SECURITY' COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
.

SECOND YEAR

'.
. . .ID

•

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
1

-

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
\

DEUXIEME ANNEE

, .

-' No. 43
./

138th m~eting
4 June 1947

138eme seance
4 -iu!..I!-1947- -~

take Success·
New York

TABLE OF CONT~NTS

~

TABLE DES MATIERES

Hundred lCInd thirty-eighth meeting

,

Cent-trente-huitieme seance

Page

)

Pages

159. Ordre du jour' provisoire
947
159. Provisional agenda
947'
948 . 160. Allocution du nouveau President
948
160. Speech by the new President
161. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
948
161. Adoption of the agenda
948
. 162. Application of Articles 11 and 12 of
162. Application des Articles 11 et 12 du
Statut de la .Cour intemationale de
the Statute of the International Court
Justice
: :
:-;..:
949
oi Justice
,
949
-163:
-Accords
speciaux
prews
a
l'Article
43
163. Special agreements under Article -43 of,
de la Charte et organisatio~ des forces
.the Charter and tl;le C'rganization of the
armees des Nations Unies
,
952
United Nations armed forces
952
<0 • • • • • • • • • • • • :

:

Document
The following document' is relevant to the
hundred and thirty-eighth meeting:
Security Council 'Official Records. Stcond
Yea,r. Special Supplement No. 1
T

.

Lettefdated 30 April 1947 from the Chairman of the Military Staff Committ.::e to
the Secretary-General, and .enclost;d report' on general 'principles governing the
organization of the armed forces made
available to the Security Council by
.Member nations of the United Nations
(document 8/336)' .
,r'

Document
. Le document· suivant se rapporte a la centtrente-huitieme seance:
Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de se- '\
c,!,-rite. Deu~teme Annee. SU.fJpl.ement
special No 1
Lettre, .en date. du 30 avril 1947, adressee
. au Secretalre general par le President
, . du Comite d'etat-m~jor et rapport, joint
a cette lettre, sur les principes generaux
regissant l'organisation des forces armees
mises a la disposition du Conseil de se,)_ curite par les Etats Membres des Nations
Unies (document 8/336)
'.

" .1.

L.

[

,

NATIONS UNIES

tTNITED NATIONS

SE'CURITY
CO'UNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX' OFFIClELS
No. 43

SECOND YEAR

DEUXIEME ANNEE

No 43
/

,

~-

HUNDRED AND THIRTY-EIGHTH MEETING

CENT-TRENTE-HUITIEME 'SEANCE

.Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Wednesday, 4 June 1947 at 3 p.m.

Tenue Lake Success, New-York,
le mercr'edi 4 juin 1947, a 15 heures.

President: Mr. A. PARODI (France).

President: M. A. PARODI (France).

l'resetlt: The'representatives of the'followmg
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of
S9viet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays smvants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
Etats-Unis d'Amerique, France, Pologne, Syne,
Royaume-Uni, Union des RepubIiques socialistes
sovietiques.

159. Provisional ~genda (document
5/361)

159. Ordre du jour' provisoire (document
5/361)

a

1. Adoption of the agenda. ,

L Adoptio:a de l'ordre dujour.

2. Application of Articles 11' and 12 of the

2. Application des Articles 11 et 12 du Statut
de la Cour intemationale de Justice.
/1) Lettre du s.ecretaire general' par 'n1tCrlm
au' President du ,Conseil de securite, en
date du 28 janvier 1947 (document SI
, 260)1.

Statute of the International Cout:t of Jus.tice. ,
(t.i) Letter f~om' the Acting S~cretary­
General to the Presi~ent of the Security
Council, dated 28 January 1947 (document 8/260) 1.

3A SpecW ~greements un~er~c,le43 of the
Charter and the organization of the United
Nations anned force.
. (a) Letter dated '30 April 1947 from the
deputy representative of", the United
Stat~
the Security Council to the
SecretaJ'y-General,' (document S/338).
(b) Letter. dated 30 April 1947 from/the
Chairman of the Military Staff Committee to the Secretary-General, and
enclosed report on general principles
, governing the organization of the~ed
forces made' available -to the S~urity
Council ,by Member nations of the
8/3362 ).
United .Nations , (document
...

on

---.

.

'-._

, 1.This letter transmits'resolution No.•88 (1); see Resolutl~1IS adopted b, the General Assembly during the sec, ond Part ()fits first session, pages 115' and 176.
..,. I

SeeiJH!cial Records of the Securit,; Council, ~ond'

,~ear. SpeCIal Supplement No. 1.

'

3. ,Accords speaaux prevus a l'Article~3 de la
Charte et organisation de la'force armee des
Nations Unies.
.
a) Lettre en date d~ 30 avril1947, adrasee

au Secretaire general par le repr6Jentant
suppleant des Etats-Unis au Conaeil de
,securite .(document S/338).
b) I;ettre du Prcic;ident du Oomite d'etat-'
major au Secretaire general, en date du
30 avril 1947, et rapport, jointacette
lettre, sur les prin~ipesgeqeraux,re~t
l'organisation des forces arm~ ritises a
la dispos.itiOll du Consei1 desecurite par
les EtatS· Membres des Nations 'Umes
(docutnent SJ33€).2
-~-

1'Cetl:re lettre transmet la resOlution No 88 ' (I) j voir
les' ResolutiorU: adoP.tBl1s par I'.dssembUe~ geMral. peadant laseconde partie de la premiere I~on. pq'eI 175
et 176.
"
,
,
2 Voir les Proc~s-verbtJu;c officiels ,du Consl1il de s;curite, Deu,gemeAnl}ee, SuppICment spa:)liINo 1.

"-=--"_._ ..

~...-..'-.6i""''''",",,;';
....~'i;;,~ii:$'~~~.-i~
. . ...'
~~,'ii,_"'~""""~"'~""'~~
7"""'~"'?-=-~"'''''''~.
..,
·~i!r"~:;~.;r.-----~.
'.
"'-'~":=-------'
_-,,=.
.~,,,,,,,
~ ~ _ . . . " ~....,..
'
. "• . '"
'(;$'1.

160. Speech by the new President

160. Allocution du rtouveau President

- The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
This is the second time that the almost annual
cycle of rotation in the Presidency of the
Security Coun~ has brought me the honour
and responsibility of conducting the Council's
work for a month. I should not like to be lacking
in that tradition of moderation in language
which we have established. In opening this
meeting, I shall confine myself to expressing
the Council's gratitude to my predecessor, Mr.
L6pez, who has placed at our disposal the
great resources of his 'authority and political
experien.ce acquired in the high posts which he
has held ,ill his coUntry.
I am sUre that I am interpreting the sentiments of all the members of the Security Council
in expressing our gratitude to Mr. L6pez.

Le PRESIDENT: C'est la seconde fois que 1~
cycle a peu pres annucl des revolutions de la
presidence du Conseil de securite me confex-e
l'honneur et la responsabilite de diriger les travaux du Conseil pendant un mois. n s'est etabli
entre nous une tradition de sobriete de langage
a laquelle je ne voudrais pas manquer. Je me
. bomerai, en ouvrant cette seance, a exprimer les
remerciemenfu du Conseil a mon predecesseur,
M. L6pez~ qui mit a notre disposition les grandes
ressources de son autorite et de son experience
politique, experience acquise et autorite aHermie
,daus les postes les plus eIeves qu'il a (3CCUPes
dans ~onpays.
Je sms sUr d'etre l'interprete de tous les membres du Conseil de securite en exprimant nos
remerciements a M, L6pez.
'

161. Adopf".)n of the agenda

161. Adoptic.m de I'ordre du iour

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The :first item is the- adoption of the agenda. I
submit it for your COmIllents if you.,desire to
make any.

, Le PRESIDENT: Le premier point figurant a
notre ordre du jour est son approbation. Je le
soumets a vos observations, si vous desirez er;,
presenter.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (tmnslated from Russian): I am
not cl~aras to the meaning of item 3 (a), which
reads: "Lettel dated 30 April 1947 from the
deputy 'representative of the United States on
the Security Council to the Secretary-General."1

M. GROMYKO (Uni~n des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit d~L russe): Je ne comprends pas tres bien a quoi sertle point3a. Nous
y lisons en efIet: "Lettre adressee au Secretaire
general par le :representant suppleant des E'i:ats·
Unis au Conseil desecurite, en date du 30 avril
19471 ."
La question qui figure au point suivant (rap- '
p,ortdu Comite d'etat-major) re1eve de rArticle 43 de la Charte. Or, c'est precisement a
cetArticle qu'a trait la lettre du representant des
. Etats-Unis. Les points a) et b) prevoient done
tous les deux l'examen d'un seul et meme Article
-1'Article 43. Je ne comprends pas queUe peut
etre l'utilite du point a). Etant donne que le
point b) a eteportea 1'9rdre du jour, le point'
,a) ne me semble pas, necessaire. En tout cas, cela
n'est pas clair pour moL

The 1100 sub-item deals with a question arising
-out of Article 43 of the Charter, namely the
'M;titary Staff ,Committee's report. The United
Staces representative's letter is concen::led precisely with ArtiCle 43. Thus' we have a sub-item
( a )on the ne-:essity for considering Article 43
and. a sub-item ( b ) also on the question of
considering Article 43'. I am not dear as to
what sub-item (a) is intended to cover. ,Seeing
that there is a sub-item (b), I think that the
need for suh-item (a) no longer arises. In any
caSe, I am not clear on this point.

The PRESIDENT. (translated/rom French.):
So far as' I am concerned, I see no contradiction
between points (a). and (b) of item 3 of the
agenda. It seems' to me that both points relate
to, the same type of question and that they
might be discussed simultaneously.
.' 'However, in view' of the question raised by
our 'Colleague ,of the Soviet Union, I should like
to ask the representative of the United States
. if he ." has ,any comment· to make on what has,
just ~een said. .

Le PRESIDENT: En, ce qui me conceme, je
ne vois pas,de contradiction entre'les points a)
et b) de la partie 3 de l'ordre du jour. n me
semble qu'il s'agit de d~ux points se lapportant
au,-meme ordre de questions et dont 1'examen
pOUITatt etre POurSUlVl concurremment.
Cependant,' etant donne la question soulevee
par notre collegue de 1'Union .sovietique, je
voudl'ais dein.ander au represent.ant· d~-------'
Unis s'il a une observation ge!wrrque a pre- .
senter ~usujet de-c· ent d'etre dit.

Mt. }C>HNSON (Unitdd States of America):
~Y f,rovernment, ID instructing. t~nit

-; OHNSON (Etats-Unis d~Amerique)' (trad'uit de l'anglais): ~n d0nn~t instruction a la

'The. text of the.lette~~H~

.
,
• ' .
.... i
On-instructions from my . Government I reqtiestthat
....--t1ie .item, Special Agreements unde!' Article 43, of the
Chartex'and the organization of th,epnited Nations
armed forces, which now appears on .the list of matters
of .which the Security Council is seized, be placed on
the provisional agenda c;>f the next meeting of theSecllrity Council.
'.
.. (Signed) .Herschel V. JOIU'SON
.' Deputy lfnitea-,statesrepresentative
, on tkeSecurity Council
1

.Excellency~

•

A

.

••

-

.

'.

-

,

1Le texte de cette lettre.est le strlvant:
Excellence, . .
'
D'ordre de mon Gotivernement, j'ai I'honneur de demander que le point concernant les accords speciaux
prevus par l'Article 43 de la Oharteainsi que I'organisation des forces· 'armees des Nations Unies,qui figure actuellement suria liste des. questions dont le Conseil de
, securite se trouve saisi, soit inclus a l'ordre .d!! joUr provisoire de la prochaine seance du Conseil de securite.
,,
.. (Signe) Hersche1 V. JoH,N'so:,
Representant sutJp16ant des Etats-U~tS ,
auConseil de securztej

-~

~:s: :::~~n

:0 sen~-~;~·;:"·~~~-~-;~~:~~:·~~:- ~~ts-Unis

Secretary-General, had no other purpose or mtention than to effect, if possible, an early consideration by the Security Cound! of the report
of the Military Staff Qommittee, which was d';1e
on 30 April and was, pre..c;umably, about to be ID
the hands of the President of the Council and
the Secretary-General.
There w~s no hidden purpose whatever in
that procedure; it is merely a matter of record
and has no other meaning than that.

d'envoyer cette lettre
'au Secretaire general, mon Gouvernement se
proposait uniquement de faire, si possible, examiner au plus tot par le Consei1 de securite le
rapport du Comite d'etat-major. Ce rapport, qui
devait nous e.tre soumis pour le 30 avriI, etait,
pensait-on, sur le point de parvenir au President
du Consei1 et au Secretaire general.
,n n'y avait absolument aucune intention
cachee dans cette procedure; nous voulions simplement qu'il en soit fait etat au proces-verbal.

The PRESIDENT (translated fro'{lL Frenc.h):
The statement Mr. Johnson has just made confirms what I said myself. In reality points (a)
and (b )of item 3 of our agenda form a single
subject, and I think we can adopt the agenda,
on the understanding that the two questions are
Enked.
Is there any objection to the adoption of the
agenda?
'
The agenda was adopted.

Le PRESIDENT: La declaration que vient de
faire M. Johnson confirmece que j'avais ern
devoir moi-meme expiimer.En realite, les
points a) et b) de la partie 3 de notre ordre du
jour forment un ensemble, et je crois que nous
pouvons adopter l'ordre du jour, etant entendu
que Ies deux questions sont liees.
Y a-t-il opposition a l'adoption de l'ordre
du jour?
L'ordr:e du jour est adoptee

~ 62. Application

of Articles 11 and 12
of the Statute of the Internation~1
Court of Justice

162. ApplicCition des Articles 11 et 12 du
Sh:ltut de la Cour internationcde de
Justice
f
,

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The first item on the agen.da we have to consider concerns the application of Articles 11 and
12 of the Statute of the International Court of
Justice. It consists of a letter from the' Acting
Secretary-G~neral to the President of the Security Council dated 28 Jatluary 1947 (document
S/260), which you- have before you.
The question arises how are we going to
discuss the item now before us?

Le PRESIDENT: Le premier point de J'qrdre
du jour que nous ayons a examiner se rapporte
'a l'applk.ation des Articles 11 et 12 du Sta:tut de
la Cour intema'tionale de Justice. Il consisteen '
une lettre du Secretaire general par interim all
President du Conseil de securite, en date du
'28 janvier 1947 (document 8/260) que vous
avez sous Ies yeux_
La question se pose a nous de.savoir comnient
nous allons examiner le point qui !lOUS estactuellement soumis.,

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
Members of the Comcil will recall that the
General Assembly. unanimously passed a resolution on 19 Nov:ember 1946 which adopted
provisionally, and subject to the cOIlcurrence
of the Securi:ty Council; rules of procedure with
respect to the election of. members of the Court. l ,

. M. jom~'soN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique)' (tr:(lduit
l'anglais) ~ Les membres' du Conseilse
souviendront que, le 19 novembre 1946,1'&sembIee generale a vote a l'unanimiteune resohition aux termes de laquelle elle adopt~pro.o;
visoirement, et sous reserve de l'av.· onrOIme du
Conseil de securite, un
e relatif' a l'election'
des membres
ourl •
-,-,c:..--et,·'L'ats:-Unis ontpris l'initiative de cette
resolution. Je voudrais maintenant prese:pterau
CGllseil de securite un projet de resolutjon dont
l'adoption par le Conseil perm.ettrait. de' regler
rapidement la question. La question ne nous
sem~le pas sujettea controverse et Ies termes
employes dans mon projetde resolutjori sont
entierement confornies au texte, adopte par
l'AssembIee gerierale.
"
Je vais donc, si vous m~ le permettez, lire le
texte de, mon projet, de resolution, dcn,lt un
exemplarre va etre diStribue a chacun des mem'
bres du Conseil:
teLe Conseil de securiM,
"Ayant examine la resollltionpar laquelle
I'Assemblee generale a, le 19, novembre 1946,
adopte provisoirement, et sous reserve de l'avis
conforme du Conseil de sectirite, l'article suivant:

.The United States tOOA the initiative in the
matter at that time. I should now like to I
ch, if
before the' Council a draft resolu .
acceptable to the Council,-IDig~uickly dispose
of ~ question.-l'~estionappears to us to
ben~ersial and the. language ad9pted
-------mthe~ p;~p~s~d resolution is entirely in confoIlllity with that of the General Assembly.
If I may do so, Mr. President, I shall read

~eproposed resolution, and copies' will be dis-

tnbuted to each member 'of' the Council: .
"The Security Council,
C<Having considered the r~lollltion of the Gen'eral'Assembly of 19 Novemlber 1946, adopting
pr~visionallyand subject to the concurrence of
the Security Council the following rule of procedure:' '
,

de

---'-

1 ~ee 'Resolutions adopted bY. the (;e,neral Assembly
176~~,g ~he s,econd p<U't of its first session, p~ges 175 and
"

1fI1IItII..1I1-'1III'.·

1Voir !es Resolutions ad()ptees par l'Assembltfe genlrale pendant la seconde paitie de sa premiere 'session,
pages 175 et 176.

'. .--------.--.
.
.~

IJ5f_,-.
.•

_ _i!ilI
. _."""l'!l.I...
,.i'JIli'Jll!lfill_ _
J:eNlo::Pmi@
......JP'""'~..........

_._~

:ll'l1l!l'il::el"l,_~W_;'"

,;;t,e

. 4 . . ~--_.---~~
. ..._ ~._._
•. ~~.....- _
.. ~--,""~-"

' .,"RULE 99A.Any meetfug of the General
Assembly held in pursuance of the Statute of
. the International Court of Justice for the p~rpose of the. election of members of the Court
shall continue until as many ,candidates as are
required for all the seats to be filled have obtamed in one or mo;\,e ballots an absolute ma.jority of votes." . '

--

.

-~_.-~~~, I

??S'IIIt

"ARTICLE 99A. Toute seance de l'Assemblee
gene.:ale tenue conformem.ent au Statut' de la
Courinternationale de Justice pour procCder a
l'61ection de membres de la Cour, se poursuivra
jusqu'a ce que la majorite absolue des voix soit
allee, ~ un ou plusieurs t~urs de scrutin, a antant de candiuats qu'il sera necessaire pour que
tous lessieges vacantS soient pourvus."

. ~~Respllies:'
1. To concur in the rule ofproceduf€: quote!i

ccDecide:..
1. D~approuver i'article susmeutionn6;

2. To adopt the following rule of procedure:

2. D'adopter l'article smvant:

RELATIONS WITH OTHER UNITED NATIONS
,-~'
ORGANS,

RELATIONS AVEC LES AUTRES ORGANES DES
NATIONS UNmS

"RULE .61. Any mee~g of the Security
Council held in pursuanc(' of the Statute of the
International Court' of Justice for the purpose
of the election of members of the Court shall
. continue until as many-candidates as. are required for &l the seats to be filled have obtained
in .one er more ballots an absolute majority qf
votes."
. ,
,

"MTICI,E 61.· Toute seance du Conseilde
securite· tenue conform~ent au Statut de la
Cour intemationale tie Justice pour proceder ..
a l'eIection de roembtes de, la Cour se pour~ .
suivra jusq~i'a ce que la majorite absolue de'!
voix soit allee, en un ou .plusieurs toms de
scrutin, a autant de candidats qu'ilseia necessaire J.."Ourque tous Ies sieges ~acants roie.i1t
pourvus."
. '
. "Transmet cette resolution al'Asst?mbIee'gene~
. rale pour information."
.

above; and

..

/

CCTrans.mits this resolution to the General
Assembly for its inf~rmation."

'The PRESIDENT. (tra:'!tSlated from' Fren~k) :

Le PRESIDENT: Si je comprends exaetement la
declaration de M. JohnsoD:? clle tend, d'unepart,
a nous saisir d'un p'rojet de r€solutionet, d'autre
tDitting •to us a draft. resolution and, on. the . part, a en demander l'examen inimediat par le
other hand, asking for an immediate discussion
CoIiseil de securit6. C'~t une procCdure que
it by the Security Council. Th?it is. a procequre' nous pouvons adoptu si fiotisestUnons Stre 5Ofwhich we Can~ adopt if we consider' that we have
fi.'laInment'eclaires sur le p~bleme.
'
sufficiei:Jf inform~tiOJl on thesubject~
·Another. method of procedure wowdbe to,
Une autre maIiiercde proceder 'Consisterait
refer .• the .. question,'for' a •;rapid study,. to the
rcnvoyer la ,question, .pour une etude rapide,
Committee of Experts which isatta,ched. to us
au Conrlte d'~erts qui no1,1s est .adjoint poUf
for thestildy of legal questions. In my opinion,
l'examen' des questions·juridiques. A mon ayjsj
the ·second. method would be more in con- . cetteseconde manie:re de procederscrait la plu$ .
forIJrl.tY' With our cUStomS;! shQuldlikc, Jiow- . conform:e. 2. nos habitudes; je 'desire cependllilt
ever, to have your opinion on this question of' avoir votre. avis' sUr cette· question de proc~Urt.
procedllre. .

If I understand , Mr. Johnson's statero~t cor.' rectly, it. contemplates on the one hand sub-

. ,of

a

;'

'.;"

J .

."

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (I,aMr. ]OHNSON (United States of America):
duitde l'anglais): La. d6legation des Etilt&-Uniil
The United States delegatidn would nQt wish to
n'insisterapas pour que le' Conseil prc:nneune
.pressthe Council. to take¥nJnediate -action: I
deci&ionimmediate. Mais. je II!e pennets Q~dire
venture, however"to. suggest that from our' pomt
of view there catainly does not
to be a,ny .qu'a.Il~tre 'avis la qllestlOJ1 nep~t
p1entpreter~"aueune controverse. L'Amemblet
con4"Oversial element .in 1this . question ; it is. a
generale a' adopte eet article l:unanimite.
1I1atter which the General.'Assembly adopted
unanitnously.
.
'.
.'
n me semble que lesmembres' du Comeil,
If the' members of. the CouIicil' 'Yc:re disposed
peuvent, g'ils Je veulent; ~egler eette qu~on
to do so, it would appear to us that they might
.disposeoi' this .item very ~uickly this aftemoo~. , tresVite, eet apres-niidi' meme. Mais nonS n'y
" :However, we have no feeling whatever that. this 'tenons 'pas essentiellemertt. Quelle que soit la
decil!iort .du Conseil· de securite, nous y souscrishould be done.• Whatever ··the Security Council
rombien volontiers.
decides would he entire~y agreeable to 'the
United States 'delegation.

seem

cerWne-

a

Mr.GI{OMYKO (Union of .Soviet Socialist .

M. GR9~Y~O (Union des ,R~publiqu~ socia-

listes sovietiques) (traduii du rus$e):. U'I:f!olu'Reptlbli~) .(translated from Russian): . The
tion
des,'Etats-Unis· confirme la r6Kllutionde
United Stat~aelegati9n'sresolution.confirms,

,or,to •. b€: more correct,repea(s the General
.Assetnply,resolutio~. .The t~'of .~e United
States<,lraft differs. from' the General A.ssembly
rC8()lution in two 'Y0rds only: the words uSecur-

l'Al3Semblee generale ou, plqs aactemet?-t"e1le en
reproduit IfS termes. La diff6renc~,qu'ilyaentre
le projet deS Etaw-Unis et la resolution ~e l'¥
sembIee. ne .porte que sur .' deux mots: le pro~

A

p_lJIIIIIllIIII'0_...........

951

ity. Council'" are used ins.tead of the words
"General Assembly"..
The USSR delegation to the General Assembly agreed to the text which was accepted by
the Assembly, and· the pSSR delegation to the
Security Council also agrees to the Gen~ral
Aesembly resolution and to inclqding a corres-:ponding paragraph in. the rules of procedure
of the Security Council.,
' .

americain substitue les mots "Conseil de securite" auterme ~~AssembIee gen~rale"•..
La delegation de l'URSS a l'AssembIee generale s'est declareed'accord sur le texte de la
resolution adoptee par l'AssembMe; la .deIega.tion de l'URSS au Oonsen de· securite se declare
egalement d'accord avcc la resolution de l'AssembIee et estime qu'il y a lieu d'inserer un paragraphe correspondant dans le reglement interieur du Conseil.
'Toutefois, si certam.<;' membres eprouvent des
If any members of the CoUncil find it difficult
tc) discuss this ~atter at the present meeting, or
difficultes a ~aininer cette question au cours' de
if even' one member of the Security Council h~
la presente seance, ou meme si un seul des
any doubts 'whatsoever on the matter, I would
membres. du Comen .eprouve des doutes a ce
personally not object to referring this question
slljet, je ne m'opposerai pas a ce que nous
and the relevant documents to a Committee. of
renvoyiQns a. un' Comite d'experts la question et
Experts,ps suggested by the President. This
les documentsquiyont ti'ait, ainsi que l'a prowould be in conformity with our usual procepose le President. Cela serait conforme a notre,
dure, since resolutions are not usually adopted at
methoqc tiabituelle. D'ordihaire; ce n'estpas au
the same meeting, "at which they are introduced:' cours.· de la seance Oll une resolution nousest
presentee 'que nous I'adoptons.
Quant au fond, je le repete, je ne m'oppose
On the substance of the. question, as I have.
pas .a ce que ·nous a~ceptions la resolution de
already said, I have no objection to accepting
l'Assemblee,et a ce que nous in.serions dans notre
the General .Assembly resolu~bn and including
in the rules of pmcedure the same rule, the same ,reglement int6ieur le point qui figure ·clan.s le
reglement in·' erieur de l'Assemblee gcnerale et
paragraph which has been inserted in the Genquitraite de l'eIection des membres de la Cour
eral AssemblY rules of procedure q:>ncerning the
intemationale de Justice.
.
.election of members of the ,International Court
of' Justice.
'
Le ,PRESIDENT: Les observatioll8 qui viennent
The PRESIDE~T ·(translated from French):,
d'etre presentees sont favorables . a.un examen
The comments which have jU$t be~n made are
immediat du texte. Je partagel'avis ~prime par
in ,favour of an immediate examination of &e
text. I share the opinion expressed by the rep- le representant, de l'Union sovietique, a savoir
resentative of the Soviet Union, namely that if
que, sf rim desm€:InbreS du Coriseil dem~da.jt
que le texte fut. envoye au Comite d'experts, it
one member of the Council asks that the text
~hould b~ referred t() the. Committee of Experts, '. conviendrait de le faire.. Mais si aucun d'entre
It should be done. But if no one afilongst-you· vous n~J~_d~mande, nous" procederons. immt.
diatement a·l'examen--atrtexte--f¥l.~nd.
tt:lakes this r~quest, we shall proceed to an inl"
.
mediate. examination. of the' substance
the
text."
. ,.
I ~ould like, however)' to have the Secre..
Je.voudrais .cependant prendre I'avis du Se~at's opinion as to ,whether there is any objec.,
cretariat afin de savoir ~'il -a une objection
.tion to this immediate examination.
.
l'examen immediat du texte.
Mr. Xrygve Lie, Secretary-General, made a
M. Trygve Lie, Secreto$re gen~rol, fait un
fl,egativc sign. . '
.
signe de denegation•
. The PRESIDENT (translated from -French):
Le PRESIDENT: Puisque le Secreta,tiat ne voit
Smce the Secretariat sees no objection to the
aUi:une objection .a un e~amen illl-mediat du
immediate examination of the -draft resolution,
projet de resolution, .je deinanderai si un .mem
\1 .sho~dlike to know if .any member· of the
bre du Conseil de s.ecurite y serait oppose.
Security Council is. opposeq to it.
,I note that the Council members are imaniJe .prends acte de ce que les. membres du
mous in wishing to examine thiS text at once.,
Consen sont.unanimes pour desirer examiner ce
texte tout de suite.
I invite th~ Council members 'to make their
Tinvite lesmembres du Consen apresente-r
Comments on the, substance of the draftresoleurs. observations sur le fond du projet de
Iution.
resolution.'
.' .
, Colonel HODGSON' (Aust~alia): ,We are all
Le colonel HOPGSON (AustraIie) (traduitde·
conversant with this subject. and with the diffi- 'l'anglais): Nous so:mm.'est()US parfaitement !;ill
cultywhich gavel'rise to it. Those of us who were
courant de cette question et des difficultes qui
at the first General Assembly meeting in London
ont ete a I'origine de ce texte,· Ceux d'entre
know the hopeless confusion which arose between
nous qui ont assiste a la' premiere session de
the. SeCl,uity Council and the. General Assembly,
l'AssembIee generale, a' Londr~, se rappelleront
0wmg to the lack of a rule such as· the one
l'inextricabl~ confusion qui, en l'absence d'mie
. before us. Indee~, as the Secretary-General will . telle regIe etait venue a regner.entre leConsen
b.ear me out, the President of the Security Counde securite et l'Assemblee generale. En effet,
cilgaveonerulin:g' and the President of thecomme le Secretaire g&..eralpourraen temoiGeneral i\ssembly gave another.'
.
gner, le. President du Conseil,de securite a pm
~.. .
une decision et lee President de l'Ass€mbIeege-

of

.

.

----:'--.~

a

a

_ _1.1·

9.7F-------·.Jn~eir~alleill·einWliaIliPansiii· llunitl~ieiilaiMWrlWlilei:

liIII.7

_.5i11l!l!1..,.

The United States draft resolution Win obviate
that 4ifIiculty, It involves-only a technical point,
so far as my delegation is .concerned: namely,
the substitution of the two words "Security
Council" for "Gen.eral Assembly':. We are quite
prepared to vote without further discussion on
the .United States proposal as it· stands. in the,
text before us.
.

.Leprojet de resolution des Etats-Unis remedie
a cette difficulte. Ma· delegation ne voit qu'une-'"~'
seule modification d'ordre technique a y apporter: le remplacement des mots "AssembIee
generale". par les mats "Conseil de securitc".
Nous sommes prets a voter sans autre discussion sur la proposition des Etats-Unis damna
redaction a.ctuelle.

Th~.PRESIDENT (transla.ted from French).:
Since there are no comments, I shall put the
resolution proposed by the United States· delegation to the vote.
A vote was taken by s40w of hands, and
the resolution submitted by' the United States
America was adopted unanimouslY7

Le PRESIDENT: Puisqu'il n'y a pas d'observation, je vais mettre aux voix la resolution
proposee par la deiegation des Etat.s-Unis.

ot

163. S~ecial agr~ements under Article 43
of the Charter and the (trganization
of the United Nations armed forces
The'·PREsIDENT (translated ·from French):
Th'e second point on opr agenda deals with .a
particularly important question. The report of
·the Military Staff Committee· brings. us to a
~singu1ady grave' and particularly constructive
aspect of th~. work with which we have been
entrusted in the interest of the maintenance and
.organization ofworld peace.
.
I should ,like to express my thanks and, I
'have no doubt those of the Security Council, to
the MjIitary Stafi'Committee for this extreIIlely
thorough· report, . the compilation of . which we
know has ·been; difficult.
The question is pow we .ar~ going to examine
this report-.avoluminous one--which demands
all our·. attention. I should like to have your
opinion. as to whether we should first' proceed to
a general diScussion on the wholetex.t submitted
to us, arid then examine the procedure for discuSsing the report. ] think, however, that those.
oouuwW.h
hoo .ssppeeakak in the-general discussion comd
•. ' at"~e usefully ,express your vie\\(S
on themethodo{wOix:-=~._
.._

Il est procide au vote a main levee et la
resolution presenMe par les Etats-Unis d' Amerique est adoptee al'unanimite.

163. Accords speciauxprevusa l'Article
43 de ~aCharie et organisation d~
forces armees des Nations Unies ,
Le PRESIDENT: Le secoIid point qui figure a

notre ordre du jour a trait a une question par·ticulierement importante. A,vec le rapport· du
Comite d'etat-major, nous abordons Un element
singulierement grave, particulierement. cons- ..
tructif, du travail dont nous avoils ete charges
dans l'interet du maintien et de l'organisation
de la paix dans le monde.
Je tiens a exprimer mes remerciements et, je
pense, ce~ du Conseil de securite, an Comite
d'etat-major pour ce rapport extremement s~
rieux, et dont nous savons qu'il a ete difficile a
mettre sur p i e d . '
..
La question, se pose ~ nous de savoir comment nous nllons procedei' a· l'examen de ce
rapport - Un rapport volumineux - qui dema,nde tout~ notre attention. J e desire, avoir
~ votre opinion sur le point de savoir si now;
procederons d'abord a une discussion generale
sur l'ensemble du te.xtequi vientde .. .)US eue
souinis, a la suite de quoinous pourriGns examiner la procedure suivant laquelle no~ discuterons le rapp lit. Je pense cependant que ceux
, ...;
d'entre vous qui prendront la parole pendant la'
discussion generale pourraient utilement cx"
primer, en meme temps, leur maniere de voir
sur la procedure de travail.
Si vous etes d'accord, r~uvrirai la discussion
If· you agree, I shall open the general dis..
generalesur l'ensemble du rapport.
CUssiOIl on the report as a whole.
La parole est 'au representant des Etats-Unis
I call upon the representative' of the United
d~Amerique.
.
States of Ame~ca.

--•• - o
.
' t
..
i.,

. Mr. ]OHNSON (United States of America):
The Security Council retul'IlS today toa most
important piece of unfinished bllSiness.
Five .of the principal organs of the United
Nations were .brought .• into existence eighteen
mOllths ago. Since then, great progress has been
made in completing the orgallizational structure
of the ··United Nations. The laSt of' the principal
organs, .the. Trusteeship Council, was eStablished
by the General Assembly last December a:nd has
since lfeld
its 1irstmeeting.1 In. the economic
,
1 See. Resolu.tions adopted by. the . GenerqJ Assembly'
during the second part of its first session, pages 56, 122
and 123. The Trusteeship Council. held its first session
in March and April 1947.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-UniS d'Amerique) (Iraduit de r anglais): Le Conseil de securite reprend aujourd'hui ·l'examen d'unequestiontres
importante dont·iln'avait pas acheve l'etude.
Cinq des organes principaux des Nations
Unies ont ete creesil y a clix-huit mois.~ Depuis
lors, l'elaboran.on de. la structure interne' de
l'OrganiSation. des' Nations Unies a fait . de
grands progres. 1.. 'dernier. en date. de c~or­
ganes principaux, le Co~eil .de tutelle, . aete
constitue par l'AssembIee generale en decembre
.1946 et a deja. tenu sa premiere session1 • Dans . :,

~i=~;.;~i~:~:.~de:;~.!ir:~:.~

/ premiere session en mars-avril 1947.

..

and social fields many of the commissions and
les domaines economique et social, un grand,
sp(':cialized ag':'ncies contemplated by the Charter
nombre des commissions et des institutions spehave been established. and have begun their , cialisees env.!Sagees. par la Charte ont ere creees
work.
et ont commence leurs·travaux,
One vital organizational task remains undone.
Dans cette ceuvre d'organisation, il reste une
Article 43 of the qharter imposes upon the
tache vitale a accomplir. L'Article 43 de la
Security Council the responsibili;ty for negotiating
Charte donne au Conseil de securite mission de
"as soon as possible" special agreements under
negocier "aussitot que possible" les accords spewhich the Member States will make available
ciaux en vertu desque1s les Etats Membres metto the Securf:y Council, on its call, "armed
tront a la disposition du Conseil de securite, sur
forces, assistance, and facilities, including rights
son invitation, "le.'l forces armees, l'assistance et
of passage, necessary for the purpose of mainles facilites, y compris le droit de paB$age, necestaining international peace and security." Until
saires au maintien de la pm et de la securite
those agreements have been concluded and put
internationales".· Tant que ces accords' n'auront
into force, the Security· Counci! will be unable "pas ete conclus et mis en viguew': !e Conseil de
to iulfil its ·resppnsibilities as the enforcement
securite sera. incapable de s'acquitter de ses fOI1cagency of the United Nations.:Jhapter VII of
tions d'organe cLarge de fake appIiquer ifS
the Charter, in so far as it relates to military
mesures coercitives decidees pat les Nations
. enforcement me~ures, will remain inoperative.
Unies;et le Chapitre VII de la Charte~ dans la
mesure OU' i1 traite de l' action coercitive d'ordre
militaire, restera Iettre morte.
It was about fourteen months ago that the
n y a a. peu pres quator~c mois, cl. la fin de sa
premiere session a. Londres, le Conseil de ~ecu­
Security Council, at the end of its iirstmeetings
in London, requested the representatives of the
rite a demande aux representants des cinq memfive permanent members who compose the Milibres '-permanents qui coi1Stituen~ le Cornite
tary Staff Committee to study Article 43 from
d'etat-major d'etudier l'Article 4:3 du· point de
the military. point of view and to make recomvue militaire, et de faire des recommandations
mendations to the Security Council. -.
au Conseil de securite.
The Military Staff Committee made little
Le Comite d'etat-major a fait peu de progres
progress until the meeting of the C'eneral Assem~
jusqu'a. la reunion de l'AssembIee generale,.
bly last fall. The General Assembly in its resoluI'automne dernier. Dans saresoiution sur les
tion on the' principles' governing the general
principes regi.:sant la reglemerr.t&.tion et la reregulation and reduction of armaments recomduction generales des armements, l'AEsembIee
.mended that the Security Council should
generale a reco:mrnande an Uomeil de securite
-"accelerate as mqch as possible the placing at
"de hater danstoute la mesure du possible la
its disposal of the armed fOl'Ces mentioned in
mise ~ sa disposition des forces armecs visees a.
Article 43 of the Charter" lThe Security Cooo"
I'Article 43 de la Charte~'i. A la suite de cette
eil, acting on thi'S recommendation, directed the
recommandation, le Conseil de securit6 ainvit6
Military Staff Committee to report by 30 April leComi'i:e d'etat..major abrl presenter, pour le
.
1947 on itsprogress.2
30 avril- 1947, un· rapport sur les progres de ses
travau.~.

I

. The recommendations which are before us-"The general. principles governing the organizatjon. of the armed forces ma:de available to the
Security Couricil by Member nations of the
United Nations9 ' 8-'. are the result of those
unanimous requests of the General Assembly
and the Security Council.
,
The United States has been disappointed by
the slow. pace at which the work has progressed.
Those recClznmendations do however repr-esent
a measure of progress. We believe that the
Security (Jouncil should now exert every effort
to complete the task that is imposed by Article
43 of the Charter upon the Council· collectively
and upon the Members of the United Nations
individwilly.
,
As the next step in thatdir~ction, the United'
". States believes that tile Security Council should
proceed ,today and in. succeeding meetings to a
full and pubHG examination and debate. on the
recommendations cuntained in this report and
on related problems concerning irr,tplementation

Leg reconu::n.andations que nous avons'soU,S les
yeux ("Principes generaux regissant l'organisation des forces armees mises· a la disposition. du
Conseil de securite par les Etats Membres des
Nations Unies"8) son1; le resultat de ces demandes unanimes faites' p~ I'AssembIee generate
et le Conseil de ~ecurite,
,.
. Les Etats-Unis ont ete de~uspar la lenteur de
Ce,s travaux. .Cependant, ' lesrecommandatioIlB
que voici representent un certainprogres. Nons
croyons que le Comeil de securite devrait maintenant. employer to-qs ses efforts aachever la
tache, que l'Article 43 de la Charte impose au
Conseil en .general eta chaque Membre des
'Nations Unies en particlilier.

d 1 ~ee ResDlutions adopted by the General .Assembly
unng the second part of its first session,. page 66.

1 Voir les Resolutions adoptees par Z'.AssembUe generale pendant h~ seconde partie de sa premiere session,
page 66.. J
2Voir les Proces-verbaux officielr flu Conseil de sicuriM, Deu."tieme Annee, No 13.
. a/bid., .Supplement special No 1.

-

y2SeeOfficial Records of the Security Council, Second
ear, No. 13.
1bid"'7speci~ Supplement No. I.
•

La delegation des Etats-lJniS' e.nme que la
pren.1icre chose a faire a. cet egard est de nons
mettre a. examiner.et a discuter minutieusement
et pubIiquement, au· cours de la. presente seance
et des prochai."1es seances, les recommandatioIlB
contenues dans le rapport et les·problemes. con-

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

n

:

i

l

'

9

l

~

.

_

_ _ _ _....

lIP-I F.~et L~·r.~~~-----.,'

of Article 43, and should seek to reacll decisions
that will advance our work.

The Members of the United Nations and
their peoples should know and understand all
of the .problems involved and the reasons for
the decisions that we shall take. We must never
forget that all of the Members of the United
Nations have conferred on the Security Council,
under Article 24, "primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
and agree that in carrying out its duties under
this responsibility the Security Council acts on
their behalf".
The peoples of the world look to this Council
to fulfil this responsibility and they should be
fully informed of the manner in which we discharge our obligation to establish the peace
forces called for in the ChCh'1:er.
The report before us represents wide areas of
unanimous agreement. Unfortunately, however,
some of the most important principles did not
secure unanimity in the Military Staff Committee. As the report itself makes clear, the
United States supports the majority position in
every case in which unanimity was not secured.
I do not desire in this opening statement to
enter into a detailed discussion of the articles
of the report of the Military Staff Committee.
I do, however, wish to make clear the funda· men~al understanding of my Government concerning the obligations imposed upon the Security Coundl and upon the United States as a
Member nation in· the establishment of the
armed ~orces of the United Nations.
The United Nations is ~ot a world government. It is based on the principle of the sovereign
equality of all its Members. Therefore, it could
not have a pennanent standing armed force of
.its 0'WIl in the same sense that individual nations
possess such forces.
Oh the· other hand, the founders of the
· United Nations decided at San Francisco that
the United Nations should not repeat the experience of the League of Nations, which relied
solely upon the individual action of Member
States to carry out the sanctions provided in the
League Covenant. It was therefore decided that
· each nation should agree in advance to provide
forces and facilities upon which the Security
Council could call to prevent or suppress any
act of aggression or breach of the peace. Those
nationalcoIltingents are to be under the strategic
direction of the Military Staff Committee whenever they are called into action by the Security
Council.
The decision at San Francisco w~ a long
step· forward in the direction of enforceable world
law' against war. Nothing like it has ever been
attempted ,before. That forward nz'ogress would,
however, be largely lost if we tailed to draw up
agreements of such a nature that the world will
be certain that the Security Council can b:ong

nexes concernant la mise ea reuvre de l'Article

43; nous devons nous efforcer de prendre des
decisions qui fassent avancer nos travaux.
11 importe que les Etats Membres des Nations
Unies et Ies populations de ces Etats connaissent
et comprennent tous les problemesen jeu et les
motifs des decisions que nous allons prendre.
Nous ne devons jamais oublier qu'aux tennes de
l'Article 24, les Membres des Nations Unies ont
confere au ClJllSeil de securite "la responsabilite
principaIe du maintien de la paix et de la
s~curite internationales, et reconnaissent qu'en
s'acquittant des devoirs que lui impose cette
responsabilite, !{: Conseil de securite agit en
leur nom".
Les peuples du monde attendent du Conseil
qu'il s'acquitte de cette responsabilite; ils doivent
etre exactement informes de la maniae dont
nous remplisso~ l'obligation que l~ Charte nous
impose de cOIl..stituer une force armee au service
de la paix.
Le rapport qui se trouve devant nous montre
que l'accoI'd unanime s'est fait sur de nombreuses questions. Malheureusement, l'unanimite
n'a pas pu se faire, au sein du Comite d'etatmajor, sur plusieurs: des principes les plus importants. Comme ilressort du rapport lui-meme,
dans tous Ies cas ou il n'y a pas eu unanimite,
Ies Etats-Unis approuvent la position prise par
la majorite.
Au cours de ce premier expose, je ne veux
pas entreprendre une discussion, detaillee des
articles du rapport du Comite d'etat-major. Je
tiens cependant a indiquer cIairement la fa~on
dont mon Gouvemement comprend essentiellement les obligations qui incombent au Conseil
de securite, ainsi qu'aux Etats-Unis en tant que
Memhre des Nations Unies, en ce qui conceme
la creation d'une force armee au service des
Nations Unies.
L'Organisation des. Nations Unies n'est pas
un gouvernement universe!. Elle repose sur le
principe de l'egalite souveraine de tous ses Membres. Elle ne saurait done avorr sa force armee
permanente de la mSme fa~on que chaque nation pdssMe la sienne.
D'autre part, les fondateurs de l'Organisation ont decide, a San-Francisco, que 1'on ne
repeterait pas l'experience de la Societe des
Nations, qui comptaIt uniquement sur l'action
individuelle des Etats Membres POUl' prendre les
sahctions prevues par le Pacte de la Societe. n fut
done decide que chaque nation dcvait accepter
a l'avance de mettre a la disposition du Conseil
de securite les forces annees et les autres facilites
dont il pourrait avoir besoin pour empecher ou
reprimer tout acte d'agression ou toute rupture
de la. paix. des contingents nationaux seront
sous la direction strategique du CoIhite d'etatmajor chaque fois que le Conseil de securite fera
appel a eux.
La decision de San-Francisco a grandement
contribue a instituer, clans le monde entier, une .
legislation ·coercitive contre la guerre. Rien de
pareil n'avait ete tente auparavant. Mais ce
progres serait reduit a peu pres a neant si nouS'
n'arrivions pas a preparer des accords qui don- .
nent au monde la certitude qu'en cas de rupture,,:..,

......._-.....

--------~5':1:')r::I:>I"""'"-------------------

to ~ against any breach of the peace 'uywhere
the world, balanced striking fon:e;
drawn from the most powerful and best equipped
forces that could be provided by the Members.

de la pmx dans un point quelconque du globe,
le Conseil (.. e securite est en mesure ae faire
porter contre l'agresseur tout le poids de ses
ressources militait'es combinees, composees des
forces armees les plus puissantes et les mieux
equipees que pourront lui fournir les Etats
Membres.
La conception que nous avons de la nature et
Our concept of the nature and strength of
de la puissance des forces annees des Nations
the United Nations armed forces is based to a
Unies repose, dans une tres large mesure, sur
very considerable extent on the experience of the
l'experience de la dernlere guerre. Nous avons
last war. We fOUll-d that it was not only possible
constate qu'il etait non seulement possible, mais
but practical to combine the armed forces of
avantageux, de combiner les forces armees de
two or more nations. We found that such comdeux ou de plusieurs nations; nous avons egalebinations immeasurably increased the strength
ment constate que la puissance et I'efficacite de
and effectiveness of our efforts. As a result, we
nos efforts s'en trouvaient extremement accrues.
have faith that natic.nal contingents of the
Aussi croyons-nous que les contingents nationaux
Members of the United Nations can be moulded
into effective armed forces serving the United
des Etats Membres des Nations Unies pourront
Nations under the control of the Security s'amalgamel' en une force armee efficace, au
Council.
service des Nations .Unies et sous le controle d~
Conseil de securite.
We learned other strategic lessons which
Nous avons appris d'autres le~ons d'ordre
should guide us in the organization of the United
strategique qui devraient nonS guider dans I'orNations armed forces. We learned that an atganisation des forces annees de l'Organisaticn
tempt to stop an aggressor after' he has sucdes Nations Unies. Ainsi, nous avons appris qu'il
ceeded in a fait accompli is infinitely more diffiest infiniment plus difficile d'arreter un agrescult thau to stop him. at an earlier stage. We
seur quand it nous a mis devant un fait accomare seeking, therefore, to provide arrangements
pli que de I'arreter au debut. C'est pourquoi '
under which the Council could bring its forces
nollS essayons de prendre des dispositions qui
to bear in the shortest possible time. That o1:ijecpermettront au Conseil de fme intervenir ces
tive will be aided by the fact that the contingents ' forces dans le plus brei deIai possible. Cela nollS
of the Member nations ,V:J1 normally be mainsera d'autant plus facile que les contingents des
tained, as they are at the present time,in various
Etats Mernbres seront normalement stationnes,
parts of the world. This na~ural advaIltage accomme ils le sont d'ailleurs actuel1ement, dans
cruing to the United Nations should be seized
diverses parties du monde.· Cet avantage natuon and promoted and not limited by artificial
rel, les Nations Unies devraient le saisir et en
re.mictions on the location of the contingents
tirer parti,. aulieu de le. reduire' en limitant
made available by Members.
arti,ficiel1ement les enw'oits ou seront postes les
contingents que les Etats Membres mettent a la
,
disposition del'Organisation.
We also learned that the tremendous forces
NOllS avons appris egalement que les forces
WID.ch my country mobilized for one war could
enormes mobilisees par mon pays au cours de la
not be moved into a position to strike at the
gueITe ne pouvaient etre amenees' a frapper
enetny without bases near to the enemy, and
I'ennemi si el1es ne possedaient pas des bases
that intermediate staging and supply bases were
tout pres de cet ennemi. Nous avops appris que
of vital. impQrtance to all three elements of our
des bases de depart et de ravitaillement serva'llt
a."Il1ed forces.. In the Pacific, when we were
de'relais etaient d'importance vitale pour les
?Oable to obtain adequate land bases, we found
trois elements de nos forces armees. Dans le
It necessary to develop floating bases for our
Pacifique, nous avons du, IOrSqu'il etait imposfleet operations. We therefore recognize that if sible d'avoir des bases terrestres convenables,
the United Nations armed forces are to be effecconstruire des bases flottantes pour nos operative at all, the Member· nations' must make
tions navales. C'est pourquoi nous sommes peraVaila~le to. the Security Council a system of
suades que, si l'on veut que les forces armees des
bases m vanous parts of the world from which
Nations Unies jouent un role efficace, il faut que
they could operate.
les Etats Membres mettent it la disposition du
Conseil de securite, dans les diverses parties du
monde, une serie de bases d'oll les forces arrnees
.
.
pouITont operer.
Ail outstanding feature' of the last war, and
Un des traits reinarquables de la. dermere
one whicp in 'our view proved aecisive, was th~
gueITe -,et qui, selon nonS, a joue un role decisif
development of new and .powerful. striking
- est la constitution de forces militaires nouvelforces c:;ombinihg all three elements of the allied
les et puisSantes combinant les ·.trois armes. des
armed forces:anny, navy and air. We remem~, forces alliees: armee, marine et aviation. Nous
be~ !hat Japan was brought to het knees 'by the n'oublions pas que le Japon a ete reduita. merc~
str~g power of 'long range air forces, ampar la puissance offensive des operations aerien;.
phiblOUS' operations, and powerful catrier and
nes a' longue portee, des operations amphibies,
~ther.naval task forces. In the European war,' des porte-avians. et autres forces navales.De
likeWISe, the enormous striking power of thosememe, au .cours des combats qui se .sont Jivres

in

~~oprr;ents gr~at1~ ~:t:~,d. th~ ~ay.•~~"_. en~Europ~~"l'eno:me pUiss~ce~_off~~ive de~~~ ..

.

"1

nouvelles methodes ~ grandement M.te l'avenement de la victClire. Nons ne croyons pas que
l'Organisation des Nations Unies puisse avoir
des forces militaires efficaces, si e1le ne combine
pas les divers elements constitutifs des forces
armees modemes qui se sont reveIees infiniment
plus mobiles et plus redoutables que les armees
d'autrefois. Il nous semble, en effet, que ce type
nouveau de force armee est celui qui s'adapte le
mieux aux besoins des Nations Unies.
The problem facing the United Nations is
Il ne s'agit pas, pour les Nations Unies, de
de£endre une ligne Maginot. Il s'agit d'assurer
not to defend any Maginot Line. Its problem is
la paix dans toutes les parties du monde. Il est
to enforce peace in all parts of the world. There
can be no question that the United Nations
hors de doute que leG Nations Unies ont besoin,
needs, :first of all, a mobile force able to strike
avant tout, d'une force mobile capable de frapquickly at long range and to bring to bear, upon
per vite et loin et de faire entrer en act~~m, quel
any given point in the world where trouble may
que soit le point du globe OU surgissent des
occur, the maximum armed force in the minitroubles, le maximum de contingents militaires
dans un minimum.de temps.
mum time.
H, in order that the United NatioIlS should
Si, pour pouvoir disposer d'une te1le force,
have such a force available to it, it is necessary
rOrganisation a besoin que ceux des membres
that those permanent members of the Security
permanents du Conseil de securite qui possMent
Council which possess such forces at the present
actue1lement. ces forces me~tent· a sa disposition
time should provide the greater portion of a
la majeure partie d'un certain type de forces
particular mobile component, we think that
mobiles, nous estimons que la chose doit etre
should be done. The interests of the United
faite. Les interets de l'ensemble d61Nations
Nations as a whole must take precedence over
Unies doivent avoir le pas sur les desirs ou les
the desires or ambitions of any single nation.
ambitions d'une seule nation, que1le qu'elIe soit.
We consider that the contributions of the perNous estimons que, pour assurer un equilibre
manent members of the Security Council can
equitable et une equivalence approximative entre
be properly balanced and rendered roughly
les contributions militaires des membres permacomparable without prejudice to the interests
nents duConseil de securit~, sans porter prejuof individual nations by arranging that those
dice aux interets nationaux, on pourra. prevair
nations wmch make available a lesser proportion
que les Nations qui fourniront des contingents
of the new mobile components could put up a
moins importants de ces nouveaux groupes molarger portion of other components or other
biles pourront mettre a la disposition des Nations
forms of assistance and facilities.
Unies, soit des contingents plus importants
d'autres forces armees, soit d'autres formes d'assistance ou de servicf8.
The mere existence of such forces will be a
La seule existence de ces forces constituera
powerful deterrent to' any nation contemplating
une menace efficace capable de faire hesiter
an act of aggression. Prompt establishment of . toute nation qui envisagerait un acte d'agressuch forces will be a demonstration to the peosion. La .creation rapide de ces forces· armees
ples of the world d the intention of the Member
montrera aux populations du monde que les
nati.pns to carry out their obligations to uphold
Membres des Nations Unies ont l'intention de
the law of the Charter.
respecter les obligations que leur impose la
Charte.
The United States welcomes ~t this stage in
Au stade actuel de l'reuvre de constitution de
the work of establishing these forces the full
ces forces militaires, les Etats-Unis accueillent
participation of the non-permanent. members of
avec empressement la participation entiere de! .
the Security Council. The obligations of the
membres non permanents du Conseil de seenCharter apply equally to every· Member of the
rite. Les obligations de la .Charte s'appliquent
United Nations large and small. Each of us is
egalement a to':l8 les Membres des Nations
obligated to refrain "from the threat or use of
Unies, petits ou grands. Chacuri. d'entre nous
force against the territorial integrity or political
doit s'abstenir "de recourir a la menace ou a
. independence of· any State, .or in any other
l'emploi de la force soit contre l'integrite termanner :inconsist~twith the purposes of the
ritoriale ou l'independance politique de tout
United Nations." Each of us is bound by the
Etat, soit de toute autre maniere incompatible
purpose "to take effective collective measures
avec les buts ces Nations Unies". Pour atteindre
for the prevention and removal of threats to the
ces buts, nous sommes tous obliges de "prendre
peace, and for the suppression of acts of agdes mesures collectives efficaces en vue de pregression or other breaches of the peace . . ."
venir et d'ecarter les menaces a. la paix et de
reprimer tout acte d'agression ou autre rupture
de la paix".
'
.
We intend, with frankness and good will, to
Noussornmes decides a poursuivre avec fran-·
chise et bonne volonte nos efforts de collaboracontinue Gur efforts in collaboration With other
members of this Council to determine ways and
tion avec les autres membres de ce Conseil, afui
means of applying armed force to support the
de determiner par quels moyens nous POUiTons """'11

\ victory. We do not believe that the United Nations can have an effective armed force unless
it contains the components of these modem
forces, which have proved of infinitely greater
mobility and striking power than any previollSly
developed. In 'fact, it seems to us that this type
of force is most suitable to the requirements of
the United Nations.

j

~OJft:~d!_!3.I!I!t!!';!!!!!MgLI'.!!'¥" $,~(~,lm . •U!'1'''J• • • lflt!._l.ri!_tl._ _ !I.lJ!li.llli\g!il_U!J d

_ ••••••-----..

---~9~5~',.-

principles of the United Nations in accordance
with the Charter. In particular, the United
States desires the advice of those members of
the Security Council, who, because they are not
pennanent. members of the Council, have not
participated in the lengthy discussions which
have tak(''1 place in the Military Staff Committee.
It is my hope that' a general agreement on
basic orinciples may be reached by this Council
in sufficient time for the Security Council to be
able to report affirmatively on this subject to
the General Assembly at its next regular session
in September.

.-·--a----------------

utiliser nos forces armees poUf soutenir les principes des Nations Unies conformement aux
termes de la Charte. Les Etats-Unis dement, en
particulier, recevoir les conseils de ceux des
membres du Conseil de secunte qui, n'etant pas
membres permanents, n'ont pu participer aux
longues discussions qui ont eu lieu au sein du
Comite d'etat-major.
J'espere qu'un accord general sur les principes
essentiels pourra se faire suffisamment a temps
pour que le Conseil de securite puisse J,lresenter
a la prochaine session ordinaire de l'.As.';emb!ee,
au mois de septembre, un rapport constructif.

M. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgique): Au moMr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated
ment ou la Conference de San-Francisco apfrom French); At the time when the San
prouva la Charte des Nations Unies, les disposiFrancisco Conference approved the United Nations relatives aux mesures coercitives qui peutions Charter, the provisions regarding enforcevent etre decidees par le Conseil de securite en
ment measures which might be decided upon
cas de menace contre la p~, de rupture de la
by the Security Council in case of threats to
paix et d'acte d'agression, furent considerees
peace, a breach of the peace or an act of aggressio_1, were· considered as the keystone of the
comme le point central de la construction que
edifice which wao:; in the course of construction.
l'on etait en train d'edifier. C'est ainsi que les
Mr. Paul-Boncour characterized 'them as folqualifia M, Paul-Boncour dans le rapport du
lows in the report of the committee which was
Comite qui avait ete charge de leur examen.
entrusted with their examination.
"A collective force," he said, "whose size,
"Une force collective, dit-il, dont !'etendue, la
composition, time-limits and location will be
composition, les deJ.ais et l'emplacement seront
:fixed in advance, should be placed at.the Coun:fixes d'avance, devra etre mise a la disposition
cil's disposal to enforce its· decision. . . . That,"
d.u Conseil pour faire appliquer ces decisions .•.
he concluded, "is a great historic act."
C'est la, concluait-il, un grand fait histori'que."
The Security Council now 'has before it the
Le Conseil de securite est a present saisi du
report' of the Military Staff Committee on the
rapport du Comite d'etat-major sur les principes
general principles governing the organization of
generaux regissant l'organisation des forces
armed forces made available to the Security
armees mises a· la disposition du Conseil de
Council by States Members of the United Nasecurite par les Membres des Nations Unies. n.
tions. It is thus called upon to' appraise the
est. mis ainsi ameme d'apprecier les mesures
measures contemplated to translate into reality .envisagees en vue de -traduire dans la realite.
the hopes conceived at the moment when the
les esperances con~ues au moment ou est nee
United Nations was born.
. l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
In conformity with provisions laid down at
Conformemeht aux dispositionsprewes des
the outset, the ?fIlled. forces made available to
l'origine, lesforces aimees mises a la disposition
the Security Council are contemplated in .the
du .Conseil de securite sont envisageessous la
form of national contingents. In accordance • forme de contingents natiollaux. Elles sont, suiwith article 3 of the report, they will be comvant les termes de l'article 3 du rapport, composed of· units of national forces whicp. are norposces d'unites des forces nationales qui font
mally maintained as components of armed
nonnalement partie des forces armces des Memforces of States Members of the United Nations.
bresdes Nations Unies. Elles demeurent pla.cees
They will remain under the exclusive command
sous le commandement exclusif des nations
of the Member nations who provide them until
Membres .qui les ont fournies, aussi longtemps
they are called upon by the Security Council, in
que le Conseil de securite n'a pas fait appel a
conformity with Articles 42 and 43. Only then
eUes en application des Articles 42 et 43. C'est
ca.1J. they come under the Council's authority
a ce moment seulement qu'elles·passent even.tueland can the Military Staff Committee become
lement sous l'autorite du Conseil et que le
responsible. for their strategic direction.
Comite d'etat-major devient responsable de leur
direction. strat~giqu<::.
According to article 39 of the report, howMais, meme a ce moment, d'apres l' artiCle 39
ever, even at this moment: "The command of
du rapport, "le' commandeinent dC;S contin-.
national··contingents will be exercised by comgents nationaux estexerce par des chefs nommes '
manders appointed by the respective Member
par les nations 1vfembres des Nations Unies resnations. These contingents will retain their napectives. Ces·· contingents c9nservent leur cational character and will be subject at all times
ractere national et restent soumis en tout temps
to the discipline and regulations in force in their
a la discipline et aux reglements en vigueur dans
own national armed forces." Finally, according
leurs propres forces armces nationales." Enfin,
. to article 40: "The commanders of national
d'apres l'article 40 :"Les commandants des concontingents will be .entitled to communicate
tingents nationaux ont le drQit d'etreen rapport
directly with·· the .authorities of their own coundirect sur toutes les questions avec les autorites
tries on all matters."
de leurs propres pays."
Mw

<

ON

•

These provisions, which are in confonnity
Ces dispositions, cop.formes aux conceptions
with the ~:onceptions established in the Charter,
consacrees par la Charte, n'appeIlent pas d'obdo not call for any comments; moreover, they
servation; eIles n'ont' d'ailleurs pas suscite de
did not give rise to any differences of opinion in.
divergences d'opinion au sem du Comite d'etatthe Military Staff Committee, at least so far as
major, tout au moins pour autant qu'on puisse
- can be·seen by reading the report. They provide
s'en rendre compte par la lecture du rapport.
the Military Staff Committee with the elenlents
Elles constituent,' pour le Comite d'etat-major,
of the problem to be solved, which consists in
les donnees du probleme a resoudre, ~t dont
determining how it is possible, with these ele1'0bjet est de preciser comment il est possible,
mentS, to forge the most effective instrument
avec de teIs elements, de forger l'instrument le
po:::sible to suppress threats to peace and aggresplus efficace pour reprimet les menaces a la paix
sion.
ou les agressions.
One of the first questions which arises in the·
L'une des premieres questions qui se posent,
accomplishment of this task is the determination _ dans l'accompIissement de cette tlklie, est la
of the strength of the total armed forces, and the
determination de la puissance d'ensemble des
contribution of the Member nations. Chapters
forces armees et de la contribution des Etats
III and IV of the Military Staff Committee's
Membres. Les chapitres II et IV du rapport
report are devoted to this subject. Article 5
du Comite. d'etat-major y sont consacres. Varstates: "The moral weight and the- potential
ticle 5 constate que "toute decisiontendant a
power behind any qecision to employ the armed
mettre enreuvre les forces armees mises a la disforces made available to the Security Oouncil
position du Conseil de. securite par les nations
by Member nations of the United Nations in
Membres des Nations Unies, en vue d'une action
enforcement action will be very great, and this
coercitive, aura l'appui d'une autorite morale et
fact will directly influence the size of the armed
d'un potentiel iIrimense. Ce fait aura une reperforces required."
cussion directe sur l'importance des forces
armees necessaires".
. The explanation of this article~ it seems, is to
Cet article trouve, semble-t-il, son explicabe found in Article 27, paragraph 3, of the . tion dans l'Article 27, paragraphe 3 de la
Charter.
Charte.
In order that the armed forces made available
Pour qu'il soit fait appel aux forces anllees
to the Council may be called upon, a decision
mises a la disposition du Conseil, il faut qu'il en
to this efft:ct by the latter is required. Such a
soit ainsi decide par celui-ci. Semblable decision
decision requires thl~ unailimous agreement of
requiert un accord unanime des cinq membres
the five permanent members. There can,be no
permanents. n n'est pas douteux qu'une te1le
doubt that such unanimity will place great
unanimite .conferera a la decision une graride
. moral authority and immense potential strength
autorite morale et -un potentiel immense. Rares
behind the decision. There will doubtless be
seront sans doute les Etats qui auront l'audace
very few States which will' have the audacity to
de defier une telle autorite.
· defy such.. an~uthority.
.
.
n semble que le Comite d'etat-major ait
It would seettl that the- Military Staff Co~· mittee, by. the careful ~raftingof .article 5,
voulu faire entendre, par la redacti()n prudente
wished to infer that it was not necessary, in the
de l'adicle 5, qu'~.n'etait point necessaire, dans .
circumstances, for the Security Council to have
ces co~ditions, que k Conseil de securite dis- .
.
large for~es at its disposal.
.posat de forces consi~erables.
Some members of the Military Staff CommitCertains membr.es '. du Comite .d'etat-majorse
tee, however, hav~_ shown themselves more
sont cependant montres plus soucieux que d'a,uanxiotlS than others. to· ensure, even within these
tres d'assurer, meme dans ces Iimites, l'efficacite
· limits the efficiency of the atmed forces placed at
des farces armees mises a la disposition dn·
the Military Staff Cotninittee's disposal.
.
Comite .d'etat-major..
Deux. conceptions sesont en effet opposees a
. There were :two conflicting conceptions in
proposde I'article, 11 qui definit les principes
regard to article 11, which 'Iays down principles
suivant lesqueIs serait d.eterminee lacontribu-'
determining the contribution of permanent
, members. AccordiIlg to one of these conceptions' tion des membres permanents. Suivant J'une de
ces. conceptions,.il suffit que ~'importance d'enit would. be sufficient if the overall contributions
semble des contributions <:Ies membres permaof the permanent memb~rs 'Yere cpmparable
and showed· no great disproportions. According llentssoit comparable et ne, presente pas de
to t4e other. conception, the. contribution of the . grandes disproportions. "Suivant . ·l'autre conception, la c.ontribution, des .membres .permanents
peIlllanent membcrsshouId be goyeluedby the
doit ~tre regie par un principe cl'egalite, tant en '
principle of equality, both as. t:egards overall
ce qui concerne son importance globale qu'en, ce
strength and as .regards composition. In /this
connexion the delegation of the Soviet Union . .qui conceme s~ elements composants. La delegation de rUnion sovietique presente a ce sujet .
'.
sub,mits the folloWing comment:'
les observations suivantes:
"The' overall size ~f the armed forces made
"L'importance globale des forces armees
placees a la dispositio~ du Conseilde,secJ,lrite<ne .
available: to the Security Council will not.be too
sera pas tres 'considerable, Les c~q. membres
large. Therefore the five~tate-s can make armed
forces available on 'me prinCiple of, equality,permanentspourront done fourmr ces. forces
that ,is they can contribute armed forces, land, r ' suiv~t le,principe de I'eg~te~ c'est-a-dire apporW

I

-------~~~~~-'~'"-''-'''''''''''
l'air

lIZ!ea and air, which would be equal in strength
and composition. The principle of equality does
not permit advantages in the position of any
permanent member of the Security Council in
the contribution of armed forces by that memher."
If the disproportion between the components
of the armed forces of the permanent members,
particularly in regard to air forces and navies,
is bome in mind, we are inclined to $hare the
opinion of the, French delegation "that it would
be Utopian to insist that each of them provide
contributions equal in quantity and in quality."

The Military Staff Committee's recommendations appear to be based on a realistic interpretation of the provisions of the Charter, which
determine how the Security Council takes its
decisions. The Milit.ary Staff Committee has
deduced from these provisions that the forces
placed at the Security Council's disposal would
not be used in the event of a world war involving the Great Powers. In our opinion such a
conclusion cannot be unreservedly accep~ed.

.

ter en contribution des forces de terre, de mer et
de
egales en importance et en composition.
Le principe d'egalite ne permet -d'avantager
aucun membre permanent du Conseil de s6cunt6
en ce qui coneerne . sa contribution en forces
armees."
,
Si I'on tient compte des disproportions exiStant entre les Bements composant les forces
armees des membres permanents, en ce qui conceme particulierement l'avlation et la marine, on
est porte a partager'l'opinion de la delegation
frangaise "qu'il serait utopique d'exiger de
chacun d'eux des contributions egales en quantite et en qualite";
Les recommandations du ComiteS d'etat-major
paraissent fondees sur une interpretation reaIiste
des dispositions de la Charte qui determinent
comment doivent intervenir les decisions du
Conseil de securite.
COImte d'etat-major en a
deduit qu'il n'y avait pas lieu, d'envisager la mise
en reuvre' des forces J:nises
la disposition du
Conseil de securite, dans l'eventualite d'une
guerre mondiale mettant auxprises les grandes
Puissances. Semblable conclusion, a no.tre avis,
ne sauraitetre acceptee sans reselVe.
Les Membres de I'Organisation se sont engages a s'abstenir, dans leurs 'relations int~a­
tiona)es, de recourir a la menace ou a l'emploi
de la force. La Charte ne s' est pas bomee a
enoncer ce principe; elle a etabli un ensemble de
mesures a prendre dans le cas Oll ce princlpe ne
serait pas obselVe. C'est l'objet du Chapitre VII
qui determine l'action de l'Organisation en cas
de nienac~ contre'la paix, 'de rupture de ,la paix
au d'acte'd'agression.

Le

a

The Members of the United Nations have
und~en to abstain' from recourse to the
threat or use of force in their intemational relations. The Charter has hot confined itself, to
enunciating this principle; it has laid d()wn a
series of measllres to be taken in the event of
this principle not being obServed., That is the
object of Chapter VII of the Charter, which
lays down the action of the United Nations in
the case of a threat, to peace, a breach of the
peace or an act of aggression.
Mais ceS dispositionS ont une portCe generate; .
These provisions, however~ are of general
scope; they do not contain' exceptions with reell~ ne compQrtent pas d'exc;:eption al'egard de
gard to certain categories of wars.
certainescategories de guerres..
The Military Staff Committee has, however,
Le Comite d'etat-major a cependant ete
excluded ,.from their application threats to
amene, a omettre de leur application .la menace
contre-Ia paix;Ja rupture de la paix et ('aCfle
peace and acts of aggression when these are ditectiyor indirectly committed by a great
d'agression quand ils sont directement.oll mdi,Power. The conclusions of the Military Staff
rectement le fait dtune grande Puissance. Les
lJommittee amount toaffi.m:ling that the system
conclusions du Comite d'etat-major' reviennent
of security established by the Charter would not
ainsi a constater que le systemede securitCprCvu,
apply to the prevention' or repression of prepar la Chartene jouerait pas dans leg cas' all n .
cISe1y those wars which, in view- of their ims'agirait de prevenir et de .reprin).er les guerres
poI:tance, are the only ones likely to break the
qui, par leur importance,sont precisement les
peace'of th~ world.
'seules de nature a rompre la paix qu molide.
" It would seem difficult to maintain that such
U PM-ait dift'icile 'desautenir que ~blabk
a.c~nception ,is in strict. conformity, with the conception soit rigoureusement conforme a
spmt of Chapter VII of the Charter. This can
l'esprit du Chapitre VII de la Charte Bne
only be remedied to, the jextentthat a spirit of
pourra ette rem6die a ce manque deconfonnite
que dans lamesure,oll 'se developpera ~tre Jes
co.-operation rising above conSiderations ofnar~ow national interests can be deve1opedamong
membres du Conseil de secunte, principalemellt
the!llembers' of the SecUljty Council and more
;ntre les membres permanents; •. un ,espritcle
,particularly among the,pennanent members.
cooperation steIevant ~u-dessus des considera)
tions dtinteret etroitement national.
The .effectiveness of the: enfO!:cement measL'effic~cite des mesurescoercitive; decidees
ures decided upon by the Security Council does· . f par ie Con"ell de securite ne depend
seu!enot deppnd orJy upon the strength of the armed
ment de la: puissance des forces annk9. mises en
forces brought into. action; it depends ~ to a
mUVIe; elledepend aussi) dans une large mesure,
l~ge extent on the prompmess of their intervende· la promptitude de leur intelVention;iI y a
~on.'this~here'is therefore a major interest in enSurdone un interet majeur a l'assurer.
mg
.
'
C'est !'idee quetraduit l'article 19d~ rapport.
ThiS is the idea contained in article 19 of the .
Mais le .Comite d'etat-major a crn pouvoir' se
report. The Military Staff' Committee has, how-

p=.,

"

$

ever, thought it sufficient to state it; it has not
made any satisfactory or unanimous proposal to
ensure its realization.
"It would be impossible to employ large
bodies of forces, required for operations, without a fairly accurate knowledge on the part of
the organ responsible for strategic direction, of
either the location of units constituting these
forces and their state of readiness, or the dates
on which they would be moved in combat readi..
ness to a pre-determined location.
"Armed forces to be;; made available to the
Security Council must, obviously, not deviate
from this elementary strategic rule. We would
be completely defenceless if Member nations did
not conform to this rule and if they contemplated the use, as they saw fit, of the forces they
haQ. ear-marked to be made available, on call,
to the Security Council, until the day when these
forces had been placed ~t the disposal of the
Security Council."1
. It is not necessary to' be versed in military science to recognize the pertinence of this comment
by the French delegation. The Military Staff
Committee's report,' however, contains no pro'
visions for implementing this idea.

In,. this connexion, the Charter contains, in
Article 45, special provisions concerning air
forces. In order to enable the United Nations to·
take urgent military measures, it.is prescribed
that contingents of immediately available national air forces should. be held for combined
international enforcement action. The Security
Council, with the assistance of the Military Staff
Committee, should' deterniine the size and degree of readiness of these contingents, as well as
making plans for their combined action.
It is regrettable that' the Military Staff Committee .could not reach agreement on proposalsto implement this Article of the Charter.

borner a l'evoquer; ,il n'a pas forinuled~ proncsition satisfaisante ou unanime pour en, asstU-er
la realisation.
"n serait impossible d'utiliser des masses importantes, conformement aux-- besoins de la
manreuvre, sans que soient connus de maniere
suffisamment precise, par I'organisme responsable
de la direction strategique, soit, l'emplacement
des elements constitutifs de ces masses et leur
degre de mise sur pied et de mise e.."l condition,
soit la date de leur Iivraison en ordre de combat
dans une zone determinee,
"Les forces armees a mettre a la disposition
du Conseil de securite n'echappent evidemment
pas, a cette regIe elementaire de strategie, et nons
serions coml,lletement desarmes si les nations
Membres ne s'y pIiaient pas et entendaient disposer comme bon leur semble de forces qU'elles
auraient .designees comme devant etre mises, sur
sa demande,a la disposition du Conseil de securite, jusqu'au jour de leur mise a disposi1"
.
ti•on.
n n'est pas besoin d'etre verse dans I'art
militaire pour reconnaitre Ja pertinence de cette
observation formulee par la delegation fran~aise.
Le .rapport du Comite d'etat-major ne contient.
cependant pas de dispositions qui y donnent
effectivement .suite,
'
Dans cet ordre d'idees, la Charte comprend,
dans son Article 45, .des dispositions speciales en
ce 'qui concerne les forces aeriennes. Min de per- .
mettre a l'Organisation de prendre d'urgence des
mesures cl'ordre militaire, des contingents nationaux de forces aeriennes immediatement
utiIisables doivent etre maintenus en vue de
l'execution combinee d'une action coercitive in- '
ternationaJe. Le Consell de securite, avec l'aide
du Comite <:l'etat-m~jor, doit fixer ,l'importance
et le degre de preparation de ces contingel).ts,
et etablir des plans prevoyant leur actio.n combinee.
n est regrettable que le Comite d'etat-major
ne' soitpas arrive a se mettre d'at:cord. sur les
propositioi:ls destinees a donner effet a cet Article
de la Charte,
.
D'autre part, smvant I'Article 47 de la Charte,
des' sous-comitesregionaux dli Comite d'etatmajor peuvent etre etablis par celui-ci, avec
l'autorisation du Conseil de sckurite et apres
consultation des organismes appropries. Le rapportdu Comite d'etat:..major est muet a ce sujet.
n .eut cependallt ete utile de connaitre son opinion etses .prop·ositions,

EI4I

Moreover, in accord~ce with Article 47 of
the Charter, regional 8ub~committees of theMilitary Staff Committee may be es~ablished by the
latter, with the authorization of the Secllrity
Council and ·after consiIltation with appropriate .
agencies. The Mili~ary Staff Committee's report
makes no mention of this. It would, however,
have been useful to know its opinion' and proposals.
The United Nations has w~te4formonths
, Les Nations Unies ont attendu pendant. de
for the Military Staff Committee's proP08~1l:' on
longs roois .les propositions du, Comite d'etatdleimplf'll1elltation of one of the essential parts , major au sujet de la mise enreuvre de l'une des
of the Charter.
_ .
parties essentielles de la Charte,
."
It is to be feared that the perusal of the pron est a craindre que la lecture des proposi• po~als, now submitted. to the Security 90uncil
tions a present soumises au Conseil de securite
'haS created a feeling of disapp()intment. It. is
n'ait suscite un sentiment de deception, n im'important to react against such a state of.rnin~:
porte de reagir' contre un tel etat d'esp:rit car,
'I' 1
.. . . J . . J
"
because, if it should develop, doubts would
s'u aevau se -p.eveopper,
ues
uoutes ne tar. quickly arise as to the effective value of the
deraient pas a apparaitre au sujetde la valeur
,measures provided for in Chapter VII of the
effective des. mesures prevues par le Chapitre
,...

1 See Official Records of. the Security Council, Second
Year. Special Supplement No. 1, Militaty Staff Gemmittee'.sreport, position of the French delegation with
'regard to article 17. '
.
.•..

.\,1

,

-.'.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux ofJiciels du Conseil de 16curite, Deuxieme Annee, Supplement special No 1. Rap"
port dUiComite d'etat-major;eXpose de la position de la
delegation fran!Oaise a.l'egard de l'article 17,

j

..

pi Charter in regard to threats to peace, breaches

of the peace and acts of aggression. The inter~
~t which should attach· to the first Articles of
Chapter VII where these measures are set forth,
might gradually diminish ~d be transferred
more and more to the final Article of the Charte r
which reserves the natu!'al right of self-defense.
In conclusion, the. Belgian delegation asks
that note should be taken of its reservations on
the subject of those of the Military Staff Committee's proposals which tend to neglect threats
to peace, breaches of thepea~e ~d acts o~ a&- .
gression when a Great Power IS directly or mdirectly responsible for them.
Furthermore, the Belgian delegation proposes
that the Military Staff Committee should be
'invited diligently. to pursue ,its studies on the
organization of the armed forces placed at the
Security' Council's disposal, having particularly
in mind the necessity of ensuring the maximum
effectiveness of any possible action by these
forces.
,.
In 'particular, the Military Staff Committee
should be asked to make concrete proposals on
the following:
.
1. Measures to ensure that the action of
armed forces made available to the Security
'Council should be exercised, in conformity with
the principle set forth in ~'1:icle 19 of the report, with the greatest possible promptness;
2. Measures to give full effect to Article 45
of the Charter, concerning the air forces im.m;ediately available with a view to combined international enforcement action;

VII de la Charte concernant la menace contre
la paix, la ruptur e de la paix et l'acte d'agression.
L'interet qu'iI convient de preter awe premiers
Articles de ce Chapitre, ou ces mesures sont
enoncees, pourrait progressivement diminuer et
se· porter de plus en plus sur l'Article final, qui
reserve le droit naturel de legitime defense.
En conclusion, la delegation beIge demande
qu'iI soit pris acte de ses reserv esau sujet de
celles des propositions du l::omite d'etat-major
qui tendent a negliger la menace contre la paix,
la niptur e de la paix et l'acte d'agression, quand
ils sont directement ou indirectement le fait
d'une iande Puissance.
La delegation beIge, d'autre part, propose que
leCom ite d'etat-major soit invite a poursuivre
avec diligence ses etudes consacrees a. l'Organisation des forces armees mises a la disposition du
eonseil de securite, en ayant particulierement a
l'esprit la uecessite' d'assurer le maximum d'efficacite a I'action eventuelle de ces forces.
Le Comite d;etat-major devrait, en particulier,
etre prie de faire des propositions concretes en ce
qui conceme:
1. Les mesures destinees a assurer que l'action
des forees armees mises ala dispositio~ du COnSeiI
de securite's'exerce, conformement au principe
enonce a l'article 19 du rapport, avec le maximum de promptitude;
2. Les mesure destinees a donner plein effet
a l'Article 45 de la Charte concernant Res forces
aeriennes immecliatement utilisables en vue de
l'execution combinee d'une action coercitivein.temationale;
3. La creation eventuelle de sous-comites regionaux du Comite d'etat-major, visee par
l'Article 47? paragraphe 4, de la Charte.

,3. The possible establishment of regional
sub-cominittees of the Military Staff Committee, as contemplated in Article 47, paragraph 4
of the Charter.
Mr. President, at the beginning of this disMonsieur le President, au debut de cette discussion, you expressed the desire that members
cussion, vous avez exprime le desir que les mem·
of the Security Council should give their. opinbres du ConseiI d~ securite formulent leur opiion on the procedure to be followed in examm:nion sur la procedure a suivre pOUf l'examen du
ing the Military Staff Committee's report. So
rappor t du Comire d'etat-major. La delegation
far as it is concerned, the Belgian delegation will
belge, ce qui la conceme, ne fera pas d'objection
raise no objection to this examination being reau renvoi eventuel de cet examen a un comite
ferred to a committee of the Council if that is
du Conseil si tel est l'avis de la majorite. Mais,
the opinion of the majority. But if such a deau cas ou semblable decision serait prise, j'incision is taken, I shall insist that all the members
sisterais cependant pour que tous les membres
of the Security Council be represented on this
du Conseil de securite soient representes au sein
conarnittee.
"
de ce comite.
, The PRESIDENT (translated from French ):
Le PRESIDENT: Jerem ercie le representant
I thank the representatives of the United States
des Etats-Unis et le representant de la Belgique
and Belgium for the impor tant contributions
pour les cc:Jntributions importantes qu'ils ont
they have made to the work we have before us.
fournies au travail que nous avons devant noUs.
I think. that we shall have to qevote one, and ,!1 conviendra, je
pense, que nous consacrionS
perha.ps several, more meetings to this general
encore une' seance, peut-etre meme plusieurs
discussion, for I know that certain delegations
seances a cette discus~i
,b.ave comments to make but prefer not to do so '<.lue certaines delegat on, generale car je sais deja
ions desirent presenter,·des
this evening..
observations, .mais pre~erent ne pas le faire ce
soir meme.
.
I would express the hope that, in particular,
J'exprime 'le souhait que les membres non
the non-permanent :members' of the Security'
perrnanents du Conseil de securite en particulier
Co~ncil-apart from Belgium, whose represen- a).1tres que la Belgique, dont le representant it
tatIve has been good enough to express his, bien voulu
nous exprimer son avis cet apres-midi
opinion this .afternoon~will state their views on
-'- fassent aussi connaltre. leur maniere de voir
the report as 'a whole. That, in my view, would
sur l'ensemble
bea particularly useful contribution to our work. . semble-t-:-il, ' unedu rapport. 11 y aurait la, me
contribution particulierement
utile a notre travail.

bts

If there are any members of the Councll who'

. wish t9 speak this evening, I think ·we can prolong this meeting; we shall listen to them:very
willingly.
If not, I- propose we hold our next- meeting on

-. .Sicertains membres du Conseil desirent p~
dre ·la parole ce soir encore, je pense que no .
pourrlons prolonger cette seance; nollS le; &:ou-

tenons tres volontiers. -

.' Sinon, je propose de fixer

a vendredl 15

heur~ la. date 'de notre prochaine reunion.

Friday at 3.p.m.

La seance est levee a17 heurn.

The meeiing rose at'5 p.m.

•

•1

SALES AGENTS OF UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATION'f1

DEPOSITAJRES DESPUELlCATIONS DES NATIO!V"S UNIBS

•

Argentina-Argentine

Ecuador... Equateur

Editorial Sudamericana
S.A.
Alsina 500

Mui'ioz Hermanos y Cia
Nueve de Octubre 703
Casilla 10-24

BUENOS AmEs

GUAYA~UIL

Austtalia-Australie
H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255aGeorge Street.
SYD~EY

BeIgium--'.Belgique
Agence et Messageries de la
Presse
14'..22 rue du Persil
BRUxELLES

Egypt-Egypte
Librame "La. Renaissance
d'Egypte"
.
9 Sh. Adl¥. Pasha

New Zealand
N ozevelle-Zela11de
Gordon & Got~h
Waring Taylor Street
WELLINGTON

Norway":-No'tvege
Norsk Bokimport AjS
Edv. Storms Gate 1
. OSLO

CAIRO

FinIand-Finlande
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskus1}atu

Philippines
D. P.Perez Co.
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN

HELSINKI

Bolivia-Bolivie
"-Librel'ia Cientifica y
Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ

Canada

Sweden-Suede

France
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Souffiot

AB C. E. Fl'itzes KungI .
Hofbokhandel
Fredsgatan 2

PARIS,

STOCKHOLM

ve

Greece-Gtece
"Eleftheroudakis"
Librairie intemationale
Place de la Constitution

Switzerland-Suisse
Librame Payot S. A.

:I'ORON'rO

. A'rHENES

LAUSANNE, .GENEVE, VEVEY
MONTREUX, :rq-EUCHATEL,
BERNE, BASEL

Chile-Chili

Guatemala

Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17

The Ryerson Press
299 Queen Street West

Edmundo Pizarro
.-- Merced846
SANTIAGO

China-Chine

GUATEMALA

The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
SHANGHAI

Costa Rica-Costa-Rica
Trejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313
SAN JOSE

,

Cuba
La. Casa BeIga
Rene de Smedt
O'ReiHy 455
LA HABANA

Czechoslovakia
Tchecoslovaquie
F. Topic
Narodni Trida 9
PRAHAl

Denmark-Danemark
Binar Mu:askgaard
Norregade 6
KJOBENHAVN

Dominican Republic
Repttblit:jue Dominicaine
Libreria Dominicana
CaIle Mercedes No. 49

___

iI l~ili ..lr~D...~aliOd...T...~...~..~ILI.O_"...;.. .
..

Jose Goubaud
,
Goubaud & Cia Ltda.
Sucesor
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.

Haiti-Haiti
Max Bouchereau
-Librame "A la CaraveIle"
Bohe postale ll1-B .
PORT-ATj-PRINCE

ZU{UCH I

. Syria-Syrie
. Librairie universelle
DAMAS

Union of South Africa
Union Sud-Africaine
Central News Agency Ltd.
Commissioner & Rissik Sts.
JOHANNESBURG

India-Inde
Oxfurd Book' & 'Stationery
Go.
Scindia House
NEW DELHI

Iran
Bangahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
TEHERAN

Iraq-lrak ~

Mackenzie &Mackenzie
The Bool~shop
BAGHDAn

Lebanotl.-Liban
Librahie univel'selle

United Kingdom
Royaume-Uni
H.M. Stationery Offi~
p.a. Box 569
LONDON, S..E. 1
and at H.M.S.a. Shops at
LONDON, EDINBURGH,
MANCHESTER, CARDIFF,
BELFAST and BRISTOL

{-

United States of America
Etats-Unis d'Amerique
International Documents
. Service
. Columbia University Pr~---c ~
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK 27, N. Y.

BEYROUTH:

Yugoslavia-Yougoslavill
Nethedands--Pays-Bas
N. V. Mal'tinus Nijhoff

~_~_~_V... :._._~~_u_t...9
NO
....

DrzavnoPreduzece
Jugoslovenska Knjiga,

~_·_~lJ_l•. _3_6._.4J
