S/PV.7508

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7508th meeting

Thursday, 20 August 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Consolidating Security Council engagement on security sector reform: towards
further implementation of resolution 2151 (2014)
Letter dated 11 August 2015 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2015/614)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-26091 (E)
*1526091*

S/PV.7508

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.

their many efforts in support of resolution 2151 (2014),
including its implementation in the field.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Consolidating Security Council engagement
on security sector reform: towards further
implementation of resolution 2151 (2014)
Letter dated 11 August 2015 from the
Permanent Representative of Nigeria
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2015/614)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Dmitry Titov, Assistant Secretary-General for
Rule of Law and Security Institutions, Department
of Peacekeeping Operations; Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict; and Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu, Assistant Secretary-General and Assistant
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/614, which contains the text of
a letter dated 11 August 2015 from the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Mr. Titov.
Mr. Titov: On behalf of Under-Secretary-General
Hervé Ladsous, I am glad to take part in this important
meeting. I wish to thank you, Ambassador Ogwu, for
this timely initiative and for your special personal
leadership on this strategic issue. We particularly
appreciate the background paper (S/2015/614, annex)
circulated by Nigeria for this meeting; it articulates
many important questions, especially those with which
we are dealing.
I would also like to pay special tribute to Slovakia
and South Africa for their long-standing and very
dedicated service as co-Chairs of the United Nations
Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform and for

2/26

20/08/2015

Last year, while briefing the Council, the SecretaryGeneral said, “The purpose of security sector reform,
simply put, is to make people’s lives safer” (S/PV.7161,
p.2). We could not agree more. Well-trained, wellsupported, accountable and service-oriented police
and military professionals are a country’s best defence
against the violence and instability that threaten both
lives and livelihoods. From the perspective of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), the
Council is right to do more to strengthen legitimate
institutions and governance, not only to break cycles
of violence, but also to provide citizen security, justice
and economic growth.
A quick scan of Foreign Policy’s 2015 Fragile
States Index demonstrates the strong correlation
between the performance of the security apparatus and
overall fragility. The five most fragile countries in this
index — South Sudan, Somalia, the Central African
Republic, the Sudan and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo — are all vivid reminders that a country’s
security sector is closely linked with both the perception
of State legitimacy and long-term socioeconomic and
political development.
For this reason, DPKO believes that, depending on
specific circumstances, security-sector management
and professionalization should be at the core of peace
operations’ mandates and activities.
Understandably, some Member States express
caution about the United Nations engagement in
security-sector management. However, the philosophy
of the United Nations practice has been simple: securitysector reform (SSR) can be achieved only if host
countries themselves agree to it. No one can impose or
import a security system. That simply does not work,
at least in the long term. The role of the United Nations
is to support nationally owned SSR efforts when
mandated or requested to do so. At the same time, it is
our obligation to share the best international practices
with recipient States.
Over the past 16 months, the Council has adopted
21 resolutions containing elements of security-sector
reform and management. In 17 peace operations
conducted globally, the United Nations is actively
helping host countries professionalize their security
sector, so that they themselves can better support their
nations in addressing national and regional security

15-26091

20/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

threats, including terrorism, violent extremism and
organized crime.
In the field, we are focusing on four central
priorities which are explicit in resolution 2151 (2014).
First, the United Nations views SSR as a political
process as much as a technical one. To train and equip
is indispensable in post-conflict situations. But as
demonstrated in a variety of mission contexts, securitysector management is most effective when it is also
linked to broader reforms.
In Mali, for example, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali provided its technical expertise during the
development of the recently signed Peace Agreement.
The Mission is now helping Malian authorities as they
prepare to integrate armed groups into the national
security forces and revise the presidential decree on the
National Council on Security Sector Reform. Together
with the European Union and other partners, training is
ongoing for the national army, police and gendarmerie,
along with mentoring in the field. We are also engaged
in building the Malian anti-organized-crime capacity,
and, together with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and INTERPOL, DPKO is actively doing the
same in other West African countries.
In the Central African Republic, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) helped the
Government to develop its draft Constitution, which, as
a result, now includes defence and security provisions.
In addition, 2,000 members of the Central African
armed forces have been preliminarily vetted, which has
already led to the reinstatement of the First Territorial
Infantry Battalion.
Secondly, the international community must focus
on the need to integrate sector-wide delivery. The
security sector does not only cover defence; it includes
justice and corrections, policing, border management
and other areas. Building the capacity of each of these
services should preferably be balanced and mutually
reinforcing.
In Somalia, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the Government
are implementing a security sector public expenditure
review, which will help develop a sustainable security
architecture. The Mission is also helping integrate
militia forces into the Somali National Army and
to strengthen the capacity of 11,000 officers in the

S/PV.7508

Somali National Army so that they will able to engage
with the African Union Mission in Somalia. On
policing, UNSOM has also assisted the Government in
developing a comprehensive plan that includes training,
infrastructure development and equipment for police in
Mogadishu and beyond.
The United Nations provides similar, multifaceted
support in Guinea-Bissau. I know that the has Council
received a briefing from the Department of Political
Affairs (DPA) on the political situation in that
country last Friday. The United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau has advised the
Government to develop a new law on the establishment
of the special pension fund. This legislation will pave
the way for the retirement of almost 1,500 personnel in
the armed forces and security sector.
Thirdly, in the spirit of national ownership, we
support Governments in their efforts to develop State
security plans and convene international partners
around those plans. In Liberia, the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) has responded to the
requests of the Council by working with the Government
to produce a transition plan that is largely focused on
the security sector. UNM1L has also trained almost
3,000 police officers and supported the review of the
national security strategy, while the bilateral partners
have assisted with the national army and specialized
police.
Meanwhile, the support of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti for the vetting of
national police officers has resulted in an additional
1,200 certified national police officers, thereby
making progress towards the goals of the national
police development plan. This effort complements the
training that the United Nations — again, together
with donors — has provided to 14,000 Haitian National
Police officers and over 200 corrections officers over
several years. All of this training is undertaken on the
basis of United Nations standards, human rights law
and due diligence policy.
Fourthly, building strong and accountable security
sectors helps the United Nations to deliver on key
mandated activities, including the protection of
civilians, the prevention of sexual and gender-based
violence, and others. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for example, United Nations police deployed
recently alongside the Congolese National Police to
mentor, advise and help protect civilians in the troubled
town of Beni, where armed groups were launching

15-260913/26

S/PV.7508

Maintenance of international peace and security

deadly attacks on the population. Colleagues from the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo also manage the
prosecution support cells programme, which has helped
the military justice system of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to reduce impunity and address conflictrelated sexual violence. This is an integral United
Nations activity in many operations.
All of these are only examples, which demonstrate
the concrete action of my colleagues from DPKO in
the field on a daily basis. Yet I must acknowledge that
the whole system could do better. In South Sudan, for
example, the United Nations did not manage the security
dialogue properly or effectively, which contributed
to the unravelling of peace. The lack of success in
this context demonstrates the political imperative for
sustained and well-resourced efforts towards SSR in
peace operations.
Within the framework of the inter-agency Security
Sector Task Force, DPKO’s special unit dedicated to
security sector management has also carried out a number
of other system-wide initiatives, including — again, as
only one example — support to DPA in its efforts in Iraq
and earlier in Libya. With colleagues from the United
Nations Development Programme, who will also speak
this morning, we hope to increase our engagement with
other partners, including the Peacebuilding Support
Office and the World Bank.
Meanwhile, DPKO has also undertaken mapping
initiatives with regional partners, including the European
Union and the African Union (AU). Over the past five
years, the Department has built a serious, strategic
partnership with the African Union Commission. This
has resulted in the adoption of the first and unique
African Union policy framework on SSR. As stressed in
resolution 2151 (2014), we need to enhance cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, including
regional economic communities, in order to ensure the
compatibility of approaches and closer coordination.
Through all the initiatives we have mentioned this
morning, DPKO is also trying to address a number
of persistent challenges. Therefore, we would like
to propose a few recommendations for the Council’s
future consideration.
First, SSR is sometimes viewed as a technical
process, while it could and should provide crucial
solutions to some political engagements. Moreover,
there are instances when United Nations support to SSR
comes too little and too. Security sector management
4/26

20/08/2015

should obviously concentrate on post-conflict
situations, but it could also be used for prevention
purposes in some specific contexts. Furthermore,
the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
should be empowered and indeed encouraged to take
initiative and ownership on security sector management
issues. I stress that this should be done from the earliest
days of the mission onwards. This should not be seen
as a second- or third-tier activity, and progress towards
security sector benchmarks should be embedded into
any mission’s entry and exit strategies.
Secondly, commitments to strengthening the
security sector, whether on the part of international
partners or host States, are often difficult to formalize,
especially when they come at the later stages of United
Nations intervention. The Council could consider
requesting that host States and the United Nations
agree on special compacts — which the Council has
already discussed informally — in the security sector
and wider governance areas. That should be done at the
time when operations are being established, and could
help in implementing specific reforms and allocating
national resources in a sustained manner and based on
national commitments.
Thirdly, I believe that we in DPKO could better serve
the Security Council by increasing our engagement with
its members on SSR. Already, having had two briefings
in two years dedicated to this strategic topic is a step
in the right direction, and the Council should perhaps
encourage us, through the Secretary-General’s reports,
to provide more detailed information on national and
international efforts in this vital area, as well as on the
whole issue of peace sustainment.
Before I conclude, I would like to reiterate that any
peace operation should ideally leave behind at least
a basic functioning security and rule-of-law system.
From our perspective, this should be considered a
strategic priority goal for most of our operations, so
that the Council will not be seized over and over again
with relapsing conflicts, human suffering, impunity
and instability.
The President: I thank Mr. Titov for his statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bangura.
Ms. Bangura: I thank you, Madam President, for
extending an invitation to me to brief the Security
Council on matters related to the important crosscutting issue of security sector reform (SSR). It is a
pleasure to join my colleagues from the Department
15-26091

20/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in
addressing the Council today.
For a number of years, as we have progressively
shifted the conflict-related sexual violence agenda to
the operational level, we have recognized the critical
nexus between sexual violence crimes and dysfunctional
security sector reform processes, or the incomplete
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) of former combatants. Indeed, the Security
Council has already articulated the crucial connection
between security-sector reform and conflict-related
sexual violence in a number of resolutions, including
resolution 2106 (2013), on sexual violence in conflict
in 2013, as well as resolution 2151 (2014), the first
thematic resolution on security-sector reform, which
was sponsored by Nigeria in 2014.
Essentially, a comprehensive response to conflictrelated sexual violence must include proactive and
purposeful engagement with the security sector,
particularly in settings where the security services
may have been involved in the commission of sexual
violence. Such engagement with the security sector
has now become part of the modus operandi of our
mandate. I welcome this opportunity to highlight some
of our emerging experience and practice in that regard.
Through our monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements, mandated under resolution 1960 (2010),
we have been able to verify that a number of national
security services, including national armed forces and
national police, are among the perpetrators of conflictrelated sexual violence crimes. Therefore, we have
encouraged national authorities to respond accordingly,
and are supporting them in a process to strengthen
their institutional capacity to monitor and ensure
accountability within the security forces.
As I have stressed repeatedly, the essential starting
point is to ensure national ownership, leadership and
responsibility. Accordingly, I have focused especially
on gaining commitments at the highest political levels
through my advocacy. Over the past two years in
particular, we have been able to report consistently
to the Security Council with regard to commitments
obtained from political and military leaders in a number
of our priority countries.
For example, in the past few years we have
signed political-level agreements in the form of joint
communiqués with the Governments of the Democratic

S/PV.7508

Republic of the Congo, Guinea, Somalia and South
Sudan. Those agreements form the basis for ongoing
engagement at strategic and operational levels, for the
practical implementation of the commitments made.
The Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict supports the Governments with
technical and logistical assistance to turn those highlevel political agreements into concrete actions and
activities to be undertaken by the Governments. The
Team of Experts reports to me and — with members of
the team from DPKO, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the United
Nations Development Programme, led by a Director
in my Office — represents one of the best and most
innovative examples of the One UN initiative.
The commitments they help to operationalize
entail some fundamental reforms of the security sector,
in line with resolution 2106 (2013). They include,
first, issuing clear orders to all defence and security
forces through chains of command prohibiting sexual
violence and providing accountability measures for
breaching such orders in accordance with international
standards; secondly, ensuring that all elements joining
the army, the police or other security institutions are
vetted so that no element involved in the commission
of serious violations of human rights and humanitarian
law, including sexual violence, is allowed to join
those institutions; thirdly, prohibitions against
sexual violence in codes of conduct and military and
police field manuals or their equivalents; fourthly,
developing action plans specific to the national army
and the national policethat include, respectively, the
reinforcement of the military justice system and the
establishment or strengthening of special police units
on sexual violence; fifthly, ensuring that perpetrators
of sexual violence crimes are excluded from amnesty
provisions in the context of conflict-resolution
processes, and that all those who have perpetrated or
are responsible for acts of sexual violence are excluded
from the security institutions; sixthly, ensuring that the
military and police speaks out in the strongest terms
against sexual violence in conflict, including through
internal and public campaigns; and, finally, ensuring
that security services establish mechanisms for the
protection of victims, witnesses and others who report
crimes committed by the army or the police, including
civil society and judicial actors engaged in the fight
against conflict-related sexual violence.
The elements I have just elaborated on have formed
the basis for the development of concrete operational or

15-260915/26

S/PV.7508

Maintenance of international peace and security

implementation plans, which we refer to as action plans
to prevent conflict-related sexual violence, in countries
such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Côte
d’Ivoire.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where
we have focused consistent attention since the
establishment of the mandate, the joint communiqué
signed with the Government and the action plan
developed with our support by the Forces armées de
la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) have
begun to yield some tangible results. For instance, in
the 2014 reporting period, military tribunals convicted
135 individuals of sexual violence crimes, including
76 members of the armed forces, 41 members of the
national police and 18 members of armed groups.
Crucially, the FARDC action plan includes specific
undertakings signed by senior commanders, whereby
they personally commit to prevent and respond to sexual
violence through a series of actions. That has served to
reinforce both individual and command responsibility.
In a number of cases, the actions undertaken to
address sexual violence have resulted in significant
institutional and structural reforms within the
security institutions, as well as an increased number
of prosecutions and convictions. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the national army has
established a high-level and dedicated infrastructure
in the form of an armed services commission to
ensure the implementation of the action plan on sexual
violence. Similarly, the national army of Côte d’Ivoire
has established a committee on conflict-related sexual
violence that includes senior commanding officers from
the army, the gendarmerie and the police to oversee the
institutional response.
Since 2013, the Team of Experts has deployed
an expert to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to support military justice efforts, including in the
framework of the Prosecution Support Cell. In Guinea,
the Team of Experts has provided technical support to
a domestic panel of judges established to investigate
and prosecute crimes committed against opposition
supporters on 28 September 2009, including at least
109 cases of sexual violence. That has resulted in 16
indictments, including against high-ranking military
officials, and, most recently, former president Dadis
Camara. That represents one of the rare times that a
former Head of State has been indicted by a fully
national process.

6/26

20/08/2015

In a number of priority countries, police have
established or strengthened specialized units dealing
with crimes against women and children, including
sexual violence crimes — for example, our mandate is
supporting the establishment and functioning of such
a specialized unit in the gendarmerie in the Central
African Republic. Such initiatives may be viewed as an
entry point and provide avenues for more fundamental
reforms within those institutions. Vetting during
recruitment drives and prior to the integration of armed
groups into the armed forces to exclude those who have
committed or commanded sexual violence represent
crucial shifts in attitudes and practice, and contribute
to the professionalization of the security sector.
It is also evident that where SSR or DDR
processes have failed, it has sometimes contributed
to the commission of sexual violence crimes. For
example, we have received reports of sexual violence
being committed in the post-conflict setting within
communities by so-called civilians. However, in a
number of such cases the perpetrators are former
combatants who were demobilized under hurriedly
conducted DDR processes.
Another significant challenge relates to the informal
integration of militia groups into national armed
forces. For the most part, such armed groups are poorly
trained and have often committed gross human rights
violations, which is a significant threat to the integrity
and professionalism of national security institutions
and hinders accountability for sexual violence crimes.
In addition to the specific points of action I have
outlined here, I wish to conclude by proposing four
overarching recommendations related to securitysector reform and sexual violence in conflict.
First, the role of security institutions in preventing
sexual violence crimes may be enhanced by striving to
mainstream sexual violence considerations consistently
in security-sector reform processes, in view of the nexus
between SSR and conflict-related sexual violence. That
includes a specific reference by the Security Council
to the prevention of sexual violence in provisions
related to SSR and DDR in all relevant country-specific
resolutions, as well as in the relevant provisions of
peace agreements and ceasefire frameworks.
Secondly, preventing sexual violence crimes
and ensuring accountability should be considered
fundamental indicator criteria of success of SSR
programmes as a whole and, as such, should be

15-26091

20/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

included in SSR programme monitoring and evaluation
frameworks.
Thirdly, we should ensure that multilateral and
bilateral SSR support and assistance include targeted
resources and training to support national security
institutions in enhancing their capacity to prevent and
address crimes of sexual violence.
Fourthly, we should ensure a proportional
representation of women in security institutions at all
levels as the basis for the creation of security forces
who respect and protect women and children in times
of war and of peace.
The linkage between SSR and sexual violence will
continue to be a priority focus of my mandate and a key
aspect of the work of our programme, as well as that
of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, which has played a central role in
supporting our engagements with national authorities
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
the Central African Republic, South Sudan, Guinea and
elsewhere.
The President: I thank Ms. Bangura for her
statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Nakamitsu.
Ms. Nakamitsu: On behalf of the Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
Ms. Helen Clark, I would like to sincerely thank you,
Madam President, for convening this very important
meeting and UNDP to brief members of the Council
on this crucial topic. I would also like to express our
gratitude to the Nigerian delegation and you for your
personal leadership on this very important issue.
Security sector reform (SSR) is a relatively
new area for us, but as co-Chairs of both the United
Nations inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task
Force and the Global Focal Point for Police, Justice
and Corrections, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and UNDP increasingly reap the
benefits of working closely together to sustain peace
in settings where Security Council mandates apply.
Resolution 2151 (2014) highlights aspects of security
that are particularly important to UNDP. It emphasizes
people’s safety, human rights and democratic oversight
in the security sector. These are essential foundations
for the rule of law, peace and sustainable development.
The proposed goal 16, on peaceful, just and
inclusive societies of the 2030 agenda for sustainable

S/PV.7508

development further recognizes the important linkages
between peace and development and urges Member
States to promote the rule of law, safety and justice.
It also calls for effective, accountable and transparent
institutions at all levels. This also applies to the security
institutions responsible for providing a safe and secure
environment to people and communities. Please allow
me to highlight briefly three essential ingredients
for successful SSR implementation in post-conflict
environments from the UNDP perspectives.
First, security sector reform is a long-term process,
and we must understand and accept that SSR requires
both concerted efforts in the lifetime of United Nations
peace operations and long-term sustained efforts and
support beyond peace operations. It is therefore critical
to sequence and strategically prioritize various tasks.
Security Council mandates on SSR have become
more comprehensive, requiring United Nations peace
operations to implement an increasingly wide range
of SSR tasks. But we also know that addressing the
negative power bases in the security services of postconflict countries is one of the most challenging aspects
of post-conflict reconstruction and transformation. In
fact, it is one of the structural causes that had led those
countries to violent conflicts in the first place. Military
and security cadres often have vested interests in the
political settlements that follow peace agreements.
Therefore, it is not easy to resolve these
challenges. This means that the implementation of
holistic approaches to SSR by the United Nations
requires a sustained focus on building political will
for meaningful reforms. Strong political support from
the Council will be key in that regard, and therefore
Mr. Titov’s suggestion of a possible compact is indeed
an interesting one. At the same time, national capacitybuilding efforts that will continue over time need to
be supported by predictable and reliable sources of
funding. In order to be effective, such efforts must be
carried out in a conflict-sensitive manner and be built
into longer-term development assistance programming.
Secondly, at the country level, as Mr. Titov pointed
out, we must have the right balance and combination
of technical expertise and guidance, on the one
hand, and political accompaniment, on the other, for
a successful SSR. In order for the United Nations to
make a difference in this area, we must find ways for
peace operations to work closely with country teams
in an integrated manner, and we must strive to use our

15-260917/26

S/PV.7508

Maintenance of international peace and security

collective resources and capacities more efficiently and
in a more impactful way.
As underscored by the recent report of the HighLevel Independent Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446), such joint approaches
are a necessity for enhancing operational coherence.
We are pleased to see acknowledgement in the Panel’s
report that Mission budgets should ensure that funds
for programming are available to support that work as
well as the recognition that United Nations agencies,
such as UNDP, are well placed to support peace
operations in that regard. The fact that the Council
invited UNDP to brief it today is further testimony
that our programming work, which brings together the
required technical expertise, is indeed an important
part of the implementation of the mandates given to the
United Nations.
By working together, the United Nations is more
capable of delivering those comprehensive mandates.
For example, linking police salary payments with
support to improved community policing on issues
related to gender-based violence and with better
recruitment and training of cadets makes eminent
sense and is already delivering positive results on
the ground, as seen in Somalia. There, UNDP works
with the Global Focal Point partners, DPKO and UNWomen, as well as the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, in delivering a joint rule-of-law
programme that includes training and mentoring for
the Puntland police force. Through the programme,
we are supporting 25 police officers, including six
women, who are studying criminal science thanks to
a police scholarship initiative developed in partnership
with Puntland State University. This might seem like
a small initiative, but we are investing in creating and
supporting the leadership of a police force that will put
people’s security and safety at the core of their service.
In another case, UNDP, through a joint initiative
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
UN-Women and the Global Focal Point, redeployed
police and gendarmerie forces in the Central African
Republic by supplying general food allowances and
salary payments. Those efforts allowed justice sector
activities to resume and reduced cases of robbery,
including armed robbery, in the country.
Thirdly, for SSR to succeed, we must have a coherent
strategy among all actors who support it — from the
United Nations, regional organizations and other
8/26

20/08/2015

Member States — and the full ownership, leadership
and political commitment of national stakeholders.
Successful SSR requires support and investment from
Member States, whether through development support,
Government-provided personnel or direct cooperation,
to reinforce and complement United Nations efforts.
We have many lessons learned over past decades in
that regard — for example, from Afghanistan. In other
places, such as the Central African Republic, Mali and
Somalia, where many actors are involved, we have
also learned that better coordination efforts between
regional entities and the United Nations should be
prioritized to enhance our collective impact.
Within the United Nations system, coordination
between United Nations missions and country teams
should commence as soon as Security Council mandates
on SSR are established and should be linked to joint
planning undertaken by the global focal point, which
encompasses important aspects of SSR, especially
on police reform. I very much agree with Mr. Titov’s
statement that SSR is not only about the defence sector.
For reforms to be sustainable, joint programmes
need to be aligned with national development plans and
national budgets. I would also add that joint engagement
throughout the lifetime of a mission will also help
the United Nations to manage smooth transitions as
missions draw down.
In conclusion, let me stress that the United Nations
system needs to translate security sector reform in
post-conflict settings into tangible results that are
immediately felt by ordinary people on the street. As
I stated earlier, SSR is a long-term process. However,
for UNDP it is the number one priority in the lifespan
of United Nations peace operations. We must look at
security in the broader context of promoting safe and
secure environments for communities and people,
especially for women, and in terms of facilitating
people’s participation in efforts to strengthen and
reform security institutions.
We must also pay more attention to advancing
gender equality and security for women, as Special
Representative Bangura pointed out. Although this
year marks the tenth year anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, we
continue to see high levels of violence against women
and girls in conflict and, unfortunately, high levels of
impunity. Those situations require a comprehensive
and coordinated response on the part of the United
Nations system and the international community. Only
15-26091

20/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

by promoting people’s security and safety and human
rights and democratic oversight in the security sector,
can we lay the foundation for the rule of law, peace and
sustainable development.
The President: I thank Ms. Nakamitsu for her
briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank the Nigerian
delegation for convening today’s meeting on the issue
of security sector reform (SSR). We are also grateful to
Assistant Secretary-General Titov, Assistant SecretaryGeneral Nakamitsu and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Bangura for their detailed briefings.
Security sector reform is one of the most important
components of peacekeeping during the post-conflict
period. Relevant measures help not only in achieving
national reconciliation, but also in ensuring the
security of State institutions, thereby promoting
effective civilian protection, strengthening stability
and preventing the emergence of new violence.
Undoubtedly, security sector reform should be
conducted in the context of broader rebuilding processes,
including a package of efforts on the political, economic
and social fronts. Only a holistic approach will provide
hope for lasting peace and security. The success of
security sector reform depends, first and foremost,
on ownership on the part of national Governments
and their determination to take responsible efforts in
drafting and implementing national strategies and
priorities in that sphere.
A lack of progress in security sector reform was one
of the basic causes of an escalation of armed conflict
in South Sudan, where national armed forces broke
into warring camps. Another negative example was
the situation preceding the military coup d’état in the
Central African Republic in the spring of 2014, where
the army and police did not reflect either the ethnic or
the religious composition of the population. They also
lacked proper equipment and training due, in part, to
fears of former President Bozizé of threats to his power.
It is unfortunate that in a number of cases of
countries experiencing conflict situations, they are
unable, without outside support, to ensure security
and rebuild viable and effective State institutions.
In such situations, assistance from the international

S/PV.7508

community is of critical importance. Such assistance
should be guided by fundamental principles, including
the host country’s agreement, respect for its national
sovereignty and political independence. Such efforts
must also focus on strengthening national capacities,
based on the country’s specific situation.
A central role in coordinating and agreeing upon SSR
efforts should be played by the United Nations, which
has a diverse toolkit of effective instruments. First and
foremost I am thinking of Security Council authorized
peacekeeping missions. Peacekeepers’ multifaceted
mandates include tasks aimed at assisting with SSR,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts
and rebuilding law-and-order structures and the rule
of law in general. Outstanding work in that area is
also carried out by the Peacebuilding Fund and the
Peacebuilding Commission, whose complementary
significantly increases the chances for establishing
sound, accountable and professional national security
bodies.
In the current context there is also need to take
into account the regional aspects of conflict and the
transborder nature of threats, in cases where a spike
in violence in one country could ignite violence in
neighbouring countries and, indeed, in the region
as a whole. In that context, it is of great importance
to develop cooperation between and among the
States of the region, was well as with regional and
subregional organizations. Such cooperation should
include information exchange of frontline experience
and providing resources to ensure swift and effective
responses to emerging threats.
In conclusion we would like to underscore the
Russian Federation’s commitment to developing
international cooperation in SSR, including in
peacekeeping operations and providing peacekeeping
staff with the necessary expertise and equipment,
including advanced training for peacekeepers on
United Nations standards.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this briefing. I would also like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Dmitry Titov,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict Zainab Hawa Bangura
and Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, Assistant Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme, for their
insights and comprehensive briefings to the Security
Council.

15-260919/26

S/PV.7508

Maintenance of international peace and security

At the Council’s debate on security sector reform
(SSR) last year (see S/PV.7161), we called on the
United Nations to do more to help States coming out
of conflict to reform their police and military forces.
We advocated for reinforced efforts to ensure that
security institutions in post-conflict environments
were a source of safety, security and trust, rather than
of extortion and fear. Over a year since that debate
and the adoption of resolution 2151 (2014), we can ask
ourselves if enough is being done to put the resolution
into action. Are the voices of women, youth and civil
society being heard well enough by those implementing
SSR efforts? Is the vetting effective enough to bar those
who have committed rape and abuse from joining police
and military ranks? Have we become better in meeting
the needs of the countries concerned?
As has been said many times, ensuring national
ownership of SRR processes is essential. To succeed,
national authorities must lead, own and drive reform
efforts. The United Nations and other contributing actors
on the ground can assist Governments in their efforts,
with a clear objective to create effective, accountable
and human rights-respecting national security
structures. In that regard, we welcome the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations compact initiative aimed
at helping to better coordinate responsibilities between
the United Nations and national Governments.
As we have heard this morning, the subject itself is
wide-ranging, and I cannot deal with all of the issues.
I would like to touch upon just a few of them, starting
with trust.
While the pressure to rebuild security sector
institutions as a country emerges out of conflict may
be enormous, Governments must make sure that SSR
activities involve all segments of society and respond
to the concerns of all, including the most affected
and vulnerable groups. That is the best way to ensure
the common ownership of the reform and to prevent
lingering grievances from resurfacing at a later stage.
The support of the good offices of the United Nations
in that respect could be helpful.
An army or a local police force made up exclusively
of one ethnicity, one tribe or one faith in multi-ethnic,
multireligious communities would inevitably challenge
their impartiality and put into question their readiness
to protect all members of the community. It would
also serve to raise fears and suspicions of bias — for
example, in situations such as the violence we have
witnessed in the Central African Republic.
10/26

20/08/2015

Likewise, an exclusively male police force, or
prosecutorial bodies, for that matter, would raise
legitimate concerns and fears among women about
their safety and security and would inevitably prevent
women from complaining about sexual violence, rape
and other abuses. Integrating a gender perspective into
security sector reform is therefore a question of trust
and confidence in the bodies and in the reform itself. A
gender perspective must become part of the daily work
of armed forces, police and law-and-order institutions.
It should make those institutions more inclusive and
accountable, strengthen popular trust in them and
improve the overall effectiveness of security sector
reform. Specific programmes aimed at preventing
sexual harassment and gender-based violence must be
implemented so that both the general female population
and the women serving in the armed and police forces
are guaranteed safety and recourse to justice in cases of
abuse. Witness and victim protection mechanisms must
also be put in place.
In that regard, we would like to emphasize the
importance of the Secretary-General’s seven-point
action plan on women’s participation in peacebuilding,
as well as the whole range of measures that the United
Nations has established to date, including on the matter
referred to today by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. They offer practical ways forward
that should be taken by the United Nations system, with
the support of Member States, regional partners and
implementing countries.
Justice and accountability are other factors linked
to security sector reform, and an underlying element
for SSR durability. They are an integral part of peace
and reconciliation efforts. If left unaddressed, a lack of
accountability for past crimes can lead to a reopening
of old wounds — and therefore a resurgence of conflict,
bringing the efforts of any country emerging out of
conflict to naught. Therefore, security sector reform
should entail, inter alia, solid human rights training,
mentoring, due diligence policies and an embedded
culture of individual responsibility among the
ranks — from top to bottom and bottom to top — for
abuses of office, including human rights abuses.
In countries plagued by repeated cycles of
violence, members of the security forces are known to
have participated in serious human rights abuses and
crimes against humanity, including killings, summary
executions, mass rapes, torture, arbitrary arrests and
abductions. Vetting mechanisms therefore should be a

15-26091

20/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

central component of troop selection in order to break
with past abuses and build disciplined, rights-respecting
forces that protect civilians instead of preying on them.
Cleaning up the ranks also serves to strengthen the
trust between local populations and the armed and
police forces, as well as the general confidence in the
irreversibility of post-conflict recovery.
In that regard, we welcome the steps taken by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to introduce vetting
and build a security sector free from child recruitment
and sexual violence. We encourage the Government
to further develop cooperation with United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in implementing
a zero-tolerance policy towards violations of human
rights law and humanitarian law.
Verification and vetting are currently being
undertaken in the Central African Republic, where
preparations are under way for the national elections.
The pressure to have the armed forces in place and
ready to provide security for the people during that vital
transition time should not lead to compromising on the
integrity of the troops. As per resolution 2217 (2015), the
transitional authorities must investigate swiftly alleged
violations and abuses in order to hold perpetrators
accountable and to ensure that those responsible for
such violations and abuses are excluded from the
security sector. Granted, it is a challenging task, and
the assistance of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic in that respect remains very important.
The sharing of information and cooperation between
national authorities and peacekeeping missions, as well
as with the relevant international actors, contribute to
the success of the vetting process. In that regard, we
would like to welcome the efforts in Côte d’Ivoire,
where the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire,
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
and the Ministry of the Interior are developing terms of
reference for police vetting.
Finally, the success of security sector reform
requires having a clear picture on how effective
particular measures have been — what works and what
does not in a given situation — and how best to avoid
the typical mistakes in the process. The implementation
of monitoring instruments, such as sets of indicators
and benchmarks like those developed in Côte d’Ivoire
and Liberia, have an important role to play in ensuring
the sustained relevance and effectiveness of the support

S/PV.7508

provided to national Governments. In that context,
a specific focus during Security Council’s visits on
issues raised by the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General, as well as an annual closed-door
briefing by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
on the implementation of resolution 2151 (2014), as
proposed by the Nigerian presidency in its concept
note (S/2015/614,annex), could offer a useful venue for
discussion and exchange on lessons learned.
Finally, let us not forget the system-wide, holistic,
long-term approach, as underlined by the Assistant
Administrator of UNDP, as well as the underlying
linkages between SSR and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) processes. If DDR fails, if it is
only partial or incomplete, conducting solid and durable
reform of the security sector will be hard to achieve.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank all the briefers: Mr. Titov, Assistant
Secretary-General for Rule of Law and Security
Institutions; Ms. Nikamitsu, Assistant SecretaryGeneral and Assistant Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme; and Ms. Bangura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. I also thank Nigeria for
convening today’s meeting.
The previous debate by the Security Council on
security sector reform (SSR) (see S/PV.7161) made
it abundantly clear that that concept is important in
post-conflict situations, including its contribution to
establishing a modern State that is committed to the
rule of law, good governance and the avoidance of
relapse into conflict. Thanks to efforts made by Nigeria,
the Security Council adopted resolution 2151 (2014),
the first resolution devoted solely to SSR. As we meet
today to consider the implementation of the resolution,
we stress the importance of the Security Council’s
consideration of SSR in a complementary manner and
in conjunction with debates regarding peacebuilding
processes.
We have already set out our position on SSR in
terms of peacebuilding and peacekeeping. We have also
emphasized that United Nations engagement should
always be based on certain basic principles, namely,
that host countries have the primary responsibility
for providing security; the need to respect national
ownership; and their sovereign right to determine their
own national priorities. It is important for national
authorities to be kept informed and to provide for
populations’ needs and aspirations. However, we stress

15-2609111/26

S/PV.7508

Maintenance of international peace and security

the new challenges confronting SSR, especially given
the increasing complexity and the increase in the
number of peacekeeping mandates.
I wish to thank the delegation of Nigeria for its
useful concept note (S/2015/614, annex), which indicates
clearly some of the challenges we must consider in order
achieve our primary goal of creating sustainable and
efficient security structures that are accountable and
take into consideration the rule of law, international
human rights law and international standards.
The way for the Security Council to engage
genuinely with the issue of security sector reform in
post-conflict situations is by establishing transparent
cooperation among itself, the troop contributors to
peacekeeping operations, the Secretariat and host
countries, particularly during the consultations on
drafting and renewing the mandates of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions.
We cannot overlook the political nature of SSR,
especially in countries recovering from conflict. We
should recognize that it can be used as an integral
part of the wider political process and as an element in
mediation plans aimed at launching a national dialogue
and helping to achieve a political solution in many of
the cases on the Council’s agenda. We therefore call
for concerted and integrated efforts on the part of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
the Department of Political Affairs (DPA), so that
the DPKO can benefit from DPA’s evaluations of the
political platforms and positions of all the parties in
each situation. We call for SSR to be included in the
plans and proposals of the Mediation Support Unit.
We hope that the heads and chiefs of United Nations
special political missions and the Special Envoys of the
Secretary-General will take note of and consider those
plans with the aim of achieving successful security
sector reform. We also believe that SSR units should be
supported so that they can provide advice and in order
to increase the levels of cooperation and coordination
with regional and subregional organizations.
The Council can be more effective in bringing
about security sector reform by drafting peacekeeping
mandates clearly and giving priority to SSR in the
peacekeeping operations that require that essential
element, thereby ensuring that host countries can
clearly interpret their mandates and that United
Nations entities are able to effectively implement the
SSR provisions. The Council will also be better able
to address non-traditional challenges by focusing
12/26

20/08/2015

the counter-terrorism committees’ work so that they
specifically target efforts to build new and more
modern States in countries emerging from conflict. It
should also ensure the establishment of an environment
conducive to ensuring the success of SSR by giving
particular attention to arms embargoes and exceptions
to them that can ensure support for national security
institutions.
The United Nations has a pivotal role to play in
supporting SSR in post-conflict situations and in States
undergoing political transition by focusing on host
countries’ national requirements and by fulfilling their
needs. We should encourage support for the security
sector through such means as the provision of training,
financial and technical support and cooperation with
regional organizations.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for organizing this
important meeting and for your personal leadership
and leadership of the Nigerian delegation on the issue
of advancing security sector reform. It is critical and
appropriate that the Security Council emphasize the role
of security sector reform in making local institutions
more effective and accountable and fostering both a
sense of and actual safety and security. I would also
like to thank Assistant Secretary-Generals Titov and
Nakamitsu and Special Representative Bangura for
their briefings.
As the Security Council reaffirmed in April 2014
when we adopted the first ever resolution focused solely
on security sector reform (resolution 2151 (2014)),
such reform is an essential aspect of prevention, and
focusing on preventing conflict or relapses into it is
something that we must all do more of and become
better at doing. Security sector reform helps build
accountable, effective and efficient institutions and
provides a foundation for resilience in fragile States.
It also provides a foundation for the rule of law and
respect for human rights. Resolution 2151 (2014)
rightly emphasized national ownership; indeed, some
of the Security Council’s most complex missions,
such as in Kosovo and Timor-Leste, have succeeded
because of the national authorities’ commitment to
achieving reforms in partnership with the international
community. In Liberia, efforts have led to an increase
in the number of women working in the security sector,
a strong focus on community policing and increased
training on human rights and gender issues. Sierra
Leone has taken a holistic approach to security sector

15-26091

20/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

reform that has included disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, the establishment of a special court
and the reform of security institutions.
But we have also seen, for example in the recent
history of the Central African Republic, that when
attention fades, progress may too. The Government
of the Central African Republic launched a vigorous
security sector reform campaign in 2008, starting with
an international security sector reform assessment
of the country’s needs and the establishment of
a timeline for achieving its security sector goals.
While the Government was making progress, having
implemented some 70 per cent of the plan within a
year, its programmes were both financially costly
and politically difficult. They fell by the wayside.
Instead of pursuing the integration that was needed,
the Government held on to its resources, never fully
integrated the police and the army, and allowed the
process to get caught in political patronage and internal
bureaucratic wrangling, all of which contributed to the
violence that surged up again in 2012.
Sustaining the reform of security institutions
is critical not only to making people safe but also to
preventing relapses into war. National ownership of
security sector reform is essential, but it should not
mean that the international community in general, or
the Security Council in particular, should be passive as
time goes on. When the memory of conflict begins to
fade, and host Governments are confronting the hardest
and most difficult challenges, that is when we have a
particular responsibility to support, encourage and
press for completion of security sector initiatives.
We welcome the idea described by Assistant
Secretary-General Titov of a security sector reform
compact between the United Nations and host
Governments. When a Government’s focus on
completing reforms wanes, we have a responsibility to
use the Security Council and the good offices of the
Secretary-General to remind national leaders of their
part in such a compact. There are few places where the
relapse into conflict represents a more pressing issue
than in South Sudan. We have seen the devastation
that war has wrought on the country’s security sector
and, indeed, on every other sector. A new country,
once a source of great hope, has become a painful
and horrifying humanitarian catastrophe. Crimes that
shock the conscience are being perpetrated against the
people of South Sudan and they are being perpetrated
with impunity. It is time for leaders to act to end the

S/PV.7508

carnage. The region and the friends of South Sudan are
united.
The choice confronting the Government is plain,
and it is incumbent upon us to make the consequences
of failing to choose the path of peace equally clear.
We must do so in support of the region, in support of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, in
support of the people of South Sudan, and in support of
peace. War has ravaged South Sudan. It has vanquished
hope; it has set back a generation; it must, and it can
end. While it is our collective hope that the Government
of South Sudan will sign the peace agreement that is on
the table, it is also our collective responsibility to act if
it does not. There is no other choice. Maintaining the
status quo is only a recipe for more rape, more murder,
more hunger and more devastation. It is time for us to
move forward together to make the choices confronting
the parties unambiguously clear and to render equally
apparent our commitment to holding those who reject
peace and choose the path of war accountable.
Police have a growing role in peace operations,
developing host-Government institutions capable of
taking over law-enforcement capabilities and often
providing critical civilian protection functions. We
can and should strengthen the role of United Nations
policing in our peacekeeping missions by providing
more institutionalized training and equipment for
foreign police units and individual police advisers,
and, importantly, increasing women’s participation in
security forces. We have seen in Darfur, with the allfemale formed police unit, that increasing the number
of women in policing roles advances security and helps
build trust and confidence in security forces.
The entire community should be brought into security
sector reform initiatives, rather than marginalized
by them. We welcome Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Bangura’s engagement in working
with Governments to make their institutions more
effective and accountable. The participation of women
in post-conflict security services is crucial to creating
structures that are representative, trusted, legitimate
and able to meet the security needs of all. Our collective
investment in helping strengthen security sectors is
an investment in creating reliable partners to not just
build safe and stable societies at home, but also to
play an active role in defeating transnational threats
everywhere. It is an investment in protecting conflict,
and it is an investment in peace and stability.

15-2609113/26

S/PV.7508

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Let me start by
thanking Nigeria for organizing this debate on a very
important topic. I am extremely pleased to bring
back this topic to the Council, where it is crucial to
have this discussion on security sector reform (SSR).
We join other members of the Council in welcoming
the Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of Law and
Security Institutions, Dmitry Tivov. We also welcome
Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, Assistant Secretary-General
and Assistant Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme.
Security sector reform is indeed an important
aspect of multidimensional peace operations. Where
peacekeeping operations are required to create an
effective, professional and responsible security sector,
SSR is one of the critical elements of the foundations
of peace and sustainable development. In that regard,
we reiterate the point already referred to by other
speakers, who emphasized that SSR must be based on
national ownership in order to be possible. It is also
recognized that successful, sustainable and nationally
led security sector reforms require focused efforts,
dedicated resources and the concerted political will of
all the parties involved.
In Angola, in order to ensure the success of
SSR, a legal framework for national dialogue on
security sector reform has been created. It involves a
programme for the technical and professional training
of demobilized personnel, and the promotion of and
training in entrepreneurship for former combatants as
a means of promoting the social integration into civil
society of thousands of men and women coming from
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes implemented in the country, in particular
at the end of a long civil war. In that ongoing process, it
has also been possible, through the recruitment of new
entrants into the army and police, to involve them in an
effective nation-building process as they are trained to
play a role not just in security, but also in the various
forms of nation-building under way in the country.
We stress that security sector reform should be
based on participatory commitments and fully include
the widest range of stakeholders, including civil society.
In that connection, it is important to enhance the host
country’s ability to develop, manage and implement
reforms that should be flexible, adaptable and tailored
to the post-conflict country’s concerns and needs.

14/26

20/08/2015

Resolution 2151 (2014) — the first stand-alone
Security Council resolution concerning SSR — is a
milestone decision that has impacted a wide range
of mandates given to United Nations peacekeeping
and special political missions. The main challenge to
security sector reform remains the deficiency of actual
political will to reform, as we have seen in different
countries on the agenda of the Security Council. We
must therefore recognize that reforming a country’s
security sector is a political endeavour and must not
be treated as a strictly technical matter. United Nations
peacekeeping and special political missions must
ensure therefore that Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General, through their good offices, engage
in intense political dialogue on SSR in the country to
which they are assigned at the earliest stage of their
mission. Security sector reform remains a crucial tool
not only for conflict prevention in post-conflict States,
but also in the prevention of post-electoral violence like
that which we are now seeing in Burundi.
The partnerships on SSR of the United Nations
with regional organizations, such as the African
Union and European Union, have in the past been a
sound foundation that has enabled the implementation
of a comprehensive SSR process with coordinated
information-sharing developing into an effective
division of labour. When implementing SSR in the
field, those partnerships should form the basis on which
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
ensure that a comprehensive SSR process is thoroughly
coordinated with information-sharing and developed
into an effective division of labour. The technical
guidance and guidelines of the United Nations system
integrated into SSR can be improved through regular
consultations with Member States, in order for the
Secretariat to continue to update and elaborate new
guidelines, including the development of training
modules based on best practices.
In countries with ongoing DDR and SSR
programmes, the United Nations should provide
information to the host countries’ security sectors on
implementation and follow-up in order to avoid the
exclusion of ex-combatants and to create the best possible
conditions for their integration into civilian life, which
is a crucial element in the peace and consolidation
process. In countries like Liberia, where the Security
Council intends to end its mission, draw down or
reduce the personnel of its peacekeeping mission, the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council
in particular should establish mechanisms to prevent
15-26091

20/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

the risk of the resurgence of conflict after the United
Nations mission exits. In that context, we also call on
the Peacebuilding Commission to continue to play its
very key advocacy role through the United Nations and
international and regional financial institutions, as well
as with bilateral and multilateral donors, in order to
continue to mobilize logistical and financial resources
in support of countries engaged in a peacebuilding
process.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that security
sector reform is not the only concern of post-conflict
countries, but must be combined with reforms in other
areas, including administration, justice, the rule of law
and good governance, in order to ensure long-lasting
stability.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela would like to thank the Nigerian presidency
for convening this briefing and for distributing the
concept note (S/2015/614, annex). Security sector
reform is a topic of vital importance. We would also
like to thank Mr. Dmitry Titov, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Rule of Law and Security Institutions
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations;
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict;
and Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, Assistant Administrator
of the Crisis Response Unit of the United Nations
Development Programme.
Guaranteeing security is a basic function of the
State. In post-conflict situations, security institutions,
such as military and police forces, may be the most
visible representatives of the State in the eyes of the
general public. As a result, when those institutions are
effective, responsible and professional they can have a
decisive and positive effect on the population’s trust in
Government institutions.
The transition from weak or weakened security
institutions to viable and robust ones has become
a major part of United Nations efforts in postconflict reconstruction. Indeed, 10 multidimensional
peacekeeping operations now have mandates that
include support for such reforms. In that regard, we
acknowledge the work of the Security Sector Reform
Unit of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The restoration of Government authority and
control in all sectors in the immediate aftermath of

S/PV.7508

conflict is a prerequisite for sustainable peace and
stability. That is why it is essential to establish effective
and accountable security structures that respect the
law, are sustainable and meet national priorities and
the needs of the population. Such structures are crucial
in order avoid a relapse into conflict. In that regard,
it is vital to recognize the links between security
sector reform and broader reform processes, including
national reconciliation and political dialogue. As clearly
pointed out in the concept note, the process of security
sector reform is as political as it is technical. Such a
reform process must take place within the framework
of a strong sense of national ownership. The State must
appropriate the process of reconciliation, inclusion and
the strengthening of military and national forces with
the aim of avoiding a relapse into conflict. Governments
themselves must determine the priorities for conducting
such reforms and coordinating their implementation;
they must also take responsibility for the results. Under
no circumstances should the essential vision of the
reform process be imposed on the recipient State
Peace agreements often overlook the need to
reform the deployment of military and police forces
in States in post-conflict situations. While the need to
demobilize, disarm and demilitarize former combatants
is generally addressed, the equally critical need to
create, reconstitute and train the military and police
forces of countries emerging from conflict is not always
taken up with the same dedication. The absence of
security sector reform can become fundamental when
the time comes to promote lasting peace and to avoid
the relapse of a country emerging from civil war. We
would like to stress that the political component cannot
be uncoupled from the success of future reconciliation
and reconstruction efforts in societies that have been
battered by war, as we can see from the experience of
Angola.
Avoiding a relapse into conflict requires a set of
security institutions that are capable of tackling the
re-emergence of insurgent groups loyal to one or the
other warring party. To the degree that the military and
police institutions that emerge from a peace agreement
are incapable of preserving the authority of the State
and guaranteeing the security of the population, the
possibility of a relapse into conflict will remain latent.
In addition, we must bear in mind that any effort to
achieve a lasting peace that fails to integrate former
combatants in the security apparatus and political and
economic institutions of the State by making them part

15-2609115/26

S/PV.7508

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the solution leaves open the possibility that they will
take up arms again.
Finally, the Council needs to undertake a broader,
deeper discussion of the experience of security sector
reform situations in countries affected by foreign
military invasions and interventions that bring about
the collapse of all State institutions. The traumatic and
terrible experiences in Iraq and Libya should prompt
a profound analysis. The collapse of State institutions
in those countries as a result of foreign military
intervention, as well as the social fragmentation
produced by a strategy of occupying and dominating
the population, including through sexual and sectarian
violence as a means to punish and terrorize sectors
of the population accused of supporting one group or
another or the former regimes, beyond the terrible social
and humanitarian effects of war itself, created fertile
ground for the emergence of the terrible phenomenon
of terrorism and extremism such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and other violent groups that
today pose the greatest threat to peace and security in
the entire region of the Middle East and North Africa.
The illegal trafficking in small arms and light weapons,
along with political and economic support for non-State
actors in the region, have become the main stimulus for
the emergence of terrorist groups. The weak security
forces of those brother countries, along with their
lack of unity and poor training, prevent them from
restoring national authority and ensuring the safety of
their civilian populations, which are the victims of the
atrocities perpetrated by those criminal groups. That
is the terrible and disastrous reality that the Council
must discuss and learn from so that it is never repeated
again.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank Assistant
Secretaries-General Titov and Nakamitsu, as well
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bangura, for their very thoughtful briefings, as well as
for the number of recommendations they made to the us,
which I found very creative and which we really need to
take seriously as the Council. I also pay tribute to your
leadership, Madam President, for having brought this
important issue back to the Council once again.
It is 18 months since we last discussed security
sector reform (SSR), and in that time more than
780,000 people have been killed by armed violence.
That is almost one person every minute. Only a tenth
of those deaths occurred at the hands of terrorists or
in full conflict situations. Too many of them occurred

16/26

20/08/2015

in countries that were emerging from conflict, where
stability, security and justice have yet to be embedded.
We all have a role to play to stop these deaths. Ensuring
an effective and accountable security sector in these
countries is a vital way of doing so.
So what can we do, as a Council and as
Governments, to achieve this? I think that there are
three things. First of all, we need to engage honestly
and sensitively with Governments and their institutions.
Security and justice are critical to stability, but if not
handled properly, these issues can fuel instability. Illdisciplined, unaccountable security forces operating
in fragile political climates can just as easily create
grievances as address them. We need to judge our
support according to the right political preconditions.
We cannot allow our enthusiasm for getting things done
to undermine the help that we are trying to give.
Honest engagement can bring risk, and it often
requires working with institutions that do not
necessarily meet international standards for human
rights transparency. But not engaging is not an option.
It is precisely these institutional security and justice
failures that allow crime and violence to flourish. They
are among the key drivers of conflict and extremism.
The Council is then left to tackle the violence and
dysfunctionality that they bring.
The second point that I want to make is that we
need to integrate our work on SSR into our longerterm work on conflict prevention, peacebuilding and
development. We have made a good start. The fact that
Assistant Secretary-General Nakamitsu is here from
the United Nations Development Programme today
briefing the Council is progress in itself.
In addition, for the first time, our global goals on
development (SDGs) contain a goal on peace, justice
and security. This goal cannot be achieved without
effective, efficient security forces that can respond to
citizens’ needs.
But we want to see more. A fully functional and
professional security sector is essential to sustainable
peace and also for the timely exit of United Nations
peace operations. We need better sequenced and better
prioritized mandates for peacekeeping operations to
achieve this, and we need effective systems to ensure
that the progress made on security forces does not fall
away once peacekeeping operations leave. If we get
these things right, not only will we decrease the average

15-26091

20/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

15-year lifespan of a peace operation, but we can avoid
the tragic relapse into conflict that we see so often.
This all requires a strong requirement on the part
of the international community to support countries
through the whole of the conflict cycle. But it also
requires national political leaders to show courage
and drive reforms themselves. That is the only way to
ensure that the local security sector is able to deliver for
its population when a mission ends.
It is this concept of local ownership that informs
my third point. Locally owned political processes are
vital to the success of security-sector reform, much
more so than externally imposed solutions. That is easy
to say but hard to deliver. In practice, this means that
efforts to build security capability in the short term
must be embedded in longer-term efforts to strengthen
accountability and the oversight mechanisms in
ministries of defence, the interior and justice. As both
Dmitry Titov and Izumi Nakamitsu have said, it means
that we have to use all of the tools available to the United
Nations, not just the military, to deliver security-sector
reform. It means coordinated responses, and, as we
heard in this Chamber earlier this week, working with
regional and subregional organizations. This is the best
way to ingrain coherent security-sector reform plans
within peacebuilding strategies.
To succeed, we also require reform processes that
are fully gender-sensitive and that incorporate the
perspectives and concerns of women. As we heard
today from Special Representative Bangura, gendersensitive SSR programmes are an important tool in the
fight against sexual violence. We know how much there
still is to do on this.
Madam President, let me conclude by thanking you
again for having brought this important issue back to the
Council. It is an issue that my Government cares about
deeply. This year, we will spend more than $250 million
on security-sector reform. That money is making a
difference. To cite just once example, in Sierra Leone
it has helped the local Government improve access to
security and justice for nearly 300,000 women and girls
in remote districts. We support these programmes and
more because we believe that security and access to
justice is a basic service, on a par with health care and
education. It is a fundamental right, as recognized in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. We owe
it to the hundreds of thousands killed since we last
discussed this issue to ensure that this right is upheld.

S/PV.7508

Mr. Taula (New Zealand): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for having convened this meeting
and for Nigeria’s long-standing engagement in securitysector reform (SSR). I also thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Titov for his update and the progress made
since the adoption of resolution 2151 (2014), as well
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bangura and Assistant Administrator Nakamitsu for
their briefings.
New Zealand considers effective SSR to be critical
for sustainable peace. We recognize SSR as a strategic,
long-term process, and we have seen some successes,
such as in Timor-Leste and Sierra Leone. But we
acknowledge that each situation is different and that
tailored approaches are required. There is also a need to
learn lessons from where SSR efforts have fallen short,
for example in South Sudan, as noted by Mr. Titov.
As this is an inherently long-term challenge, it is
important that we better coordinate Council-mandated
SSR activities with related efforts by other parts of
the United Nations system and other international
actors and bilateral donors. As noted in the concept
note for this briefing (S/2015/614, annex), Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General could have a
greater role to play in this regard. Although there is a
heavy focus on SSR in many peacekeeping missions,
SSR functions are now also being mandated across the
spectrum of United Nations peace operations, from
prevention to post-conflict stabilization, for example in
the SPMs?? Special Programming Missions?? in Libya
and Somalia and United Nations offices such as United
Nations Office in West Africa.
We need to look carefully at how SSR is mandated
in peace operations, particularly in the context of the
peace operations review and its recommendations
concerning phased mandates. We believe that it
is important for SSR to be embedded in mandates
from the start, including when peace agreements
are being conceived and negotiated. New Zealand
acknowledges the development of the United Nations
2011 policy framework for defence sector reform, and
its continued implementation. While components of
SSR do not work in isolation, it is critical to develop
accountable, professional and effective security
forces that support and adhere to the rule of law. We
see merit in the Council’s considering empowering
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General to
more directly support nationally owned security sector
reform policy and implementation frameworks. We also

15-2609117/26

S/PV.7508

Maintenance of international peace and security

support the concept of SSR compacts between missions
and host Governments. Those could both encourage
host country engagement and tie the achievement
of SSR benchmarks to the ultimate exit strategy of a
mission. We also stress the importance of women’s full
and effective participation in SSR processes.
Given the critical nature of SSR to the ultimate
success of a mission, we believe Council oversight
should be improved. In order to support that, we would
like to see more meaningful reporting on SSR and
regular mission reports. Reporting needs to be both
more consistent and of higher quality, providing a frank
assessment of progress, key obstacles and options for
addressing them.
In conclusion, we believe that resolution 2151 (2014)
was a very important step. But we need to work harder
to make SSR more effective, and therefore improve the
environment for sustainable peace and security.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Nigerian presidency for having organized this
meeting, and Mr. Dmitry Titov, Ms. Zainab Bangura
and Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu for their participation in this
important debate.
Peacekeeping operations currently deployed in
the field are mandated to cooperate in the reform of
their respective security sectors as they seek to provide
countries emerging from conflict with capacities
essential to ensuring the rule of law. Broader mandates
involve greater responsibilities for the United Nations
system and in particular for the Council. They also
require the closer attention of, among others, the Heads
of mission, Special Envoys and Representatives and
Force Commanders, who must grasp the strategic value
of such reforms and assume leadership in ongoing
coordination with national authorities, as appropriate .
From that perspective, we believe that the central
objective of security sector reform remains the
creation of national institutions that are subject to
civil authority, effective, inclusive and accountable
so to contribute to international peace and security,
sustainable development and the full exercise of
human rights. These reforms should be based on State
policies in the long term, take advantage of existing
institutional capacities, prevent their total collapse and
take into consideration, inter alia, local traditions or
cultural heritage. The incorporation of radical elements
into permanent institutions of a State is not advisable,

18/26

20/08/2015

which is why we must find mechanisms for their
demobilization and social reintegration.
However, there can be no doubt that monitoring
these reforms in countries emerging from conflict
must be a priority and ongoing task of the Council.
Understanding that security sector reform is
undertaken in specific and unique political contexts,
we favour the implementation of broad and inclusive
national agreements and commitments that will lay the
foundations for transformative processes that ensure
national ownership. The cooperation of other States
and organizations can contribute to the effectiveness
and sustainability of these processes.
We are aware in turn that any reform requires
parallel readjustments in judicial and prison systems,
as well as the systematization of the training of security
forces and their financing. Without the ability to
prosecute criminals and without predictable economic
resources, security institutions will work in a vacuum
that may limit their work, at the risk of entrenching bad
practices that will have to be unlearned. Responsible,
transparent and efficient security forces have the
enormous potential to make the people feel safe, which
is essential to facilitating the processes of reconciliation
and confidence-building among civil society, armed
groups and the Government. We believe in an inclusive
process of reform that seeks the allegiance of the people
as the beneficiaries of peacebuilding and the rule of law.
We have much to learn from countries that have
successfully emerged from conflict and established
professional and inclusive forces that serve the rule of
law. The lessons learned and best practices developed
can form a kind of catalog of potential solutions
and serve other countries undertaking key reforms.
Under resolution 2151 (2014), we must intensify the
exchange of experiences, an area where South-South
cooperation can play a leading role. Latin America has
deep experience in security sector reform that could be
shared with other regions. In this context and by way of
illustration, since 1996 Chile has maintained technical
assistance programmes with the Haitian National
Police whereby approximately 60 Haitian officers and
non-commissioned officers are trained in the military
schools of my country. That involvement has played a
key character in our participation in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
At the same time, it is necessary for countries
undertaking reforms to consider the effective and equal

15-26091

20/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

participation of women in all stages of these processes,
which will also require a cultural change. The impact
of such inclusion may facilitate national reconciliation
and the restoration of trust between civil society and
institutions. We hope that the comprehensive survey
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) will
offer guidelines in this area, including on the training
of contingents with regard to the incorporation of the
gender perspective and the policy of zero tolerance of
violence against women, including sexual violence.
We wish to conclude by insisting that mandates
be adapted to local realities and that the international
community design its cooperation around national
programmes and priorities, with comprehensive and
coherent approaches that create strong and responsible
countries and institutions able to take the path of peace.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank Nigeria
for having organized today’s meeting on consolidating
Security Council engagement on security sector reform
through the further implementation of resolution
2151 (2014). I also thank Mr. Titov, Ms. Bangura and
Ms. Nakamitsu for their briefings.
Creating professional security institutions that are
competent, uphold the rule of law and serve the people
is a difficult and long-term undertaking that requires
resources and conducive political and social conditions.
Unfortunately, such factors are often lacking in
countries experiencing or emerging from conflict. The
engagement of the United Nations and other players
is necessary to that end. Chad voted in favour of of
resolution 2151 (2014). Concerned exlusively with
security sector reform, it was the first resolution of its
type. It reflects the key importance of security sector
reform, which has become a cornerstone of United
Nations peacekeeping operations and special political
missions. I should like to make a few observations in
that respect.
Security sector reform after conflict is critical to
building peace and stability, as well as to promoting
the rule of law and good governance, extending State
authority and preventing relapse into conflict. The
regular reports of the Secretary-General on this issue
reveal that United Nations activities in support of
national security sector reform initiatives encounter
certain difficulties related to understanding the
national political context, taking support for security
sector reform into account from the very onset of the
peace process, the engagement of national authorities,

including transitional authorities,
conditions in the country concerned.

S/PV.7508

and

security

My country also notes other challenges, such as
institutional weaknesses in the host country and a lack
or shortfall of financing and other resources. In order
to overcome some of those problems, we suggest that
the Security Council undertake consultations with the
host country in the course of negotiating the mandate
of a peacekeeping operation, with a view to identifying
national priorities for the reform of the security sector.
As set out in resolution 2151 (2014), national ownership
and a country’s own determination of its priorities
on the basis of its needs and particular situation are
essential. In that regard, it is up to them to determine
and prioritize the make-up of the security sector,
including, among others, the defence sector and the
police, penal, legal, border and immigration services.
Outside stakeholders, such as countries providing
assistance and regional and international organizations,
including the United Nations, should take into account
the concerns of the host country. In the absence of a peace
agreement during a transition period where national
security institutions are practically non-existent, the
support of the United Nations in security sector reform
is crucial in helping national authorities to develop a
national programme in that regard, all the while taking
their priorities into account.
Moreover, given that the African continent is where
most security sector reform processes are under way,
it is essential to step up the interaction between the
Security Council and the African Union in connection
with providing support for such efforts. In that regard,
we should recall that the African Union has in place
a Policy Framework on Security Sector Reform, the
development of which took place against the backdrop
of broad consultation with many actors concerned,
including the United Nations, the member States
of the African Union, African civil society and the
various regional economic communities. The purpose
of the Framework is to help guide member States of
the African Union in transforming their security
sectors, with a view to making them more effective and
efficient in ensuring control in a democratic manner,
while taking into account the needs of the people in the
area of justice.
In addition to security sector reform, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) are also
important. Following disarmament, those who have

15-2609119/26

S/PV.7508

Maintenance of international peace and security

been demobilized should be provided economic
opportunities in order to reintegrate into society. We
underscore the fact that Chad, which has experienced
a long period of conflict, has undertaken quite
compelling efforts in that regard, including putting
in place a DDR programme and establishing goodneighbourly relations with surrounding countries. Our
efforts have resulted in an improvement of the country’s
security institutions, which today are contributing to
preserving peace and maintaining security beyond our
national borders. Chad is prepared to share its modest
experience in that regard.
Given the security situation in the Sahel and in
various North African countries where terrorist groups
and transnational criminal networks are exploiting
porous borders to carry out their illegal activities,
thereby jeopardizing international peace and security,
Chad would like to emphasize the importance of
stepping up border security. We call upon the relevant
entitites of the United Nations and on Member States
to support the efforts of the countries of the region in
that regard.
In conclusion, I wish to underscore the importance
of security sector reform. The efforts of the United
Nations to support national initiatives on security
sector reform are essential, but they must take into
account national ownership and the priorities of the
countries concerned, in line with their needs and
their specific situations, so as to generate greater
synergy. Chad urges the United Nations to strengthen
its cooperation with the African Union in the area
of support for security sector reform in order to help
African States to benefit from the process, including
through the Policy Framework, without losing sight of
the need to link DDR programmes with strengthened
border security, in particular in countries of the Sahel
experiencing manifold security issues, especially the
terrorism threat.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China appreciates Nigeria’s initiative to convene this
meeting on security sector reform (SSR). I would like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Titov, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bangura and
Assistant Administrator Nakamitsu for their respective
briefings.
Security sector reform is an integral part and
essential element of United Nations peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. United Nations SSR assistance to
post-conflict countries aimed at building professional,
20/26

20/08/2015

efficient and dedicated security sectors is conducive
to the maintenance of peace, security and stability
in recipient countries, as well as helpful in creating
enabling conditions for post-conflict reconstruction in
those countries.
In recent years, the United Nations has actively
assisted the SSR efforts of post-conflict countries and
has achieved positive results. Sierra Leone and Liberia,
among other countries, have gradually restored stability,
and their security sectors have once again taken on their
essential responsibility for national stability. However,
in some other post-conflict countries SSR continues
to face considerable challenges. Member States must
seriously review good practices and lessons learned
and, on the basis of existing achievements, further
explore how to improve SSR. China would like to make
four points on this issue.
First, it is important to observe national ownership
of the SSR process. The maintenance of national
security is the sovereign right of a State, and the host
country should have ownership of the SSR process.
In assisting host countries with SSR efforts, the
United Nations and other entities should respect the
sovereignty and ownership of the host countries. While
providing construcive assistance in line with their
needs, their is also a need to avoid micromanagement.
More important, a guest should never usurp the role of
the host.
Secondly, the United Nations should adhere to the
principle of adapting SSR to local specificities. Postconflict countries face myriad challenges that vary
from country to country, and their SSR needs vary as
well. While providing assistance to countries for their
SSR processes, the United Nations needs to reflect
the differences in line with their realities and specific
conditions. It must develop a policy for each country,
while identifying priority areas and the focus for the
work. Efforts should also be made to avoid stereotyping
and a one-size-fits-all approach.
Thirdly, the Organization must implement policies
in an integrated manner. Security sector reform is
central to peacebuilding in post-conflict coutries.
The United Nations should act mindful of the need to
comprehensively implement peacebuilding strategies,
reinforce integrated planning on SSR and ensure
that SSR is closely combined with efforts to achieve
national reconciliation, promote coordinated social and
economic development and eradicate poverty, among
other things. It should also ensure the eradication of the
15-26091

20/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

root causes of conflict so as to achieve lasting peace
and security.
Fourthly, regional and subregional organizations
should play their full role. Over the years, the African
Union and other regional and subregional organizations
have done a great deal of work and build up a wealth of
experience in helping post-conflict countries with their
SSR efforts. The United Nations should encourage such
organizations to scale up their participation in SSR and
support them in playing a greater role. In addition, the
United Nations should bolster its communication and
coordination with the organizations concerned through
information-sharing and exchanging best practices in
order to build synergies on SSR.
This year, the United Nations will carry out a
comprehensive review of its peacebuilding architecture
in order to take stock of positive experiences in
peacebuilding over the past decade and promote the
peacebuilding undertaking. China has taken note of
the report of the Secretary-General’s Advisory Group
of Experts on the issue. We also welcome the decision
by the Presidents of the Security Council and the
General Assembly to appoint Angola and Australia as
facilitators for the intergovernmental review process.
China is prepared to participate in the discussions
and will work with other Member States to ensure
that the review produces positive results so that the
Organization will be better able to carry out its sacred
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security, as it has been entrusted to do by the Charter of
the United Nations.
Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the Nigerian presidency of
the Security Council for organizing this informative
briefing. This is a timely debate, which certainly
suitably complements the debates we have held in
the past few weeks. An effective security sector
is undoubtedly a guarantee of stability, peace and
economic development.
We noted that a year ago resolution 2151 (2014),
adopted under Nigeria’s presidency, demonstrated that
it was important to have such a reform at this time. We
are now in an even more opportune time to assess the
developments that have taken place in the past year.
In the past year, we have seen more United Nations
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
receiving a mandate from the Council to deepen work
in this area. For the countries immersed in conflict
or in post-conflict situations, security sector reform

S/PV.7508

is extraordinarily difficult. Nonetheless, there is no
alternative. Without it, we would see a deepening of, or
relapse into, the same conflict-charged situations.
As a result, security sector reform serves, at the
same time, a healthy and preventive dimension. On
the basis of the accumulated experiences and lessons
learned, a question would be: How are we carrying out
the mission, and are we being effective when it comes
to reforming the security sector? We could talk about
the issue by coordinating three principal concepts:
cooperation, trust and continuity of the process.
First, allow me to begin with the first of those
elements, the necessary international cooperation
in this area. The main element of the security sector
reform makes it one of the most sensitive structures
within the State apparatus. As a result, reform must
necessarily at all times be carried out under national
ownership and leadership that is perfectly compatible
with international support as well as the support of
regional or subregional organizations. In that regard,
we must highlight the importance of continuing to
develop, for instance, partnerships between them and
the United Nations and the African Union or with
subregional organizations on the African continent,
bearing in mind that it is on this continent that most
countries find themselves immersed in security sector
reform.
We would also like to reiterate that Spain is
contributing significantly, within the framework of the
European Union, to training and providing advice for
security sector reform in countries such as Somalia, the
Niger, Mali and the Central African Republic, as well
as outside the continent, in Afghanistan. However, all
these efforts would be futile without the participation
of civil society in this process where the building of
trust is an important element.
Secondly, an aspect I would like to comment on is
that security sector reform has an important technical
component. But we should not fool ourselves; it is
essentially a political process, the ultimate objective of
which is to enhance the trust of society in their own
States, thereby strengthening State institutions. As a
result, security sector reform empowered to build the
necessary trust and confidence must be a process that
is inclusive in the sense that the entire nation should
feel that it is a part of the change taking place. When I
talk about inclusiveness I also want to refer to this as a
process that is sensitive to gender issues. As we heard
from the speakers, women’s participation in all phases

15-2609121/26

S/PV.7508

Maintenance of international peace and security

of security sector reform is crucial. We trust that will
be made clear in the month of October when we will
discuss the reform of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security. Only in that way can we really
talk about local ownership where security and peace
are considered essential public goods.
Likewise, building trust means that we must bear
in mind the economic and budgetary aspects of those
reforms. Rational allocation of human, economic and
material resources to the security sector is crucial.
Lastly in that regard, it is necessary to ensure that
State protection mechanisms for its citizens involve
the necessary democratic control on the part of
society. Security sector reform implies a high degree
of political responsibility and accountability, including
mechanisms that make it possible to fight against
corruption. The very close relationship that exists
between security sector reform and the reform of the
justice sector, due to their nature, are interconnected.
Thirdly, security sector reform is an ongoing
process, a medium- and long-term process, which due
to its very nature has a longer life than that of United
Nations peacekeeping missions. I said earlier that
there are more and more peacekeeping missions with
mandates related to strengthening the security sector.
However, the exit strategies planned by Department
of Peacekeeping Operations must be gradual and
progressive. They must be drawn up according to
objective, clear and verifiable parameters within the
framework of a road map that defines the strategies
clearly. They must be drawn up jointly with the host
State, whose ownership must be encouraged to ensure
that there is a proper assumption of responsibility on
the part of the State on the matter of its own security
sector.
There is still another element that we must bear in
mind when a peacekeeping mission comes to an end.
The Peacebuilding Commission plays a prominent role
in this area through demonstrating the continuity of
robust and well-coordinated support on the part of the
international community for security sector reform.
With its focus on development, the Commission acts
as the third part of the peace, security and development
apparatus, which we in the Chamber have established,
especially through the country-specific configurations.
All such international efforts must be accompanied by a
sustained national effort, which would make it possible
for the State to offer its citizens suitable functions and

22/26

20/08/2015

mechanisms when it comes to police and armed forces,
border control, the protection of civilians and justice.
Finally, it is no wonder that the sustainable
development goals that will be adopted at the next
major meeting of the General Assembly in September
will includes peacebuilding objectives. That gives
us an idea of the importance of the sector as well as
the interrelationship between peace, security and
sustainable human development.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): At the outset, I wish
to thank you, Madam President, and the Nigerian
delegation for organizing this meeting. My delegation
is of the view that the briefings today afford us an
opportunity to reflect on, among other things, the role
played by the United Nations in general and by the
Council in particular, as well as the role of the relevant
actors at the national and regional levels in implementing
the security sector reform (SSR) agenda in various
contexts, including those outlined in resolution 2151
(2014). In that connection, I thank you, Madam, for the
detail concept note (S/2015/614, annex), which serves to
frame and conceptualize our discussion today.
I join other Council members in expressing
appreciation to Mr. Titov, Assistant Secretary-General
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations;
Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict; and
Ms. Izumi Nakanitsu of United Nations Development
Programme, for sharing their views and perspectives,
which have helped enrich our discussions today.
I wish to echo the concern expressed by Ms. Bangura
in her earlier briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7428),
which highlighted, among other things, the disturbing
trend of increased instances of sexual violence,
including rape, sexual slavery and forced marriage,
particularly in the context of conflict situations and
increasing violent extremism. In certain instances,
security personnel are themselves guilty of practicing
such heinous acts. There can be no better example of
the need for SSR to become implemented in States than
the evidence of those charged with the responsibility of
protecting civilians.
On that note, Malaysia commends the SecretaryGeneral for taking decisive action in responding to
the allegations of sexual violence by United Nations
peacekeepers. All troop-contributing countries,
including those contributing national forces, must
maintain vigilance and not hesitate to investigate and,

15-26091

20/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

where appropriate, hold perpetrators to account to
ensure that there is no impunity.
In reaffirming support for resolution 2151
(2014) and its continuing implementation, I wish to
elaborate on the issue of SSR in the context of postconflict peacebuilding. Indeed, the importance of
security sector reform was among the themes raised
during the Council’s informal interactive dialogue on
peacebuilding on 25 June. Certain key points emanating
from that exchange could, in my delegation’s view,
frame possible responses to the challenges, questions
and issues raised in the concept note for today’s meeting.
For instance, Malaysia highlights that given its
unique convening role, the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) is well placed to coordinate the participation of a
wide array of critical regional and international actors
to assist concerned countries, including on reform of
their security sector. By bringing together security and
development actors, the PBC can perform a bridging role
between United Nations principal organs and actors,
thereby addressing fragmentation and the duplication
of efforts. In the context of reforming the security
sector, which itself is a precursor to establishing an
environment conducive tosustainable development and
peace, this is a crucial element. At the same time, the
inclusive nature of the PBC membership, drawn from
the general membership of the United Nations and the
Council, along with other actors, means that it is also
well placed to ensure that national priorities could be
factored into the Council’s mandate design process.
That element is particularly crucial to ensuring the
buy-in of concerned countries regarding possible SSR
initiatives.
Through
its
partnerships
with
regional
organizations and international and national financial
institutions, the PBC could help sustain the attention
and commitment of the international community
towards national peacebuilding priorities, with a focus
on addressing drivers of conflict and building resilient
institutions, including the SSR agenda. Within the
context of existing peace operations, it is conceivable
that such assistance could be provided in the drawdown phase. That said, it is worth highlighting that SSR
efforts need not necessarily follow armed conflict.
The United Nations and a number of regional
organizations have a wealth of experience and have
to date built up a substantial corpus of knowledge
on security sector reform. The fact that the majority
of United Nations peacekeeping operations contain

S/PV.7508

SSR components, each with its own peculiarity and
adaptation to the situation and specific needs on the
ground, indicates that the design and implementation
of the SSR agenda must continue to be the product of
close cooperation and collaboration among the United
Nations, the concerned country and other relevant
actors. In that connection, Malaysia is encouraged
to note that the implementation of the African
Union’s policy framework on security sector reform
is proceeding apace at the national, subregional and
regional levels.
On the donor side, we note the strong frameworks
under which the European Union, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development are assisting the overall security sector
reform agenda. Ongoing efforts are necessary to
coordinate actions and efforts between both donor and
recipient with a view tseeking mutually satisfactory
outcomes to the reform agenda.
On a related note, efforts aimed at curbing the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and their
munitions, especially in conflict situations, deserve
our full commitment and support. Malaysia strongly
believes that limiting the supply and availability of
such weapons could effectively contribute to peace
initiatives and to post-conflict peacebuilding. It is for
that reason, among others, that Malaysia co-sponsored
resolution 2220 (2015), adopted on 22 May.
In conclusion, allow me to recap certain key points
that I believe could be useful in taking forward the SSR
agenda, as follows. First, SSR initiatives, particularly
those spearheaded by the United Nations orother
multilateral or regional actors, should remain inclusive
and take into account national priorities, thereby
ensuring the buy-in of concerned countries. Secondly,
SSR must be recognized as not a exclusively technical
but also a political exercise. A certain level of flexibility
must be built into SSR initiatives, particularly at both
the design and implementation phase. Thirdly, regular
coordination among the various actors, including those
within the United Nations system, is crucial to ensuring
that efforts are not fragmented or duplicated. Finally,
a key element of SSR should be a focus on limiting
the supply of small arms and light weapons and their
munitions to conflict situations.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam, for having organized this meeting on

15-2609123/26

S/PV.7508

Maintenance of international peace and security

security sector reform (SSR). I also thank Mr. Titov,
Ms. Bangura and Ms. Nakamitsu for their briefings.
I shall limit myself to making three observations.
First, as many speakers before me have said, SSR is
more of a political exercise than a technical one. It is
decisive in post-crisis stabilization and consolidation,
and requires significant work in the area of support to
the host country. In post-conflict situations, security
institutions must be established that are transparent,
effective and fair and strive, within a system of good
governance, to uphold democratic principles and
human rights. Yet the national ownership of the host
country, political will, ongoing and inclusive dialogue
between those responsible for SSR, civil society and
Governments are all essential if the process is to
succeed.
The United Nations encounters difficulties when
local authorities do not commit as firmly to SSR as
called for in the relevant resolutions. We must never
forget that, as I said, security sector reform is as much
a political as a technical process. Its goals of rebuilding
the national armed forces and internal security forces,
as well as the judiciary and penal systems, are linked
to the fundamental sovereign functioning of the State
and the end game of reinstating a national system and a
chain of command that restore security, belonging and
confidence in the State by enshrining the protection of
civilians and the upholding of human rights, all in line
with fundamental democratic requirements.
This work is important in the context of the United
Nations efforts to resolve disputes and establish
lasting peace. It is often key to the exit strategies of
peacekeeping or special political missions, as it allows
for a transfer of operational responsibility for security
to the host country. On the other hand, we know that
incomplete or unsuccessful SSR can be a factor for
tension or even relapse into violence. In undertaking
these activities, United Nations missions need adequate
resources adapted to every stage of a crisis. The
Council tries to reflect that need in its approach to
mandates. As we have just said, SSR is a delicate and
often lengthy process. The United Nations has a role to
play in improving the expertise of its missions and its
access to local stakeholders. That, I believe, raises the
question of the language spoken by the experts.
The United Nations can also enjoy close
cooperation with other players on the ground, as in the
case of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated

24/26

20/08/2015

Stabilization Mission in Mali and the European Union
Training Mission in Mali. I stress that the adapted
deployment of significant SSR resources is not always
immediately necessary in peacekeeping operations.
Such operations do not always need to play a direct
operational role; instead, they may act as technical
advisers, motivators and coordinators. Moreover, they
cannot substitute for the role of local authorities, who
must conduct a thorough analysis of needs and define
the requirements of outside support.
Priorities and sequencing need therefore to be
established. Among generally urgent measures,
rehabilitating the police and gendarmerie services and
restarting an integrated corrections chain of command
are absolutely essential, as the Council noted in the
Central African Republic. The Council can also
identify certain priorities, as for example when it talks
about the need for a rapid reaction military force in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is for those
reasons that France feels that peacekeeping efforts
regarding SSR have to be sequenced and adapted to the
phase of the crisis, as well as focused on several initial
priorities that involve experts in sufficient numbers
and qualifications, adjusted to the needs and capacities
of the host country, in close cooperation with the
numerous international actors, including the European
Union, bilateral partners and other donors.
By way of conclusion, the Council must have at its
disposal precise elements regarding the implementation
of SSR programmes. In resolution 2151 (2014), we
called for such coordination and for an increased role
for the Council. Unfortunately, the Security Council is
not always regularly or sufficiently well informed of
progress in that field. I therefore reiterate our call for
the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General to
provide better details on those processes during their
various briefings to the Council or in meetings of the
Council with troop- and police- contributing countries.
They must insist on an implementation strategy
and, if necessary, on its linkage with disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration measures by ensuring
the effective of coordination with other United Nations
organs and agencies, or even on the potential difficulties
that they might encounter with the authorities of the
host country. In that way, the Council should have at its
disposal a regular analysis of results and improvements
to be made. Successful SSR is a factor for stability
and development for concerned countries, and thus a
guarantee of success for the United Nations.

15-26091

20/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7508

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Nigeria.

establish clarity of rules and division of labour among
those involved in the reform process.

First, I want to thank our briefers: Assistant
Secretary-General Titov, Assistant Secretary-General
Nakamitsu and Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Bangura for their very comprehensive
briefings. I must acknowledge that we have all been
greatly enriched by their perspectives on our very
important discussion this morning.

That is why we encourage the concept of an SSR
compact among peace operations, international partners
and the host State, as espoused by Mr. Titov. Such a
compact would foster predictability, prevent duplication
and ensure mutual accountability and transparency in
the implementation of the United Nations mandate.
It would also strengthen the effectiveness of United
Nations assistance by setting out focused and time-bound
priorities, as well as provide an enabling framework for
partnership between international partners and host
Governments. In clarifying roles, it is important to
emphasize that States — as most speakers have noted
this morning — bear the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and security within their borders.
States must continue to take the lead in determining
their own security sector priorities. That is the essence
and primacy of the idea of national ownership.

Our meeting today offers the Council an opportunity
to advance the enduring discourse on security sector
reform (SSR) and to explore ways of giving practical
and effective application to resolution 2151 (2014),
which provides a clear and common basis of guidance
for United Nations support to SSR. We believe that the
implementation ofthe resolution would benefit from a
prioritized plan of action that could form the basis of
periodic reports of the Secretary-General. That, in our
view, would allow the Council to monitor progress in
the implementation of the resolution. We are pleased
to note that there has been a steady increase in the
demand for SSR. Today, as we speak, the number of
Security Council resolutions that reference SSR stands
at 37. SSR has become more integral to peacekeeping
with a significant number of peacekeeping operations
supporting the reform of security institutions.
The Security Sector Reform Unit of the Office
of Rule of Law and Security Institutions, whose
Assistant Secretary-General we have just listened to
this morning, has been instrumental in the effort to
mainstream SSR. We want to commend the unit for
that important achievement. We also welcome the work
of the Office of Special Representative Bangura and
the Team of Experts in providing support to national
authorities, including in SSR processes. Indeed, the
United Nations Development Programme must also be
recognized, particularly as the co-chair of the United
Nations inter-agency Task Force on Security Sector
Reform, and its valuable contribution to advancing both
the rule of law and SSR.
The modest experience acquired so far indicates
that the quality and impact of United Nations support
to SSR depends on its coherence and effective
coordination within the United Nations and between
the United Nations and other stakeholders supporting
SSR processes. With the multiplicity of actors
supporting SSR in situations where national capacity
for coordination is often limited, it is imperative to

The global normative frameworks on SSR
expounded by the United Nations must be placed
within the specificity of the sociopolitical realities of
the particular country that is undergoing reform. In
that regard, the SSR policy framework of the African
Union, adopted only in 2013, aptly addresses the
complicity of the relationship between the former
security institutions of the State, on the one hand,
and the resilience of traditional and often informal
customary African security institutions, on the other.
The future viability of SSR in Africa will depend to a
large extent on how effectively we are able to balance
the relationship between the statutory formality and
customary informality of security institutions in Africa.
National efforts at ensuring security must take
into consideration regional and global threats to
security. That is more poignant in the current global
environment, where transnational threats increasingly
emanate essentially from non-State actors. In specific
terms, the link between national SSR processes
and various regional and global initiatives must be
emphasized at this point. The adoption of the African
Union Policy Framework on Security Sector Reform
provides opportunities for increasing cooperation with
the United Nations and other regional organizations.
In turn, the adoption of an Economic Community of
West African States SSR policy framework would
complement that process at the subregional level.
Several speakers before me this morning have
emphasized the need to remain cognizant of the

15-2609125/26

S/PV.7508

Maintenance of international peace and security

preventive dimension of security sector governance and
how that could promote peacebuilding.
I would like to say that Nigeria encourages
continued engagement with SSR on the part of other
United Nations organs, notably the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council. We welcome
the attention the General Assembly accords to SSRrelated issues, especially under goal 16 of the post-2015
sustainable development agenda. That underscores
the important link between security and development.
It is our collective responsibility not only to guard,
guide and protect that nexus; we must cultivate their
symbiotic relationship as well.

26/26

20/08/2015

It is gratifying to note that considerable progress
has been achieved in taking the SSR agenda forward.
But we believe that much more can and indeed must
be done to support SSR processes. In resolution 2151
(2014), we already have a platform for action. What
is needed now is for all hands to be on deck at the
global, regional and national levels. Only a collective,
collaborative and concerted effort will ensure our
success in this important endeavour.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

15-26091
