S/PRST/2001/31

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 October 2001
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4402nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 31 October 2001, in
connection with the first anniversary of the Council’s adoption of its resolution 1325
(2000) of 31 October 2000 on the item entitled “Women and peace and security”, the
President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the
Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to the implementation of
its resolution 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000 and welcomes the efforts by the
United Nations system, Member States, civil society organizations and other
relevant actors in promoting the equal participation and full involvement of
women in the maintenance and promotion of peace and security and in
implementing the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000).
“The Council further reaffirms its strong support for increasing the role
of women in decision-making with regard to conflict prevention and resolution
and renews its call on States to include women in the negotiations and
implementation of peace accords, constitutions and strategies for resettlement
and rebuilding and to take measures to support local women’s groups and
indigenous processes for conflict resolution. In this regard it recognizes the
efforts of the Mano River Women’s Peace Network in facilitating peace and
dialogue in the Mano River Union region. It is also encouraged by the
inclusion of women in the political decision-making bodies in Burundi,
Somalia and in East Timor.
“The Security Council underscores the importance of promoting an active
and visible policy of mainstreaming a gender perspective in all policies and
programmes while addressing armed conflicts, in particular peacekeeping
operations in keeping with the statement of the President of the Security
Council on 8 March 2000.
“The Council therefore reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
include, where appropriate, in his reporting to the Security Council, progress
in gender mainstreaming throughout United Nations peacekeeping missions
and on other aspects relating to women and girls. It expresses its intention to
give full consideration to these reports and to take appropriate action. The
Council also reaffirms its call for the inclusion of gender components as
appropriate, in peacekeeping operations.

01-61225 (E) 311001

*0161225*

S/PRST/2001/31

“The Security Council renews its support for gender-sensitive training
guidelines and material on the protection, rights and the particular needs of
women, as well as on the importance of involving women in all peacekeeping
and peace-building measures. The Council calls upon all troop-contributing
countries to include these elements in their national training programmes for
peacekeepers.
“The Council welcomes the specific proposals made by the SecretaryGeneral aimed at strengthening the Best Practices Unit of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations with the appointment of gender advisers at
sufficiently senior levels.
“It also welcomes the practical efforts including the preparation of
complementary reports, already made by the United Nations and its agencies,
funds, programmes and regional bodies, in particular those participating in the
Administrative Committee on Coordination (ACC) Inter-agency Task Force on
Women, Peace and Security to implement all aspects of resolution 1325
(2000), as well as the timely issuance of the publication Gender Perspective in
Disarmament, which gives a clear indication of ways in which women can be
fully involved and the benefits to the parties concerned.
“The Security Council notes with satisfaction that the SecretaryGeneral’s study requested under paragraph 16 of its resolution 1325 (2000) on
the impact of armed conflict on women and girls, the role of women in peacebuilding and the gender dimensions of peace processes and conflict resolution
is under way and welcomes the coordinated comprehensive input of the United
Nations and all the relevant agencies, funds and programmes of the United
Nations system and looks forward to its review.
“The Security Council is concerned that there are still no women
appointed as Special Representatives or Special Envoys of the SecretaryGeneral to peace missions, and urges Member States to redouble their efforts
to nominate women candidates to the Secretary-General. The Council also
urges the Secretary-General to appoint women as Special Representatives and
Envoys to pursue good offices on his behalf in accordance with his strategic
plan of action (A/49/587, para. 2).
“The Security Council recognizes the need to implement fully
international humanitarian and human rights law that protects the rights of
civilians including women and girls during and after conflicts and calls on all
parties to armed conflicts to take special measures to protect women and girls
from gender-based violence, and all other forms of violence.
“The Security Council remains actively seized of the matter and
expresses its willingness to consider as appropriate, the gender dimensions of
armed conflict in carrying out its responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security under the Charter of the United Nations.”

2
