104

General Aasembly-Thirtieth Session

cal, economic and social rights and interests of the
peoples of the Territories and is therefore incompatible
with the purposes and principies of the Charter,
Condemning the intensified activities of those foreign
economic, financia! and other interests which continue
to exploit the, natural and human resources of the colonial Territories and to accumulate and repatriate huge
. profits to the detriment of the interests of the inhabi/J~ts, particularly in southern Africa, the!ebr imped~g
the realization by the peoples of the Terntones of _their
legitimate aspirations for self-determination and mdependence,
, Strangly candemning the support which South Africa
and the illegal racist minority régime in S_outhern Rh_odesia continue to receive from those fore1gn econom1c,
financia! and other interests which are collaborating with
them in their exploitation of the natural and huma!!
resources of and in the further entrenchment of their
illegal and ;acialist domination over, the inteT?ational
Territory of Namibia and the Non-Self-Govemmg_ Territory of Southem Rhodesia (Zimbabwe), respectively,
Conscious of the continued need to mobilize public
opinion against the involvement of foreign _economic,
financia! and other interests in the exploitabon of the
natural and human resources of colonial Territories,
particularly in Africa,
1. Reaffums the inalienable right of the peoples of
dependent Territories to self-determination and independence and to the enjoyment of the natural resources
of their Territories, as well as their right to dispose of
those resources in their best interests;
2. Reiterates that any administering P?wer whic_h
deprives the colonial peoples of the exerc1se of their
legitimate rights over their natural resources or subordinates the rights and interests of those peoples to
foreign economic and financia! interests violates the
solemn obligations it has assumed under the Charter
of the United Nations;
3. Reaffirms that, by their depletive exploitation of
natural resources, the continued accumulation and repatriation of huge profits and the use of those profits
for the enrichment of foreign settlers and the entrenchment of colonial domination over the Territories, the
activities of foreign economic, financia! and other interests operating at present in the colonial Territories of
southem Africa constitute a major obstacle to political
independence and to the enjoyment of the natural resources of those Territories by the indigenous inhabitants;
4. Candemns the policies of the colonial Powers
and other States which continue to support or collaborate with those foreign economic and other interests
engaged in exploiting the natural and human resources
of the Territories, thus violating the political, economic
and social rights and interests of the i_ndigenous p~oples
and obstructing the full and speedy 1mplementat1on of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples in respect of those
Territories;
5. Calls upan the colonial Powers, as well as th~se
Govemments which have not yet done so, to take leg1slative administrative or other measures in respect of
their 'nationals and the bodies corporate under their
jurisdiction who o~ and operate. enterp~ises in col~nial Territories, parttcularly m Afnca, wh1ch are detr1mental to the interests of the inhabitants of those
Territories, in order to put an end to such enterprises

and to prevent new investments that run counter to the
interests of the inhabitants;
6. Requests all States to take effective measures to
end the supply of funds and other forms of assistance,
including military supplies and · equipment, to those
régimes which use such assistance to repress the peoples
of the colonial Territories and their national liberation
movements;
7. Calls upon ali States to discontinue all economic,
financia! or trade relations with South Africa concerning
Namibia and to refrain from entering into economic,
financia! or other relations with South Africa, acting on
behalf of or concerning Namibia, which may lend support to its continued illegal occupation of that Territory;
8. Calls upan the administering Powers to abolish
every discriminatory and unjust wage system wh~ch
prevails in the Territories under their administrat1on
and to apply in each Territory a uniform system of
wages to ali the inhabitants without any discrimination;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
give the widest possible publicity to the adverse etfects
of the activities of foreign economic and other interests
in ali colonial Territories, as well as to the decisions
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
and of the General Assembly on this question, and
requests all Govemments to assist the Secretary-General
in that regard;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine this question and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session.
2414th plenary meeting
21 November 1975
3399 (X.XX). Question of Namibia

The General Assembly,
Having cansidered the question of Namibia,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia6 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of- Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 7
Having heard the statements of the representative of
the South West Africa People's Organization, who participated in an observer capacity in the consideration
of the item by the Fourth Committee, 8
Having also heard the statements of the petitioners,9
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling, in particular, its resolutions 2145 (XXI)
of 27 October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967
and subsequent' resolutions of both the General Assembly and the Security Council relating to the question
6 /bid.

Supp/ement No. 23 (A/10023/Rev.l), chaps. 1-VI
and X.
B Jbid., Thirtietlz Session, Fourth Committee, 2151st and
2155th meetings.
9 /bid., 2145th, 2146th, 2156th and 2165th meetings.
1 [bid.,

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

of Namibia, as well as the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971, 1º delivered in response to the request addressed to it by the
Council in its resolution 284 (1970) of 29 July 1970,
Taking into consideration the relevant provisions of
tbe Dar es Salaam Declaration on Southern Africa,
adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization
of African Unity at its ninth extraordinary session held
from 7 to 10 April 1975, and resolution 433 (XXV)
on Namibia, adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity at its twenty-fifth ordinary session, 11 held at Kampala from 18 to 25 J uly
1975, and subsequently endorsed by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Govemment of the Organization
of African Unity at its twelfth ordinary session,
Reaf]irming that the Territory and people of Namibia
are the direct responsibility of the United Nations and
that the Namibian people must be enabled to attain
self-determination and independence within a united

Namibia,
Strongly deploring South Africa's continued refusal
to comply with the resolutions and decisions of the
United Nations, its continued illegal occupation of
Namibia, its brutal repression of the Namibian people
and its persistent violation of their human rights, as
well as its efforts to destroy the national unity and
territorial integrity of Namibia, in particular through
the convening of a so-called constitutional conference,
Gravely concerned at the militarization of Namibia
by the illegal occupation régime of South Africa,
Strongly deploring the policies of those States which,
despite the relevant decisions of the United Nations
and the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice of 21 June 1971, continue to maintain diplomatic, economic, consular anc! other relations with
South Africa, purporting to act on behalf of or concerning Namibia, as well as military or strategic collaboration, all of which has the effect of supporting or
encouraging South Africa in its defiance of the United
Nations,
Recognizing that the situation in Namibia constitutes
a threat to intemational pea.ce and security,
Noting with satisfaction the opposition of the Namibian people to South Africa's illegal presence in the
Territory and to its oppressive racist policies and, in
particular, the progress of their struggle in all its forms
for national liberation under the leadership of the
South West Africa People's Organization,
Noting with appreciation the efforts of the United
Nations Council for Namibia in the discharge of the
responsibilities entrusted to it by the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
1. Reaf]irms the inalienable and imprescriptible right
of the people of Namibia to self-determination and
independence in accordance with General Assembly
resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2621 (XXV) and subsequent resolutions;
2. Endorses the relevant provisions of the Dar es
Salaam Dedaration on Southem Africa, adopted by the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity at its ninth extraordinary session held in April
1975;
10 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Pre-sence
of South A/rica in Namibia (South West A/rica) notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion,
l.CJ. Reports 1971, p. 16.
11 See A/10297, annex I.

105

3. Reiterates that the national liberation movement
of Namibia, the South West Africa People's Organization, is the authentic representative of the Namibian
people, and supports its efforts to strengthen national
unity;
4. Reaf]irms the legitimacy of the struggle of the
N amibian people by all means against the illegal occupation of their country by South Africa;
5. Strongly condemns South Africa for its persistent
refusal to withdraw from Namibia and for its manreuvres to consolidate its illegal occupation by organizing a so-called constitutional conference, with a view
to creating divisions among etbnic groups and furthering its policies of "bantustanization";
6. Strongly condemns the military build-up by South
Africa in Namibia and the forceful removal of Namibians from the northern border for military purposes;
7. Demands the immediate withdrawal by South
Africa of ali its military and pollee forces and its administration from Namibia so as to enable the Namibian
people to achieve freedom and independence, in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 1514
(XV) and 2621 (XXV) and subsequent resolutions;
8. Decides that free national elections shall be held
in Namibia as a matter of urgency, under the direct
supervision and control of the United Nations;
9. Approves the report of the United Nations Council for Namibia, 12 including the conclusions and recommendations contained in paragraphs 348 to 357 therein,
and decides to make adequate financia! provision for
their implementation;
10. Urges the United Nations Council for Namibia
to take all necessary measures for the implementation
of its mandate under General Assembly resolution
2248 (S-V), including the promulgation of decrees
designed to protect the rights of Namibians;
11. Urges the Security Council urgently to take up
again the question of Namibia, which is still on its
agenda, and to act to give effect to its resolution 366
(1974) of 17 December 1974;
12. Calls once again upon ail those States which
have not yet done so to comply with the relevant provisions of the resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council concerning Namibia and the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of
21 June 1971;
13. Urges all those States which have not yet done
so to break off economic relations with South Africa
that concern Namibia and to take measures with a view
to compelling the Government of South Africa to withdraw immediately from Namibia in accordance with
General Assembly resolutions 2145 (XXI) and 2248
(S-V) and subsequent resolutions;
14. Calls upon those States which have consular
representation, whethcr ordinary or honorary, in
Namibia to terminatc such representation, and calls
upon those States which have consuls in South Africa
with consular jurisdiction in Namibia to withdraw such
accreditation;
15. Requests once again all Member States to take
all appropriate measures to ensure the full application
of, and compliance with, the provisions of Decree No. 1
for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia,
enacted by the United Nations Council for Namibia on
12 Officia/ Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supp/eme111 No. 24 (A/10024).

106

2 7 September 1974,

General A11aembl1
13

and such oth(:r measures as. may

be necessary to assist in the protection of the nat10nal

resources of Namibia;
16. Condemns the exploitation of uranium . an~ of
all other natural resources of Namibia by ~rgan~atio1:1,s
under private or . govemmental_ control, mcludmg m
particular transnatlo~al corpo~ati~ns, and demands t~a~
such exploitation, dtrect or mdrrect, cease forthwith,
17 Calls upon the lntemational Atomic Energy
Agency to take all possi~le me~s~res to discourage the
exploitation of uramum m Namibia;
18. Requests Member States to broad~~st programmes on their national radi? and . televis!on networks and to publish material m their offi.ci~l n~ws
media informing their populations about the situaban
in N;mibia and the obligation of Goy~rnments_ and
peoples to assist in the struggle of N amib1ans for mdependence;
19. Requests all speci~ized ag~ncies and ot~er organizations within the Umted N auons system, m ?º_nsultation with the United Nations Council for Namibia,
to render, within their respective spheres of co~p~
tence, all possible assistance to the people of Namibia
through their liberation movement, the South West
Africa People's Organization;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to_ ~?ntinue to
provide the necessary assistance. a_nd facilities_ to the
United Nations Council for Namibia for the discharge
of its duties and functions and, in particular, to _dire~t
the Office of Public Information of the Secretanat, m
co-operation with the United Nations Council for
Namibia:
(a) To increase its radio and television programmes
concerning Namibia, includi~g radio p~owammes
beamed to Namibia and radio and television programmes intended tor loe~ consumption in all areas
where there are Umted Nalions offices;
(b) To place advertisements in the news media of
Member States in arder to promote the cause of
N amibian independence;
21. Further requests the Secretary-General, in ~~nsultation with the United Nations Council for Namibia,
urgently to set up in an African ~tate a U~it_ed Nati':'ns
radio transmitter operated by tramed N am1bians, wh1ch
would have the function of transmitting radio programmes in the various languages sp?ken in _Namibi~,
informing the Namibia~ peop_le of Umted_ ~at1ons pohcies in regard to the hberat1on of Namibia, the protection of human rights and funda~ental freedoms,_ the
fight against racism and the steps bemg taken to achieve
decolonization in Namibia and throughout the world;
22. Decides to make adequate budgetary provision,
on the proposal of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, for the implementation of Decree No. 1_ ~or
the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia;
23. Decides to continuc to defray the expenses of
a representativc of thc South Wcst Africa People's
Organization, the authentic re~resentat~ve of the p~ople
of Namibia, whencver the Umted Nat10ns Counc1l for
Namibia so rcquires;
24. Decides to continue to makc adequate financia}
provision in the budgct of thc ~nitcd Nations Council
for Namibia to financc an officc of the South West
Africa Pcople's Organization in New York;
13 Jbid.,

Twenty-ninth Se.ui""• Supp/e11u•111 No. 24A
9624/Add.l ), para. 84.

( A/

Thirtieth Seuion

25. Requests a1I committees and sub-committees of
the General Assembly to continue to invite a reer~sentative of the United Nations Council for Nanubta ~
participate whenever the rights and interests of _Nam1bians are discussed, and to consult closely _With. the
Council before submitting to the Assembly at 1ts thirtyfirst session any draft resolution which may involve the
rights and interests of Namibians;
26. Requests all intergovemmental and non-govemmental organizations, bodies and conferences to ensure
that the rights and interests _of Nami?ia are prot~ted;
in this connexion the Umted Nat1ons Council for
Namibia should p:.rticipate, as appropriate, whenever
such rights and interests are involved;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to report to _the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session on the tmplementation of the present resolution.
2419th plenary meeting
26 November 1975
3400 (XXX). United Nations Fund for Namibia

The General Assembly,
Recalling its reso1ution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966, by which the United Nations deci~e~ to terminate
the Mandate of South Africa over Nanubta and assume
direct responsibility for the Territory until its independence, and resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967,
by which it established the United Nations Council for
Namibia,
Reaffirming its determination to continue to discharge
that responsibility in regard to the Territory,
Mindful that, by assuming direct responsibility for
Namibia, the United Nations incurred a solemn obligation to assist the people of the Territory morally and
materially,
RecaUing further its resolutions 2679 (XXV) of
9 December 1970, 2872 (XXVI) of 20 December
1971, 3030 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3112
(XXVIII) of 12 December 1973 and 3296 (XXIX)
of 13 December 1974,
Recognizing that South Africa's continued illegal occupation of Namibia at present prevents the United
Nations from furnishing needed, large-scale assistance
within the Territory,
H aving examined the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Fund for Namibia14 and the
relevant sections of the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, 1~
l. Takes note of the operations of the United
Nations Fund for Namibia and of the setting up of the
Institute for Namibia;
2. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
made voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Fund for Namibia;
3. Decides to allocate to the United Nations Fund
for Namibia the sum of $US 200,000 from the regular
budget of the United Nations for 1976;
4. Requests the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Council for Namibia to continue to appeal to
Governments, intergovemmental and non-govemmental
organizations and prívate individuals for generous voluntary contributions to the United Nations Fund for
Namibia;
14 A/l0229.

Record, o/ tire General Assembly, Thirtieth Se.rsi""· Supp/e111c111 Nu. 24 (A/10024).
1.; O/]iciai
