General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

206

United Nations system in working out appropriate measures
for implementing the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations and to prepare for submission to the relevant bodies,
with the assistance of those agencies and organizations, a
report on the action taken since the circulation of his previous report in implementation of the relevant resolutions.
including the present resolution;
24. Requests the Economic and Social Council to continue to consider, in consultation with the Special Committee, appropriate measures for co-ordination of the
policies and activities of the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system in implementing
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
25. Requests the Special Committee to continue to consider this question and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
70th plenary meeting
24 November 198/

36/53.

United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa, in particular resolution 35/30 of 11 November 1980,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the Programme for 1980/81, 45 containing an account of the
work of the Advisory Committee on the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa
and of the operation of the Programme during the year.
Noting with grave concern the significant decline in the
level of contributions received in 1981 and the consequent
sharp decrease in the number of new awards granted and
the total number of scholarship holders,
Strongly convinced that the continuation and expansion
of the Programme is essential in order to assist the peoples
of South Africa and Namibia,
Recognizing that supplementary contributions are urgently required in order to enable the Programme to meet
its current level of obligations and that increased contributions for the coming fiscal year are required to meet the
growing needs for assistance,
Taking account of the desirability of providing educational opportunities and counselling to student refugees in
a broad spectrum of professional, cultural, technical and
linguistic disciplines suitable for their future functions, notably, in the fields of development and international cooperation,
l. Endorses the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Educational and Training Programme for
Southern Africa;
2. Takes note with grave concern of the deficit facing
the Programme in the current financial year because of escalating costs and a decrease in contributions in both ahsolute and real terms;
3. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have supported the Programme by providing contributions, scholarships or places in their educational institutions;
4. Requests the Secretary-General and the Advisory
Committee on the United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa to take all possible measures
for the promotion of generous contributions to the Programme;

5. Appeals to all States, institutions, organizations and
individuals, in view of the increasing demand for educational opportunities by the people of South Africa and
Namibia and the rapidly increasing costs of higher education
and training, to offer greater financial and other support to
the Programme in order to ensure its continuation, effectiveness and expansion.
70th plenary meeting
24 November 1981

36/54.

Offers by Member States of study and training
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing
Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/31 of 11 November 1980,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General on
offers by Member States of study and training facilities for
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, 46 prepared
under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX) of 22 November 1954,
Considering that more scholarships should be made available to the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories
in all parts of the world and that steps should be taken to
encourage applications from students in those Territories,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
that have made scholarships available to the inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites all States to make or continue to make generous offers of study and training facilities to the inhabitants of those Territories that have not yet attained selfgovernment or independence and, whenever possible, to
provide travel funds to prospective students;
4. Urges the administering Powers to take effective
measures to ensure the widespread and continuous dissemination in the Territories under their administration of information relating to offers of study and training facilities
made by States and to provide all the necessary facilities
to enable students to avail themselves of such offers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session on the implementation of the present resolution;
6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
70th plenary meeting
24 November /98/
36/62.

Question of Bermuda, the British Virgin
Islands, the Cayman Islands, Montserrat and
the Turks and Caicos Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Bermuda, the British
Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Montserrat and the
Turks and Caicos Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 47
46

A/36/580 and Add. I.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/36/23/Rev. I), chaps. III-V and XVIII-XXII.
47

45

A/36/147.
