S/PV.9039

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9039th meeting

Monday, 23 May 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Oliveira Marques
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Mr. Flynn
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Roscoe

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Technology and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-35745 (E)
*2235745*

S/PV.9039

Maintenance of international peace and security

worked with partners to build an e-learning platform
on digital risk management.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Technology and security
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs; Ms. Nanjala
Nyabola, Director of Advox, the Digital Rights Project
of Global Voices; and Mr. Dirk Druet, Adjunct Professor
at the McGill University Center for International Peace
and Security Studies and Non-resident Fellow at the
International Peace Institute.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms.
DiCarlo:
Digital
technologies
have
profoundly transformed every facet of our societies.
They offer boundless opportunities for sustainable
development, for education and for inclusion. Social
media, for example, has transformed human rights and
humanitarian advocacy, making it possible to mobilize
people around the world quickly and efficiently around
issues requiring urgent attention. They have also
created fresh possibilities for our peace and security
work. Technological developments have improved
our ability to detect crises, to better preposition
our humanitarian stocks and to design data-driven
peacebuilding programming.
We are using digital technologies in our work in
conflict prevention, peacemaking and peacebuilding.
Allow me to share a few examples.
Digital tools strengthen our information-gathering
and early-warning capacities. In Yemen, the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
has used various mapping, geographic information
system and satellite technology tools to enhance its
monitoring of the ceasefire in the governorate. They
have increased our preparedness to understand, analyse
and respond to crises that may have a digital dimension
and to address digital risks. We have, for example,
2/28

23/05/2022

New technologies can be beneficial in support of
political processes, particularly to promote inclusion.
In various peace negotiations, we have used artificial
intelligence-assisted digital dialogues to reach out to
thousands of interlocutors and to hear their views and
priorities. That has been a particularly useful way to
reach traditionally excluded groups, including women.
In Libya, the United Nations Mission held
five digital dialogues, each with more than 1,000
participants. That effort increased the legitimacy of the
process, as different communities saw that their voices
could be heard. In Yemen, through digital consultations,
the Special Envoy engaged hundreds of women from
various governorates, which provided deeper insight
into the gender dimensions of the war.
The use of digital technologies also can improve
the safety and security of our peacekeepers and civilian
staff on the ground. The launch of the Strategy for the
Digital Transformation of United Nations Peacekeeping
represents an essential step towards that goal, as well
as towards more effective mandate implementation,
thereby increasing early-warning capacities.
Finally, with those tools, we are able to visualize
information and convey data-rich analysis to support
the Security Council’s decision-making. Our recent
virtual-reality presentation to the Security Council
on Colombia shows how we can bring our work on the
ground to the attention of this body in new ways.
The benefits of digital technologies for the
maintenance of international peace and security are
manifold. However, advances in technology have also
created significant new risks and can affect conflict
dynamics for the worse. There are several areas
of concern.
The number of State- and non-State-sponsored
incidents of malicious use of digital technologies
for political or military ends has nearly quadrupled
since 2015, according to some estimates. Of specific
concern is activity targeting the infrastructure that
provides essential public services, such as health and
humanitarian agencies. Meanwhile, lethal autonomous
weapons raise questions regarding human accountability
for the use of force.
As the Secretary-General has made clear, machines
with the power and discretion to take lives without
22-35745

23/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

human involvement are politically unacceptable,
morally repugnant and should be prohibited by
international law. In addition, non-State actors are
becoming increasingly adept at using low-cost and
widely available digital technologies to pursue their
agendas. Groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and Al-Qaida remain active on social media,
using platforms and messaging applications to share
information and communicate with followers for the
purposes of recruitment, planning and fundraising. The
increasing availability of digital payment methods such
as cryptocurrencies brings additional challenges.
Furthermore, digital technologies have raised major
human rights concerns, from artificial intelligence
systems that may be discriminatory to the widespread
availability of surveillance technologies that can
be deployed to target communities or individuals.
We are also concerned about the increasing use of
Internet shutdowns, including in situations of active
conflict, which deprive communities of their means of
communication, work and political participation.
In Myanmar, for example, Internet and mobile
shutdowns have grown in number and duration since
the military coup on 1 February 2021, particularly in
areas of military operations. Social media can fuel
polarization and, at times, violence. The misuse of
social media and the sometimes limited or not fully
adequate response of social-media companies are
enabling the spread of disinformation, radicalization,
racism and misogyny. That can heighten tensions and,
in some cases, exacerbate conflict. In Ethiopia, as
the fighting escalated, there was an alarming rise in
social media posts spreading inflammatory rhetoric,
with some going as far as inciting ethnic violence,
as recognized by the Security Council in its press
statement of 5 November 2021 (SC/14691).
We have seen how online disinformation and hate
speech can result in offline harm, including violence.
We know that disinformation can hinder the ability
of our missions to implement their mandates by
exacerbating falsehoods and fuelling polarization. We
are undertaking a number of actions to mitigate those
risks, driven by the United Nations Strategy and Plan
of Action on Hate Speech, launched by the SecretaryGeneral, and initiatives such as Verified. In Iraq, for
example, after reports of increased online harassment
of women candidates in last year’s election, the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq partnered with

S/PV.9039

civil-society organizations to monitor hate speech,
issue public reports and strengthen voter education.
We must fully embrace the opportunities offered
by digital technologies to advance peace, but in order
to do that, we must also mitigate the risks that such
technologies pose and promote their responsible use
by all actors. Through the General Assembly, Member
States have made important progress in establishing a
normative framework to ensure responsible behaviour
in cyberspace. Member States are also cooperating
to develop and apply a range of confidence-building
measures to prevent conflicts, avoid misperceptions
and misunderstandings and reduce tensions.
However, more must be done to advance, elaborate
and implement the emerging normative framework. In
his report entitled Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), the
Secretary-General called for a global digital compact
that would outline shared principles for an open, free
and secure digital future for all. Together with other
aspects of Our Common Agenda, such as the new
agenda for peace and the proposed code of conduct that
promotes integrity in public information, we have a
critical opportunity to build consensus on how digital
technologies can be used for the good of people and
the planet, while addressing their risks. But collective
action by Member States remains essential towards
achieving that goal.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Nyabola.
Ms. Nyabola: It is an honour and a pleasure to
address the Security Council today on the question of
digital technology as it pertains to peace and security.
As members heard in the introduction, I am a researcher
whose work examines the intersection of technology,
society and politics, with a specific interest in deepening
our collective understanding of digital rights.
In the past two decades, we have witnessed a dramatic
expansion of the use of digital technology at all levels
of our social lives — at the individual, the collective,
the national and the transnational levels. Unfortunately,
that expansion has not been complemented by a similar
investment in protecting ourselves from the harms that
the expansion has created, nor by a commitment to
understanding and defending the rights of the human
within the system that we are building. Simply put, our
appetite for digitalization is outpacing our awareness of
its implications, and with the mounting evidence of the

22-357453/28

S/PV.9039

Maintenance of international peace and security

harms that disordered approach makes possible, now is
a crucial moment to take stock and decide if we need to
change or reverse our course of action.
It would be foolish to attempt to summarize all the
rights implications of the digital age in the time I have
been given. Rather, in this briefing I will emphasize
some big-picture challenges created by digitalization
and three key principles that create opportunities for
action to safeguard peace and security.
As a preface, I would like to qualify my remarks
by saying that speaking about digital technology in
relation to peace and security must not be interpreted as
an invitation for the militarization and securitization of
the Internet. After all, the mandate of the Council is the
preservation of peace and security, and it is important
to be guided by a spirit that is animated as much as,
if not more, by a desire for positive peace as it is by
an interest in security. The Internet has been a space
for tremendous innovation, creativity and opportunity,
and, in thinking about resolving the challenges that
face the Internet today, I would like to urge the Council
to commit to preserving the Internet as a global public
good, much like we are led by a spirit of cooperation in
thinking about spaces like Antarctica or outer space.
Nonetheless, after many years of unchecked techoptimism, we are now in a moment of growing cynicism,
as the threats that were ignored while we were trying
to accelerate progress have started to materialize. In
the research that I lead with Advox, we use a simple
typology to help us make sense of such threats,
separating the domains of digital technology into four
categories: data, access, speech and information.
With regard to the subject of data-concerns
practices that specifically target the data stack, such
as surveillance or the growing use of biometrics, there
has been an alarming rise of the global surveillance
economy, including the widespread use of technologies
such as Pegasus against political leaders, journalists
and members of civil society. The technology that is
developed to make those practices possible is developed
in wealthy countries and then deployed or exported to
poor countries, with no overarching consideration for
the rights context, putting those who are at the forefront
of advancing peace at grave risk.
As such, we join the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in urging a global
moratorium on the development and sale of surveillance
technologies and invite the Security Council to join
4/28

23/05/2022

in putting pressure on private corporations to comply
with such a moratorium. There is also growing use
of mass data-harvesting technologies by both State
and non-State entities, or the datafication of our
lives, without a supporting drive to protect or even
raise awareness on key rights such as data privacy or
protection. In conflict zones, the datafication of refugee
lives has increased dramatically, including an increase
in the collection and storage of biometric data from
asylum-seekers that is held under opaque conditions
and sometimes used to deny refugees entitlements or
restrict their freedoms.
The question of access looks at active and passive
practices that restrict people’s ability to get to the
Internet, ranging from Internet and social-media
shutdowns to gender disparities and the deliberate
underinvestment in infrastructure, to the detriment of
low-resourced communities. In 2021, the global digital
rights organization Access Now documented 182
Internet shutdowns across 34 countries — an increase
from the 159 shutdowns in 29 countries recorded in
2020. The longest Internet shutdown endured almost
three years. The country with the most Internet
shutdowns experienced 109 in a single year.
In addition to Internet shutdowns, there has also
been an increase in related practices such as bandwidth
throttling and social-media shutdowns, particularly
around fraught election periods. These disruptions are
designed to chill civic discourse and participation and
are a direct assault on democracy and peace.
More broadly, there are several countries where
women still face systematic obstacles to accessing the
Internet — a fact that became particularly visible as
schools around the world attempted virtual education in
response to the coronavirus disease pandemic. In several
countries where the transition did not happen properly,
young girls bore the brunt of exclusion from accessing
whatever technology was available because they were
girls. Furthermore, in some countries, including some
wealthy countries, while there has been an uptick in
making digital technology mandatory for civic life,
including registrations of births, deaths and more, there
has been a strikingly low investment in making digital
infrastructure accessible to people with disabilities or
in indigenous and non-dominant languages.
The question of speech looks at restrictions to
the freedoms of expression, information or opinion.
In many countries, digital platforms work alongside
22-35745

23/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

analogue platforms, such as the media and physical
public squares, as a place where people can assemble,
deliberate and share ideas about how to improve
their societies. There has been a dramatic increase in
the use of legislation to restrict the ability of people
to participate in such discourse, including laws that
unjustly expand the definition of criminal libel to make
almost all criticism of State officials illegal. The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights noted that at least 40 social media laws were
passed between 2020 and 2021, and 30 more were under
consideration during the same time period.
Many of those laws contain such broad definitions
of the underlying injuries that they supposedly address
that they are routinely used first against journalists
and critics of the State. The passage of those laws is
generally followed by a spike in civil and criminal
cases against journalists. It is worth emphasizing at
this point that there is often a gender dimension to
those practices, with female journalists such as Maria
Ressa and Rana Ayyub, or members of civil society and
even ordinary young women, specifically targeted for
alleged breaches of public morality or for simply doing
their jobs.
Finally, the domain of information concerns
practices that manipulate information in the public
sphere in order to distort people’s perception of
reality and therefore their ability to act appropriately
in response to social or political issues. That includes
practices such as misinformation, disinformation
or malinformation, as well as the use of coordinated
inauthentic behaviour or astroturfing to shift the public
agenda on social media platforms. Those practices are
made possible by an Internet on which advertising
drives traffic and, therefore, in which the perception of
popularity can be purchased.
In conflict zones, hostile Governments use
coordinated inauthentic behaviour to silence critics by
bombarding them with so many negative comments that
their social media becomes unusable. Administrations
in several countries have built Government departments
specifically designed to shape online discourse, or
news-like organizations to distort the perception of
State behaviour or to pollute the lines of communication
with so much noise that the signal cannot get through.
Those practices together make it difficult to achieve
peace because they make it difficult for people to agree
on the causes of conflict and, therefore, what must be
done to stop it.

S/PV.9039

Perhaps the biggest cause for alarm is that the
rise of those practices is not necessarily restricted to
certain types of Government or those that we would
readily label authoritarian. Rather, our research found a
growing tolerance for allowing concerns about national
security to overtake concerns about human rights
and democracy.
Significantly, I must raise the alarm on the
practice of building and exporting technologies
that enable digital authoritarianism from countries
that are nominally democratic to countries that are
explicitly authoritarian. That is all before we address
the injustices embedded within the technologies
themselves, including concerns about the injustices
embedded within artificial intelligence, for example.
At the same time, looking at the challenges facing
the Internet today as purely national challenges results
in the fragmentation of the regulatory response,
and that undermines the value of the Internet as
a connector. Our research finds that the threats
emerging from digitalization are multilateral — that
is, rarely remaining contained within a single country;
transnational, because they routinely involve the
transfer of technology across national borders; and
generational, because we are mortgaging the possibility
of a free Internet for future generations on the perceived
security of the present moment. Those realities require
a commensurate response. It is not enough to just single
out individual countries. What we need to do is to
identify cultures of digital authoritarianism before they
take root and travel around the world.
In conclusion, I would like to once again recall the
mandate of the Security Council in the preservation
of peace and security and urge a multilateral,
transnational and generational approach to addressing
the challenges of human rights in the digital age. To
achieve such an approach, I would urge the Council to
recall three principles.
First, digital rights are human rights, and any effort
to address those challenges must first begin with the
protection of the human from the excesses of the power
of the State and private corporations.
Secondly, despite those and more challenges, the
power of the Internet can and must still be harnessed
for the greater good, and we must shape and protect it
as a global public good, without allowing the interests
of security or profit to drown out the interests of peace.

22-357455/28

S/PV.9039

Maintenance of international peace and security

Finally, whatever actions the Council chooses to
take must look beyond this moment to protecting the
aspirations of future generations. What shared digital
future do our actions make possible, and what futures
do they circumscribe? Evidently, there are many
tensions and contradictions embedded within these
principles. Do we want more Government or less?
What role should private corporations play? How do we
balance our desire for technical progress with a desire
for holistic, equitable use?
I believe that with those principles in mind, some
actions that the United Nations can take to protect
digital rights and ensure that digital technologies play a
positive role in international peace and security become
apparent. The United Nations must continue to use its
unparalleled convening power to foster deliberation
and rally support for the preservation of the Internet as
a global public good. The United Nations must use its
agenda-setting power to ensure that human rights are
embedded retroactively and proactively in the digital
technologies that we build and use. The United Nations
must use its norm-setting power to foster agreement
on the human rights standards that would make a free,
safe and just digital future possible, not just for this
generation but also for future generations.
Finally, the United Nations must rally support for
those who have been at the forefront of this work all over
the world, often at great personal risk, speaking out in
defence of those, such as Alaa Abd El-Fattah, who have
suffered grave injustices because of the way they have
used the Internet to advance democratic ideals.
At this moment we are collectively on a trajectory
towards an unjust digital future, but a different and more
just path is possible, and the Council has an opportunity
to move us closer towards that better future.
The President: I thank Ms. Nyabola for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Druet.
Mr. Druet: I am very grateful for this opportunity
and for the honour of briefing the Council on how
evolving digital technologies impact the nature of
violent conflict and on the implications that has for
the efforts of the United Nations to prevent violence,
sustain peace and alleviate suffering and war.
As the Council President mentioned, I have
participated in the development of the technological
capabilities of the United Nations over several years,
particularly from the perspective of situational
6/28

23/05/2022

awareness, analysis and peacekeeping intelligence.
Today I conduct research on those issues at McGill
University and provide advice to a variety of stakeholders
on the intersections of technology, the nature of conflict
and international peace and security interventions.
Today I would like to offer my perspective on three
interlinked topics — first, how digital technologies are
reshaping the conflicts on which the Security Council
is engaged; secondly, how those technologies and
their use by parties to conflict and the United Nations
itself impact the Organization’s efforts to prevent and
resolve violence; and, thirdly, I would like to offer
some suggestions to the Council on how the United
Nations peace and security toolkit, especially its peace
operations, can adapt to work more effectively and
responsibly in those evolving contexts.
With regard to the first topic, on impact, the
Council has heard on several previous occasions how
digital technologies have served as accelerants of
in- and out-group dynamics, platforms for the rapid
spread of anti-information or misinformation and
tools for the manipulation of populations, including
by State, non-State and extremist actors. In Myanmar,
for example, the unchecked incitement of violence
on Facebook and algorithms that raised the profile of
extreme ideas are well documented in contributing
to the genocidal violence perpetrated against the
Rohingya people. Since then, access to the Internet
and communications has been used as a tool to control
refugee populations in Cox’s Bazar. More recently,
the conflict in Ukraine has highlighted the centrality
of public narrative to the strategies of most, if not all,
parties to modern conflict.
In many of the conflicts and fragile settings in which
the United Nations is engaged, it is important to note that
populations are distinctly vulnerable to misinformation
and disinformation. Some countries, such as the
Central African Republic, lack a traditional journalistic
professional culture and media infrastructure, leaving
people almost exclusively dependent on social media for
news. Moreover, while social media companies make
much of their work to combat disinformation on their
platforms, the disclosure of internal documents from
Facebook in 2021 revealed that content moderation
resources were heavily skewed towards the United
States and the West, while some fragile and conflictaffected settings were virtually ignored. In that regard,
the Security Council has an opportunity to demand of
22-35745

23/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

social media companies that their responsibilities apply
equally across their global reach.
In addition to their impact on conflict dynamics,
digital technologies are increasingly an important
arena for the protection or deprivation of human rights
in conflict settings. In Afghanistan, civilians have
spoken about the impact of the ever-present hum of
unmanned aerial systems on their mental health, while
in Myanmar the military junta has used its control over
the Internet to target opponents of the 2021 coup d’état
and limit their ability to communicate and organize.
During the migrant crisis brought about by the conflict
in Syria and more recently in the conflict in Ukraine,
serious questions around informed consent for the
collection and management of biometric data, including
by humanitarian actors, have come to the fore.
Turning to the second topic, on the impact on peace
operations, as the centrality of digital technologies
and of the narrative to the logic of war grows, United
Nations operations deployed in those conflicts have
inevitably been drawn into strategies by conflict parties
to influence the outcome in their favour. In the Central
African Republic, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic has been the target of deliberate campaigns
aimed at undermining the credibility of the Mission
in the eyes of the population. The motivations for
those activities seem to differ widely depending
on the setting and the actors involved. In Mali, for
example, disinformation targeting the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali from some local power brokers appears
aimed at undermining Mission operations that would
disrupt illegal economic networks. In other cases,
disinformation actors seem to be motivated by
ideological objectives, while in still other situations the
United Nations seems to provide an effective foil for a
host State or its partners seeking to deflect attention
from its performance in delivering security and
services to its population. Whatever the motivations,
those attacks grievously reduce United Nations access
to local populations in need, undermine its relationship
with host Governments and parties to mediation and
peace processes, and in some cases seriously threaten
the safety and security of peacekeepers.
But it is equally important to acknowledge the role
played by digital technologies in enabling the United
Nations to effectively execute its mandates in modern
conflict environments. United Nations peace operations

S/PV.9039

in Somalia and Mali, for example, are making use of
natural language processing technologies to rapidly
gain a nuanced understanding of local perceptions
and national political discourse. Monitoring and
surveillance technologies such as unarmed unmanned
aerial systems are being used with increasingly
effective integration into mission-wide qualitative and
quantitative data-gathering tools and analysis systems
to generate higher-quality peacekeeping intelligence.
That translates into better-informed detection of
threats and more rapid action to protect civilians and,
of course, to ensure the safety and security of United
Nations personnel.
In that context, I would like to offer some thoughts
for the Council’s consideration on how the United
Nations can adapt to the impacts of digital technologies
on conflict, mitigate the negative impacts of those
technologies on their own operations and use digital
technologies more effectively and responsibly in those
contexts. In that regard, I see four areas in particular.
First, the United Nations should take on a more
explicit and deliberate role as an information actor in
conflict environments. Access to accurate information
can be increasingly considered as a human right in
situations of information warfare, and the United
Nations has a role in truth-telling and as a conduit for
reliable information. I should point out that that is a
role that United Nations missions have played for many
years within the mechanisms of peace processes, for
example, through ceasefire monitoring. So it bears
considering how good practices developed through
those mechanisms could be brought to bear to inform
societies more broadly in conflict.
For the United Nations to play such a role, however,
it will be critical that its operations gain and keep
the trust of different facets of the population. That
is no easy task when some United Nations activities
such as the protection of civilians or support to
host State authorities can leave missions open to
criticisms — sometimes warranted, sometimes
not — and even more so when those missions are the
target of disinformation campaigns. That is why, as a
second priority, United Nations peace operations need
to significantly scale up their capacities to monitor and
analyse the information space and to respond effectively
in the face of malicious communications. To quote a
recent report from the International Peace Institute,
missions need to “anticipate crises and proactively
reframe the narrative, to engage in two-way rather than

22-357457/28

S/PV.9039

Maintenance of international peace and security

one-way communication” and “to tailor their messages
to specific audiences”.
Thirdly, the United Nations itself will require
new technologies and the capacities to use them
effectively, both in the field of communications and in
the areas of situational awareness and peacekeeping
intelligence, data analytics for strategic planning and
new technologies for dialogue and mediation, to name
just a few. As the United Nations pushes forward with
many exciting innovations in those areas, including
those highlighted by Ms. DiCarlo, it is vital that we
recognize that those tools bring with them important
and complex ethical, legal and political questions that
have a bearing on the rights of people already suffering
under conflict. While it may be tempting to adopt the
frames and doctrine of Member States for the use of
those tools, I would submit to the Council that United
Nations operations are distinct in their interests and
responsibilities when using sensitive technologies in
conflict settings.
Therefore, as a fourth recommendation, I would
like to highlight the importance of the ways in which
the United Nations acquires and uses new technologies
to the credibility and political positioning of those
missions in the field. Experience has shown that the
procurement of, and partnerships for, sensitive new
technologies are most effective when they reinforce the
impartiality of the United Nations and provide credible
public assurances of responsible use.
I therefore urge the Secretariat to develop its
own organic tools, policies and procedures that take
the distinct nature of the United Nations as a user of
those technologies into account. There is already
valuable work to that effect under way, including in
the Department of Peace Operations, which is working
to enrich its policies on monitoring and surveillance,
and also in the United Nations-wide efforts led by
United Nations Global Pulse to roll out a data privacy
policy across the system. If done well, and in full
transparency of Member States and the public, I believe
that those efforts have an important normative effect
in setting the standard for how sensitive technologies
can be used responsibly in conflict situations with
vulnerable populations.
Those efforts should include a frank reckoning
on the limits of the ability of the United Nations to
protect sensitive information, especially individual
information, from intrusions by State and non-State
8/28

23/05/2022

actors and a subsequent review of practices around,
for example, the gathering of biometric data during the
course of humanitarian operations. That review should
also include the development of further guidance
on how the United Nations shares information with
non-United Nations forces, including parallel military
forces, host authorities and international rule-of-law
actors, in line with the United Nations Due Diligence
Policy on Human Rights.
In conclusion, today’s discussion engages two very
distinct yet deeply interlinked sets of issues: first, how
digital technologies are changing the nature of conflict
in situations in which the United Nations is engaged;
and, secondly, how the United Nations itself employs
digital technologies in the service of its mandates. Both
require nuanced consideration and debate as well as
distinct policy and operational responses. It is vital to
the success of our current and future operations that we
get both sets of issues right. The Council has a critical
role to play in that regard.
The President: I thank Mr. Druet for his briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Di Carlo for her
briefing. Her remarks made clear that new technologies
are already playing a critical role in the United Nations
peacekeeping efforts, and it is essential that they be
used in a constructive manner. I thank Ms. Nyabola for
her invaluable perspective on both the benefits and the
challenges that human rights activists and civil society
face from the potential use, as well as the misuse, of
those technologies. I thank Mr. Druet for sharing the
ways in which digital technology can be used to support
the work of our peacekeepers, while its misuse can
also undermine them. Let me be sure to maximize the
former and minimize the latter. This briefing is about
an enormous opportunity and a pressing challenge.
The opportunity is for the Security Council to
harness the power of digital technology to advance
peace and security in order to responsibly use those
tools to do enormous good in the very conflicts and
22-35745

23/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

contexts where they are doing harm. After all, such
technologies have immense potential to support the
good work of the United Nations system around the
world. Social media tools and messaging applications
can facilitate access to life-saving information prior to
and during conflict. Data from satellites can identify
risk from climate change, provide critical information to
peacekeepers and improve emergency communications
during conflict and natural disasters. We can identify
and stop famines before they start. We can find homes,
housing and jobs for refugees. We can better protect
our peacekeepers and those whom they are mandated
to serve.
But we also have to address a pressing challenge,
which is the way in which digital technologies are being
misused to restrict human rights and fuel conflict. In
the hands of State actors and, in some cases, non-State
actors, such technologies are being used to cut off
access to information, suppress freedom of expression
and spread disinformation, thereby escalating conflict,
undermining the foundational values of the Charter of
the United Nations that we are charged with upholding.
In the Central African Republic and Mali,
disinformation targeting United Nations peacekeeping
missions has threatened peacekeepers’ safety and
security and has undermined the ability of missions to
protect civilians. In Ethiopia, the authorities have cut
off Internet access in the Tigray region since November
2020 as conflict erupted between the Ethiopian
National Defence Forces and regional forces in Tigray.
Such actions hamper the ability of civilians to access
health services, delay the documentation of atrocities
and human rights abuses, disrupt financial services and
restrict family members from connecting virtually to
loved ones.
Countries sitting at this very table are also using
technology to harass, arbitrarily surveil and censor and
repress civil society and independent media as never
before. Nowhere is that more evident than in Russia’s
war of choice against Ukraine. The Russian Government
continues to shut down, restrict and degrade Internet
connectivity, censor content, spread disinformation
online and intimidate and arrest journalists for
reporting the truth about its invasion. Those practices
are as wrong as they are widespread. As the Council
already heard from Ms. Nyabola, the non-governmental
organization Access Now estimates that in 2021 there
were 182 Internet shutdowns in 34 countries. Even
more troubling, we often hear claims that such actions

S/PV.9039

are taken in the name of protecting peace and security.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
We also continue to see non-State actors,
including terrorists and violent extremists, use online
communications platforms to recruit, radicalize and
mobilize to violence. All of us who are committed to
addressing and preventing conflict worldwide must
do our part to ensure that technologies serve as a
force for positive change, and not as a tool misused
to perpetrate human rights abuses, fuel hatred and
exacerbate conflict.
That is why the United States is working with civil
society, the private sector and other stakeholders to
advance this global effort. For our part, we are calling
out the use of partial and complete Internet shutdowns,
censorship and other tactics to prevent the exercise
of freedom of expression online. Following on from
the Summit for Democracy, we are continuing to
join forces with our partners in the Freedom Online
Coalition to protect Internet freedom and ensure that
entire digital ecosystems respect international human
rights frameworks.
We know that surveillance tools and other dual-use
technologies can be misused to threaten human rights
defenders and others. That is why we are using export
controls to hold accountable companies that develop,
traffic or use spyware and other technologies that
enable such malicious activity.
We are working through the United Nations and
other forums to champion the framework of responsible
State behaviour in cyberspace. which makes clear that
international law applies to States’ cyberactivities
and lays out a set of voluntary norms to guide their
behaviour in peacetime. We are also standing together
with countries around the world to protect against,
and respond to, malicious cyberactivities. Across the
globe gendered forms of online harassment and abuse,
including disinformation campaigns against women
leaders, are disrupting women’s equal participation in
decision-making on matters of peace and security.
We have to work together to combat misinformation
and disinformation globally. The United Nations is
already playing a key role in producing transparent and
easily accessible information and advocating on behalf
of journalists on the front lines.
We also need to embrace the opportunities to unlock
technologies’ latent potential for advancing peace and

22-357459/28

S/PV.9039

Maintenance of international peace and security

23/05/2022

security. Last month, a group of 60 global partners
therefore launched the Declaration for the Future of the
Internet to revitalize a democratic vision for the global
Internet. We invite all relevant authorities and States
Members of the United Nations that are committed to
upholding the Declaration’s principle to join us.

activities by both State and non-State actors. The misuse
of information and communications technologies has a
direct impact on international peace and security, as it
undermines the integrity, security, economic growth
and stability of the global community, leading to
disputes and conflicts.

To effectively maintain peace and security in the
twenty-first century, we need to respond to twenty-firstcentury threats and deploy twenty-first-century tools.
Now is the time for the United Nations to responsibly
harness the power of digital technology to take on
our most pressing challenges and advance peace and
security around the world.

Given the mounting concerns about the dual-use
nature of technology and its implications for the
maintenance of international peace and security, it is
very important that the Security Council take a leading
role in assessing such risks and implications. I therefore
very much welcome the holding of today’s meeting.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): We thank the United
States for organizing this timely meeting to discuss
this as complex as important topic. We also thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her always
thoughtful insights.
We are pleased that civil society was given a
prominent place at this meeting — and for a good
reason, as we heard with the breadth that they offered
and the recommendations that they made. I therefore
thank Ms. Nyabola and Mr. Druet.
The rapid development of technology has changed
how the world works, impacting every aspect of modern
life. It has become so ingrained in our daily lives that
it is hard to remember what the world was like before.
Modern technology undeniably brings a number
of advantages across multiple sectors. Individuals,
States, Governments, industry, health care, financial
systems, regional and international organizations
and peacekeeping missions all take advantage of the
rapid growth of digital technologies. They help people
become more productive, and they help companies and
entities become more innovative, flexible and adaptive
than ever before.
We have happily embraced the interconnectivity
of devices and systems, which has visibly made our
lives and work easier, but that inevitably comes with
the cost of exposure to a wide range of threats by
malicious forces. The nexus “new tech, new threats”
needs no explanation.
As we heard today, there is a common understanding
about the immense risks arising from malicious
10/28

Artificial intelligence is doing wonders in many
sectors, including agriculture and medicine — saving
lives, increasing food production, improving energy
sources and managing production processes. But, if not
properly used and, especially, if ethics are not respected,
it can lead to serious breaches of human rights, such
as undue surveillance targeting specific groups and
communities. As technology usually develops faster
than States can grasp its full impact, we must make
sure that core principles and values— such as equity,
equality, inclusivity, responsibility, transparency and
accountability— are preserved from negative impact.
Unfortunately, the potential of technology to
dramatically impact social cohesion and, of course,
international peace and security through misuse by
State or non-State actors is growing significantly.
Some countries are continuously trying to deliberately
provide misleading information, distort facts, interfere
in the democratic processes of others, spread hatred,
promote discrimination and incite violence or conflicts
by misusing digital technologies. In the same vein, we
see with concern Internet shutdowns and the restriction
or denial of human rights and freedoms in using them.
The briefers offered concrete examples. We should
redouble efforts to mitigate the harm that they may
cause, as outlined in the report of the Secretary-General
on a road map for digital cooperation (A/74/821), and
look carefully at his recommendations.
I want to highlight Albania’s firm position for a
global, open, free, stable and secure cyberspace where
international law, including respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms, fully apply, in support of
social, political and economic development.
We are very concerned about the increase of
malicious cyber and digital activities in recent months.
We know that Russia’s actions caused communication
22-35745

23/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

outages, including against critical infrastructure, not
only in Ukraine but also in other parts of Europe, by
deliberately attacking Viasat’s satellite on 24 February
2022, just one hour before Russia’s unprovoked and
unjustified invasion of Ukraine.
Cyberattacks reportedly originating in Russia have
also attempted to interfere in Ukrainian elections,
targeting its power grid, defacing its Government
websites and spreading malware in their systems, with
destructive effect. The Western Balkans, where I am
from, are being systematically targeted by campaigns of
interference and information manipulation in order to
intentionally trigger political instability and undermine
their Euro-Atlantic aspirations. We will not allow it,
and we will resist it.
Other notorious examples are the repeated
malicious activities by the regime of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, which is trying to collect
intelligence, conduct cyberattacks and generate
unlawful income, which, inter alia, serves to fund
its militarization and proliferation, in violation of
international law and Security Council resolutions. We
add to that list the Internet shutdowns in Myanmar,
which were also mentioned today. We call for a stop to
such activities and for upholding existing norms and
the rules-based international order in cyberspace. The
Internet is not and should not become a weapon but
remain a public good.
We welcome the reports of the Group of
Governmental
Experts
and
the
Open-ended
Working Group on Developments in the Field of
Information and Telecommunications in the Context
of International Security. Through them, Member
States have agreed on a substantial United Nations
framework that includes existing international law,
11 voluntary non-binding norms, confidence-building
measures, capacity-building and the expertise of the
multi-stakeholder community.
Let me end with this — throughout history,
new challenges have opened new opportunities for
cooperation. Today is no different, even if the challenges
at hand are highly complex, quickly evolving and come
amid a rising sense of conflict and crisis. But there
is no alternative to meaningful dialogue, cooperation
through responsible behaviour, first, and then normative
frameworks on how technological developments are
affecting individuals, States and societies and the uses
and applications of technology generating the most

S/PV.9039

disruption, particularly those that pose a direct threat
to peace and security. As for many other aspects, it is
for us to decide whether to share the huge benefits or
bear the enormous costs.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Ms. DiCarlo, Ms. Nyabola and Mr. Druet for
their briefings.
I will focus on three points.
First and foremost, digital technologies are an
opportunity for international peace and security.
Peacekeeping operations have been at the forefront of
those efforts. The presidential statement adopted in
August (S/PRST/2021/17) at the initiative of India took
stock of the situation. These technologies contribute
to the safety of peacekeepers and the performance
of operations, particularly with a view to improving
the protection of civilians. They are revolutionizing
strategic peacekeeping communications. France will
therefore continue to support all those innovations.
Technology is also a lever for mobilizing and
including civil society. In the Sudan, the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan conducted an online consultation
that allowed all of civil society to make their voices
heard, including in the regions. By facilitating the flow
of information, technologies also contribute to the fight
against impunity, as illustrated by the media coverage
and open-source intelligence in the context of the
conflict in Ukraine.
However, the malicious uses of technologies are
proliferating and can constitute a threat to international
peace and security. That is my second point.
That is true for the development of cyberthreats,
as illustrated once again by the conflict in Ukraine.
France and the European Union, as well as several
partners, have condemned the cyberattacks conducted
by Russia against a network of satellites one hour before
the invasion of Ukraine, with the aim of facilitating its
aggression. International law applies in its entirety to
cyberspace. We also condemn North Korea’s malicious
cyberactivities of stealing sensitive information and
cryptocurrencies to aid their nuclear and ballistic
programmes. We are also concerned about the increasing
use of cryptocurrencies for terrorist financing. We
condemn the increasing attacks on humanitarian actors
and non-governmental organizations.
Digital technologies also facilitate information
warfare. We condemn the massive disinformation

22-3574511/28

S/PV.9039

Maintenance of international peace and security

campaigns under way in the Central African Republic
and Mali, as well as those supporting Russia’s war
against Ukraine. In Mali, France recently thwarted an
attempt to manipulate information by the mercenaries
of the Wagner Group. That example shows the threat
posed by hybrid strategies that seek to blur the line
between State and non-State actors.
Internet shutdowns violate human rights. We
deplore the ongoing interruption of telecommunications
in northern Ethiopia. It has made it difficult to gather
evidence of human rights violations, which must
not go unpunished. In the Middle East, Internet
shutdowns are used to weaken protest movements, and
some rights defenders are monitored and harassed on
social networks.
In the face of those increasing threats, Governments
must respond through cooperation and law. That is my
third point.
The United Nations offers an irreplaceable
framework for doing so. France will continue to
contribute to it, including by ensuring that Security
Council resolutions take those challenges into account.
Along with a group of 60 countries, we are promoting
the establishment within the United Nations of a
programme of action to increase the capacity of States
to implement agreed standards in cyberspace and to
strengthen the resilience of networks.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I welcome the initiative
of the United States in organizing today’s important
briefing. I thank the Under-Secretary-General,
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, and the other briefers,
Ms. Nyabola and Mr. Druet, for their valuable insights.
The increasing use of digital technologies has
accelerated economic development, improved service
delivery to citizens, generated greater social awareness
and placed information and knowledge directly in the
hands of individuals. They have made governance
more inclusive, citizen-centric and transparent.
Most activities in this digital age — political, social,
economic, humanitarian and developmental — are now
invariably conducted in or connected to cyberspace.
However, given their dual-use nature and susceptibility
to harmful uses by both State and non-State actors, they
can also have a negative impact on international peace
and security.
The nature of conflict and its underlying tools
have changed tremendously over the decades. While
12/28

23/05/2022

inter-State conflicts continue, we are witnessing
growing threats from non-State actors, including
terrorist groups. Similarly, the theatres of war and
conflict have also expanded. In addition to territorial
conflicts, the world is facing newer conflicts in seas
and space — and by space, I refer to both outer space
and cyberspace. Technology has become the common
underlying denominator, as well as a game changer, in
these conflicts. Our conventional approach to security
nationally and internationally therefore needs a reset.
I would like to submit the following five issues
for the Security Council’s consideration. First, there is
the need to address the abuse of digital technologies
by terrorist groups to disseminate terrorist ideologies,
radicalize, incite violence and recruit the next
generation of terrorist actors taking advantage of the
enhanced online presence of young people. Terrorist
groups are taking advantage of online tools to build
networks, recruit new members, procure weapons and
secure logistical support. The digital communications
methods used by these groups are organized and
sophisticated. They have become adept at using gaming
chat rooms, dark-web and other restricted-access sites
and unregulated online space to spread propaganda and
incite violence. There have been instances of terrorists
live-streaming their attacks on major platforms to
maximize publicity and impact. The wide outreach of
online space has enabled the terrorist groups to take
advantage of the openness of pluralistic democratic
societies, like our own, by fuelling societal divisions
and sectarian hatred and by supporting anti-democratic
movements and radical ideologies aimed at destabilizing
Governments and State institutions.
The ability of terrorist actors to connect,
communicate and share information over digital
platforms only underscores the growing need to regulate
such inflammatory content online. Equally needed are
efforts to address the legal challenges in bringing the
perpetrators of these crimes to justice, particularly
owing to the remote nature of their involvement in
terrorist activities. While we are used to looking at
terrorism as a direct physical attack by perpetrators, in
the digital domain, perpetrators inciting terrorist acts
through hateful content and radical ideologies may be
far from the actors actually committing the act of terror.
The instigators should be held equally responsible for
such acts of terror. They cannot be less culpable than
those who commit acts of terror. This is essential when
we consider terrorism in the cyberdomain.
22-35745

23/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Emergence of new financial technologies such
as new payment methods (NPMs), virtual currencies
and online-fundraising methods, including direct
donations, non-fungible tokens and crowd-funding
platforms — and the ease of access, anonymity and
intractability offered by them — have enabled terrorist
entities to collect and transfer funds while evading
monitoring and enforcement structures. Such NPMs
as prepaid phone cards, online-payment services
and virtual money have enabled terrorist groups to
exchange them for gold, silver and other metals and,
most recently, for mobile-phone payments, and fund
terrorist activities. Prepaid cards are frequently used
as an alternative to cash. The use of bitcoins for
funding terror activities is also well established. In
addition, terrorist misuse of artificial intelligence and
3D printing for various terrorist purposes, which have
a global reach, also demands our immediate attention.
The need for Member States to comprehensively
address and tackle the implications of terrorist
exploitation of digital technologies more strategically
has never been more dire. In this regard, I am happy
to inform the Security Council that India has proposed
holding a special meeting of the Council’s CounterTerrorism Committee in India soon, which will
exclusively focus on this issue and attempt to provide
the way forward.
Secondly, some States are leveraging their
expertise in the digital domain to achieve their
political and security-related objectives and indulge in
contemporary forms of cross-border terrorism, attacks
on critical national infrastructure, including health and
energy facilities, and disrupt social harmony through
promoting radicalization through the online space.
Open societies have been particularly vulnerable to
such threats and disinformation campaigns. Emerging
digital technologies —for instance, the use of machine
learning and big data — have the potential to enhance the
lethality of such acts, thus posing a considerable threat
to international peace and security. The international
community cannot take a selective approach and needs
to avoid double standards when it comes to addressing
these threats.
Thirdly, the interconnected nature of the digital
domain requires that solutions to the complex problems
and threats emanating from this domain cannot be
resolved in isolation. There is an underlying need to
adopt a collaborative rules-based approach and work
towards ensuring its openness, stability and security.

S/PV.9039

Fostering equitable access to digital technologies and
their benefits should also form an important component
of this approach. The widening digital divide, digital
gender divide and digital knowledge gaps create
an unsustainable environment in the cyberdomain.
Growing digital dependency in the post-coronavirusdisease era has exacerbated risks and exposed these
fissures of digital inequalities. These must be bridged
through capacity-building and technology transfers.
Fourthly, United Nations peacekeeping missions
need to be equipped with the latest digital technologies
to counter those employed by armed groups. Protecting
the protectors should be as much our priority as
protecting civilians. We have acted on this front by
rolling out, in partnership with the United Nations,
the Unite Aware platform during our presidency of the
Council in August 2021. This technology programme
provides real-time threat assessment to peacekeepers
and needs to be scaled up across all United Nations
peacekeeping missions. I thank the representative
of France for referring to the presidential statement
on technology and peacekeeping (S/PRST/2021/17)
adopted under our presidency in 2021.
Fifthly, maintaining international peace and security
in cyberspace also depends on exchange of information
among countries on the misuse of digital technologies
for committing crimes. This cooperation needs to be
effective and in real time in order to deter, disrupt and
mitigate such misuse. The establishment of the Ad Hoc
Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information and
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes
is therefore a step in the right direction.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that the global
community needs to leverage digital technologies for
the benefit of all of humankind and not just for a select
few. Our overarching objective should be to harness
such technologies for the development, prosperity
and empowerment of all people and to promote
international peace and security. India stands ready
to offer its expertise and share its experience in this
shared endeavour.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
rapid development of science and technology has
brought us new opportunities and new challenges. In
May 2021, China, Kenya, Mexico and the United Arab
Emirates jointly convened an Arria Formula meeting to
exchange views in an in-depth manner on the impact

22-3574513/28

S/PV.9039

Maintenance of international peace and security

of emerging technologies on international peace and
security. China welcomes the opportunity to continue
the discussion on technology and security in the
Security Council. In order to better develop and utilize
science and technology for the benefit of humankind.
China would like to propose the following.
First, we must vigorously advocate scientific and
technological innovation. Innovation is a primary
driver behind development. Each and every scientific,
technological and industrial revolution in human history
has profoundly transformed our mode of production
and lifestyle and tremendously promoted the progress
and well-being of humankind.
The world today is facing unprecedented and
complex challenges. Fast-changing digital technology,
artificial intelligence and biotechnology, inter alia,
have played an important role in the fields of pandemic
prevention and control, climate change, food security,
energy security and others. Be it as a new impetus for
world economic growth or as a new way and means for
solving major complex issues, innovation in science
and technology is simply indispensable.
As the world’s economy is highly interdependent
and the global industrial and supply chains are
deeply intertwined, all countries should view
international exchanges and cooperation in science
and technology with an open mind and promote them
using the relevant measures in order to jointly create an
open, fair, just and non-discriminatory environment in
that regard while actively conducting joint research and
development with a view to fostering progress through
concerted efforts.
Secondly, achievements in science and technology
must be used for the benefit of all. Technology
knows no borders and is part of humankind’s shared
wealth. Such achievements should not become
treasures hidden in caves. At present, the widening
technology divide between developed and developing
countries — in particular the digital divide — is
exacerbating new forms of inequality.
It is necessary to allow multilateral platforms
such as the United Nations to fully play their part in
supporting the research and development capacities
of developing countries; to speed up the transfer of
technologies; accelerate the commercialization of
scientific achievements; share the dividends of progress
in science and technology with developing countries;
leapfrog the development gap by narrowing the digital
14/28

23/05/2022

divide; and fast-track the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Developing countries must be supported in using
the latest technology and big data to improve social
governance and effectively prevent and combat crimes.
In peacekeeping and peacebuilding, the Council
should also actively use new technologies to strengthen
its capabilities in information collection, early warning,
emergency response and rescue.
Thirdly, it is imperative to work together to
manage and control the risks posed by technology.
Technological developments can be a source of risk in
relation to conflicting rules, societal risks and ethical
challenges. The international community should
uphold the concept of science and technology for the
benefit of humankind; enable the United Nations to
fulfil its role as a main channel for active dialogue,
exchanges and cooperation; adhere to multilateral and
multi-stakeholder participation; jointly manage the
risks of technological development; and formulate and
improve universally accepted rules and norms.
It is necessary to curb the abuse of information
technologies, oppose cybersurveillance and attacks
and oppose an arms race in cyberspace. It is crucial
to prevent terrorists from using the Internet for
recruitment, financing or organizing terrorist attacks,
as well as preventing the Internet from becoming
a hotbed of hate speech, racism, pornography and
violence. Governments should strengthen supervision
and control in accordance with the law, standardize the
application of technology and better safeguard public
interests. Technology platform providers and Internet
service providers must standardize their practice
and strengthen self-discipline in order to fulfil their
social responsibilities.
Fourthly, we oppose the politicization of issues of a
technological nature. The world of science is not a zerosum battlefield. Technological innovation should not
produce only one champion. However, it is worrisome
that for some time now, certain Governments have
politicized issues of a scientific and technological
nature. They have generalized the concept of national
security, abused State power and wantonly intensified
their suppression of other countries’ high-technology
companies. In order to maintain their monopoly in
science and technology, those Governments have
established exclusive circles and clubs under socalled strategies or frameworks. They have imposed
22-35745

23/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

technology blockades on other countries and engaged in
bullying practices in the field of science and technology.
They have interfered with and obstructed economic,
trade, scientific and technological cooperation among
other countries.
That approach, which carries an obsolete cold war
mentality, runs counter to the spirit of international
cooperation and the trends of our time. It harms the
collective interests of all countries and is doomed
to failure. We urge certain Governments to adopt a
rational and open-minded approach; to view scientific
and technological developments and international
cooperation from the right perspective; and to stop
groundless attacks and restrictions on high-technology
companies of other countries.
In the face of global challenges, the right path is
one of solidarity and cooperation. China calls on the
countries concerned to stop creating divisions around
the globe, including in the Asia-Pacific region; to cease
geographical confrontation; to stop drawing lines on the
basis of ideology and using coercive measures to force
other countries to take sides; to refrain from decoupling
the economy and science and technology; and to cease
their destructive practices affecting the stability of
global supply chains and economic recovery.
China attaches great importance to scientific and
technological innovation and has been preventing
technology risks in a responsible manner. We have
worked actively to promote international consensus
and cooperation. In 2020, China, launched a global
data security initiative, calling for openness, security
and stability in global supply chains while opposing
the practice of using information technology to
destroy critical infrastructure or conduct large-scale
surveillance. It also advocates for respect for national
sovereignty and jurisdiction and the right of States
to manage their own data. The initiative provides a
blueprint for international rules on digital security, which
we hope will attract the participation of Governments,
international organizations and multi-stakeholders.
Facing the tremendous changes brought about by
artificial intelligence and on the basis of the results
of years of discussion at the United Nations, at the
end of last year China put forward a position paper
on regulating the military application of artificial
intelligence. It provides a viable framework for the
international community to explore the impact of

S/PV.9039

military applications of artificial intelligence on
strategic security governance rules and ethics.
In July, scientists from more than 20 countries
agreed on the Tianjin Biosecurity Guidelines for Codes
of Conduct for Scientists, advocating for responsible
research and development in biotechnology, which is
the common aspiration of the international scientific
community. China welcomes the voluntary adoption
and further promotion of the Tianjin Biosecurity
Guidelines by all countries and relevant stakeholders
so as to prevent the misuse or abuse of biotechnology,
to lower the risks associated with biosecurity and
to promote the use of biotechnology for the benefit
of humankind.
Using science and technology for peaceful purposes
and conducting international cooperation in that regard
constitute an inalienable right of all States under
international law. During its seventy-sixth session,
the General Assembly adopted a resolution entitled
“Promoting international cooperation on peaceful uses
in the context of international security” (resolution
76/234). China and 26 other countries co-sponsored
that resolution, urging all countries to lift unreasonable
restrictions on the right of developing countries to
peaceful uses of science and technology while fulfilling
their international non-proliferation obligations.
China welcomes the continued inclusive dialogue
within the framework of the General Assembly with
a view to enhancing mutual trust, building consensus
and ensuring that developing countries fully enjoy their
right to the peaceful use of science and technology. That
will help us better achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals and maintain international peace and security.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo; my compatriot, Ms. Nyabola; and
Mr. Druet for their insights and recommendations on
the topic under consideration today.
When we reflect on the phenomenal role digital
technology has played in just this decade and the
unprecedented implications the digital revolution has
on the peace and security of our time, — and given
the pervasive, consequential and largely ungoverned
character of digital technologies, — what becomes
abundantly clear is the need to have a community of
discussants and actors, including the Security Council,
to explore the delicate balance between ensuring
digital innovation, on the one hand, and addressing

22-3574515/28

S/PV.9039

Maintenance of international peace and security

its malicious use by both State and non-State actors in
matters related to peace and security, on the other.
Kenya has made significant strides in ensuring
Internet accessibility and that the country and its
citizenry are protected as much as possible from
disruptive and unexpected occurrences and threats in
the digital sphere. But we recognize that cybersecurity
is not and cannot be a single-country endeavour. Indeed,
the conventional pursuance of international peace and
security by the multilateral system must now also be
undertaken in the cyberdomain.
In that regard, I will highlight five key points
for consideration. The first point concerns the need
to appreciate that the United Nations should support
countries in dealing with the consequences of the
digital revolution on their citizenry and national
stability, including the misuse of artificial intelligence,
big data, social media and other digital frontiers. The
Security Council has the responsibility of ensuring that
the United Nations has the capacity and expertise to
play that role.
My second point involves the link between digital
technologies and peace, especially in political transitions.
Electoral processes are a democratic promise, but
they often face increased security vulnerabilities on
digital platforms, with implications for national civic
cohesion and crisis management. On 28 October 2021,
during our presidency of the Security Council, Kenya
convened an Arria Formula meeting on addressing and
countering hate speech and preventing incitement to
discrimination, hostility and violence in social media.
It was evident that policymakers often face a dilemma
in striking the balance between freedom of speech and
hate speech and between democratic accountability and
safeguarding private and proprietary information. We
advocate that more attention and investment be accorded
to supporting national Governments in addressing the
link between cybersecurity and countries electoral
security, particularly in conflict situations.
Thirdly, with regard to the partnerships between
private sector and policy regulators, the Arria
Formula meeting I just mentioned brought together
representatives from leading technology companies,
including Facebook, Twitter, TikTok and Google and
civil society, who demonstrated that it is possible to
establish such partnerships. Enhanced partnerships
among technological companies, policy regulators and
the United Nations will make it possible to establish
16/28

23/05/2022

effective mechanisms and standards for ensuring
responsible conduct in cyberspace, based on principles
that speak to the public good in a manner that builds
bridges of peace among diverse groups and across
divisive topics.
The fourth concerns the link between digital
technologies
and
terrorism.
The
ubiquitous,
programmable and data-driven nature of emerging
technologies — although beneficial — has opened a
door for their misuse by armed groups and terrorists.
They capitalize on simplified user-interface systems
to recruit, radicalize, mobilize resources and plan and
carry out terrorist acts. There is a need to ensure that
States have the capacities to mitigate the online terrorist
threat, augment investigative skills and collaborate in
reducing the rate of online radicalization and illicit
financial flows and identifying and removing online
extremist content.
The fifth involves inclusion and the protection
of participation. We believe that governmental
responsibility for Internet accessibility also includes
the protection of those accessing the digital platform,
including social media. In particular, the safety of women
participating in peace and security processes remains
critical. States must therefore ramp up accountability
for and the prosecution of perpetrators of online attacks,
intimidation, the publication of private media and
physical violence against women participating in the
peace agenda. As part of safeguarding the protection
and participation pillars of the women and peace and
security agenda, the Security Council should also take
specific steps, particularly to increase the costs of all
forms of online intimidation against women who have
briefed the Council.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, we would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this meeting on a
topic with almost infinite ramifications that calls on
us to reflect, inter alia, on how to adapt the work of
the United Nations to overcome the challenges posed
by the use of digital technology to the maintenance of
international peace and security. We are also grateful
to this morning’s briefers — Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo, the Director of Advox, and Professor Druet
of McGill University — for their excellent analyses
and proposals.
If we look at things head-on, we must proceed from
the principle that the use of digital technology, first
22-35745

23/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

and foremost, must be used to defend human rights and
democracy. The two aspects are inseparably linked. In
that regard, Mexico reaffirms its commitment, which
it has maintained throughout the years, to a free, open,
stable and secure cyberspace in which international law,
including international human rights law, international
humanitarian law, international criminal law and other
legal precedents establishing, for example, the right to
privacy, is fully applicable. We recall the agreements
that we have already reached and are under way at
the intergovernmental level, especially in the area of
cybersecurity, through the reports of the Group of
Governmental Experts on Advancing Responsible State
Behaviour in Cyberspace in the Context of International
Security and the Open-ended Working Group on Security
of and in the Use of Information and Communications
Technologies. Similarly, it is incumbent on us to recall
other processes under way, including the Ad Hoc
Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information and
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes.
Innovative solutions to current challenges in
peacekeeping need to be sought, in particular through
strengthening digital technological capacities in
peace operations and special political missions, as
was mentioned earlier in today’s briefings. The use
of technology can contribute very constructively to
improving early-warning detection of emerging threats,
preventing humanitarian crises and human rights
violations and strengthening the measures necessary
for protecting and supporting civilians and civilian
infrastructure, including combating arms trafficking
and mine-clearance activities.
New technologies show particular promise in areas,
such as medical-care support, including the provision
of timely, routine and emergency mental-health and
psychosocial care. Both peacekeepers and civilians
affected by humanitarian crises can benefit from the
flexibility and accessibility afforded by telemedicine.
Moreover, we have seen that the use of renewable
energy technologies can enhance the safety and
security of United Nations personnel and the
effectiveness and sustainability of missions. In the face
of the growing environment of misinformation, which
was highlighted earlier, the use of social networks is
key to strengthening relations between peacekeeping
missions and the communities in which they operate.
For that reason, the provisions of resolution 2589 (2021)
and presidential statement S/PRST/2021/17, in which

S/PV.9039

the Security Council acknowledged that technology
could help peacekeeping missions better understand
the environments in which they operate, are absolutely
essential and should enable us to improve the way we
collect, analyse and share information.
Similarly, we take note of the Secretary-General’s
Strategy for the Digital Transformation of United
Nations Peacekeeping with regard to new technologies
and information and follow-up on the Action for
Peacekeeping Plus initiative. The implementation of
the Strategy requires greater coordination between the
United Nations system and stakeholders on the ground,
as well as cooperation with regional organizations, the
private sector, civil society and, of course, academia.
At the most United Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial
conference recent United Nations Peacekeeping
Ministerial Conference, Mexico endorsed the initiative
put forward by the Republic of Korea on technology
and medical capacity-building in peacekeeping. The
initiative has three objectives — maximize the use of
available technologies to better understand situations
and provide early warning; respond to disinformation
in conflict situations and improve cybersecurity
intelligence and promote capacity-building in the area
of data and information analysis.
Lastly, resolution 75/316, endorsed by Mexico in the
General Assembly, underscored the impact that rapid
technological change will have on achieving the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and, therefore,
on international peace and stability. We underscore the
importance of the Road Map for Digital Cooperation
and the information contained in the report Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982).
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): At the outset, I would like to
thank the United States for convening today’s briefing
on the use of digital technologies in maintaining
international peace and security.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her insightful briefing, as well as Nanjala
Nyabola, Director of Advox, the Digital Rights Project
of Global Voices, and Dirk Druet, Adjunct Professor at
the McGill University Centre for International Peace
and Security Studies, for their additional perspectives.
In recognizing the pervasive nature of digital
technologies globally, Ghana shares the view that such
technologies can play an important role in maintaining
international peace and must therefore be leveraged

22-3574517/28

S/PV.9039

Maintenance of international peace and security

to enhance our collective security. We believe that
cognizant of the demands of national sovereignty
and territorial integrity, digital technologies,
which overcome territorial barriers, can be used
in strengthening preventive diplomacy objectives,
through enhanced situational awareness, in activating
early warning, detecting emerging threats and bridging
societal differences, as disparate views and positions
are mobilized into a constructive and coherent whole
for reinforcing peace objectives.
In situations of conflict management, we also
see the benefits that digital technologies can bring in
analysing risks, improving the lead time required for
protecting civilians and civilian infrastructure, and
the rigour it provides in better defending the mandates
of peace support operations and enhancing the safety
and security of uniformed and other personnel. Digital
technologies can also strongly support peacebuilding
efforts and the rebuilding of societies fractured by war.
Ghana believes that the immeasurable benefits
that digital technologies can provide in strengthening
efforts for the maintenance of international peace
and security can better accrue only if there is a
common understanding of the normative framework
that underpins such an enhanced and complementary
approach in leveraging the available modern tools in
pacifying our world. Indeed, we are aware that despite
the benign nature of digital technologies, they can also
exacerbate global insecurity if not used responsibly.
They can deepen mistrust if perceptions persist in
strained and fragile societies that exogenous forces are
manipulating the will of a population towards values
that may be foreign to those societies.
We also note the malicious manner in which digital
technologies have been used, in some instances by
State and non-State actors to misinform and manipulate
populations, threaten and harass individual activists
and journalists and fuel discrimination in ways
that subvert national unity and coherence. The way
such technologies have been used in recruiting and
radicalizing people into terrorist groups, organizing
terrorist attacks and financing terrorist activities is also
of great concern.
Against the backdrop of the great potential of
digital technologies in reinforcing the available
tools for the maintenance of international peace and
security, but mindful of its negative consequences,
we would like to highlight a few additional points. As
18/28

23/05/2022

previously indicated, the use of digital technologies for
the maintenance of international peace and security
must proceed from a point of convergence and on the
basis of principles that respect national sovereignty and
promote universal values. In that regard, we believe that
the United Nations has an indispensable role to play in
enhancing the positive impact of digital technologies
on global peace. For instance, building upon the
commitments in the Secretary-General’s Strategy
for the Digital Transformation of United Nations
Peacekeeping, which aims to embrace the opportunities
offered by digital technologies, will enable missions to
adapt to changing conflict dynamics and take advantage
of increased efficiencies. Furthermore, lessons learned
by the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs in mediation efforts during the coronavirus
disease pandemic using digital technologies can offer an
acceptable path in constructing enduring frameworks
for such engagements with wider populations for the
cause of peace.
Secondly, the capacity of national Governments
to enhance their cybersecurity space should be at the
heart of developing a robust framework for the use
of digital technologies. The malicious use of digital
technologies by terrorists and extremist groups and
the trend towards cyberwarfare require that vulnerable
countries, such as some in Africa where fragilities
exist, obtain the required support to strengthen their
digital capacity, in line with the African Union’s Digital
Transformation Strategy for Africa (2020-2030). Such
capacity-building efforts should include the gathering,
processing, use and analysis of new technologies and
their impact on security. In that regard, the supportive
role of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate is commendable, and we welcome more
such efforts.
Thirdly, States also have a critical role to play in
enacting policies that prevent the misuse of cyberspace
with elements that, inter alia, encourage investments in
critical national infrastructure, promotes responsible
media content and facilitates the early detection,
investigation and prosecution of offenders. States
ought to make good their commitment to the Charter of
the United Nations by respecting international human
rights law in a manner that ensures that personal
data collected, stored, processed, used, transferred
and disclosed upholds and protects the privacy of
individuals. Furthermore, we welcome measures that
encourage companies to uphold international human
22-35745

23/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

rights law and business standards, based on the
United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and
Human Rights.
Fourthly, cognizant of the effectiveness of regional
arrangements in preventing conflicts through earlywarning mechanisms and in building peace in postconflict settings, we strongly urge the strengthening
of digital-technology partnerships between global
multilateral systems and regional bodies. We encourage
support for the implementation of existing treaties,
such as the Budapest Convention and the African
Union Convention on Cybersecurity and Personal Data
Protection, otherwise known as the Malabo Convention,
and believe that early-warning mechanisms, such as
those of the Economic Community of West African
States and the African Union, can be further deepened
through strong global support.
Moreover, support for regional platforms for
intelligence and information-sharing could further
enhance the early detection of the expansionist agenda
of terrorist networks, including in West Africa and in
relation to their online activities. Additionally, action
to cut off terrorism financing must be sustained and
enhanced, including in the spaced-out economy, where
cryptocurrencies have become a medium of choice for
financing terrorist activities. While the collaboration
between the Intergovernmental Action Group against
Money Laundering in West Africa and West African
national financial intelligence centres has produced
significant outcomes, its actions would continue to
require deepening.
Before concluding, I would like to mention Ghana’s
commitment to enhancing the use of technologies for
peaceful purposes through actions that have been
undertaken to strengthen the domestic information
and communications technology ecosystem. In
addition to the institutionalization of a national
cybersecurity awareness month aimed at elevating
the whole-of-society awareness of cyberthreats, the
operationalization of sectoral computer-emergencyresponse teams in key institutions, such as the National
Communication Authority, the Central Bank and
the National Information Technology Agency, have
enhanced the resilience of the cyber-ecosystem across
online services, the financial sector and Government
business. We therefore advocate a whole-of-society
approach in developing resilience in the peace-andsecurity nexus, including partnerships with the private
sector, civil society organizations and the technology

S/PV.9039

giants, whose increasing role has to be made to serve
the public good. Also, women and the youth are critical
agents of change and will remain crucial to enhancing
the positive impact of technologies on global security.
With a commitment to the collective objective
of enhancing all available tools, Ghana believes that
multilateral and regional initiatives can effectively
harness technologies for the objectives of global peace
and security.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We wish to thank our briefers for
their briefings.
Digital technologies have transformed the world
and become an integral part of its economic, political
and social processes. There were hopes that they would
become an engine of economic and social progress
and that they would simplify communication and help
humankind make the transition to a new digital stage
of development.
During the coronavirus disease pandemic, it was
thanks to information and communication technologies
(ICT) that jobs and the unity of the world divided by
quarantine were preserved. Government-provided
public services, including the work of hospitals, banks
and the financial sector in general, schools and other
institutions critical to society, became almost entirely
linked with ICT. It is no exaggeration to say that
humankind is far more dependent on ICTs today than at
any time in its history.
But the hopes that ICT would be an unequivocal
force for good have not been fulfilled. The culprit is not
technology, but the fact that it has been used to achieve
geopolitical goals and to impose hegemony. That is the
case not only in the physical environment, but also in
the online environment.
In recent years, the manipulation of information
has assumed threatening proportions. A whole army
of pseudo-investigators from non-governmental
organizations has emerged which, at the behest of
Western Governments, are churning out biased socalled investigations that are in fact generating and
disseminating numerous fakes and uncorroborated
information from open sources to tarnish countries
whose are inconvenient to the West. A notorious example
of that is the White Helmets and Bellingcat. They have
distinguished themselves for gross fabrications in the
interests of Western propaganda on the Syrian chemical

22-3574519/28

S/PV.9039

Maintenance of international peace and security

dossier, the Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 story and
many other high-profile issues. Experts have repeatedly
caught them red handed, so to speak, pointing out the
inconsistencies in their conclusions, which have nothing
to do with professional, independent investigative
journalism and are reached in violation of all the most
basic principles.
We are deeply troubled by a new trend: an
information war is being fought not just in a manner
that is completely divorced from reality, but also with
the goal of distorting it and completely superseding it.
The truth is being pushed aside by an intense flow of
information and ideologically charged spam, so as not
to give the audience the slightest opportunity to gain
access to objective information.
An egregious example of that is the information
unleashed by the Western media, under the direction of
their Governments, concerning the deaths of civilians in
Bucha, in which case the Russian military was blamed.
All objective facts and evidence were swept under the
rug, and outright fakes were instead disseminated.
Under pressure from the facts, even the Western media
were eventually forced to admit that many peaceful
residents of Bucha died not from gunshot wounds, as
Ukraine claimed, but from obsolete artillery shells that
had been used by the Ukrainian armed forces when
they bombed that city. Now they are using new fakes to
shift focus from the evident responsibility of Ukraine’s
armed forces for the provocation. Similarly, they are
also silent about the attacks on Kramatorsk, after an
investigation revealed evidence that clearly shows the
involvement of the Ukrainian armed forces.
In recent months, the work of the collective
Western Ministry of Truth, or more accurately the
Ministry of Lies, has reached a zenith. A campaign
of disinformation and manipulation of public opinion
that is unprecedented in its scope and intensity has
been unleashed against Russia. The Western media,
which were already not known for their objectivity,
have finally turned into a mouthpiece for crude State
propaganda as well as fake-news factories.
The ICT giants, which have monopolized the
sphere of social networks and video hosting, are not
behaving any better. Digital platforms have finally
thrown off their masks and are no longer trying to hide
their political bias. They are blocking any accounts
whose content is at odds with the agenda dictated by
the Western elites. The Meta corporation has explicitly
20/28

23/05/2022

allowed hate speech and calls for violence against
Russians and Russian speakers on its platforms.
States that call themselves a “community of
democracies” are in fact engineering true cybertotalitarianism. They want to create a world in which
they — and they alone — will have complete control
over the information flows and determine what is true
and what the audience needs to read and see. Any
alternative point of view is immediately branded as
disinformation and propaganda, and inconvenient facts
are cast aside. Russian television channels are being
shut down, Russian journalists are being expelled, and
access to Russian websites is being blocked. Is that the
so-called freedom of access to information? We hope
that is what the organizers of today’s meeting meant
by abuse of restrictions on access to Internet resources
under the pretext of ensuring national security.
The Russophobic information attack has been
directed by its initiators against various spheres of
activity, including those that are completely unrelated
to politics, such as education, culture and sports.
That is a flagrant violation of the basic principle of
the inadmissibility of discrimination on the basis of
ethnicity. In addition to the information aggression
aimed at people’s minds, a campaign has been
orchestrated to undermine the ICT infrastructure itself
through the organization of computer attacks. In Kyiv,
the creation of a cyberarmy was recently announced,
and there was open acknowledgement of such
cyberattacks against Russian and Belarusian targets.
Moreover, the Western sponsors of the Kyiv regime
not only did not try to prevent it, but also deliberately
cultivated that army of hackers without a thought about
the consequences. The relevant tasks, as we are aware,
were recently advanced by NATO as part of the Locked
Shields cybersecurity exercise in which the Ukrainian
armed forces are participating.
In April, Washington announced a $10 million
reward for anyone who could justify the theory
that Russian intelligence was allegedly involved in
cyberattacks on the United States. Our repeated calls
to address the issues through the competent agencies
were ignored.
Western
Governments
deliberately
engage
hacker groups and often ordinary users in launching
cyberattacks. Tools and detailed instructions on how
to stage computer attacks are published in the public
domain, and mass agitation on organizing hacker
22-35745

23/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

attacks against Russian infrastructure is carried out on
social networks.
Against that background, we were not surprised that
Nina Yankovic, born in western Ukraine and known
for leading the information campaign on whitewashing
neo-Nazism in Ukraine and spreading information
about Russia-gate, which never existed, was appointed
to head the so-called Disinformation Governance Board
at the United States Department of Homeland Security
from 27 April this year. It recently became clear that she
was directly instructed by Trump’s rival in the election,
Hillary Clinton. Even in the United States itself, such
blatant cynicism caused a scandal. Yankovic had to
resign, and the project has been suspended for the time
being. However, we have no doubt that it will be revived
in one way or another insofar as, apart from promoting
fakes and disinformation, our Western colleagues have
almost no diplomatic methods left at their disposal.
Alongside the West’s pumping of Ukraine with
conventional weapons, there is a parallel uncontrolled
distribution of cyberweapons and techniques for their
use. Practical skills are being acquired by a huge
number of people. According to Zelenskyy, there are
more than 300,000 fighters in his so-called cyberarmy.
An uncontrollable cyberarmy is being created.
After developing skills under Member States’ command
in Ukraine while attacking Russia, it will not stop there.
It is not a regular army. Experts know all too well how
difficult it is to track down hacker activity, identify its
source and suppress it. Hackers mobilized by Member
States will spread around the world, posing a threat to
citizens of Western countries, among other things.
The militarization of the digital space carried out
by the West greatly increases the threat of a direct
military clash, especially since the regime in Kyiv is
actively mastering provocations in the information
space according to Western techniques. However,
their consequences could be even more horrendous.
Computer attacks on critical infrastructure can lead to
real and large-scale human casualties, not to mention
the risk of misidentifying the perpetrator in the case of
false-flag attacks, which are much easier to organize in
virtual space than in real life. In such a case, the risks
of unintentional escalation and the mutual exchange of
cyberstrikes would increase manifold.
The Kyiv regime’s reckless actions could lead to a
full-scale confrontation in cyberspace that would involve
other countries. NATO has already extended the right

S/PV.9039

of collective self-defence under article 5 to information
space. The responsibility for such an escalation will fall
entirely on Western countries, which are encouraging
the recklessness of the Kyiv leadership.
Faced with such a threat, we will certainly fight
back against any attempts to undermine Russia’s
information security. But I once again urge Council
members to think about the danger of dragging the
world into a confrontation in cyberspace, which is
no less dangerous than the use of weapons of mass
destruction. We have been trying to prevent such a
scenario for more than two decades.
Let me recall that Russia was the first to raise the
issue of international information security at the United
Nations back in 1998 and have it included in its agenda
on a standing basis. We insisted that the United Nations
set up negotiation platforms, first expert ones and
then ones open to all Member States. At each of those
stages, we had to overcome the strongest resistance
from our Western colleagues, who claimed that they
could manage without the United Nations. How they do
without the United Nations is well known to the world.
We are seeking an international commitment
that all States should undertake not to use ICTs for
military purposes. We demand the demilitarization of
the information space. All these years, we have been
proposing specific draft international instruments — a
universal concept for ensuring international information
security and, on behalf of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, a draft code of responsible conduct in
that area.
What about our Western colleagues? All these
years, they have been openly building up their
offensive cyberpotential and developing rules for its
use. Suffice it to recall the cynical Tallinn Manual on
the International Law Applicable to Cyber Warfare,
which regulates in detail how to so-called humanely
conduct cyberwarfare.
Which one of us has therefore been preparing for
cyberwarfare all these years — Russia, which called
for a ban on the use of ICTs for political and military
purposes and is ready to assume the corresponding
obligations, or Western countries, which repeatedly
rejected all those initiatives in order to keep a complete
free hand in the information space?
The digital sphere must not be allowed to become
an area of geopolitical confrontation. This is an

22-3574521/28

S/PV.9039

Maintenance of international peace and security

existential question for humankind. Now more than
ever, there is a need for a responsible discourse aimed
at the development of practical solutions. It is our
duty to support it regardless of the political climate.
We call for a depoliticized discussion on all aspects
of ensuring international information security in a
specialized forum under the auspices of the General
Assembly — the Open-ended Working Group. We
believe that our meeting today does not replace the
activities of that Group in any way.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): The
United Arab Emirates would like to thank the United
States for organizing this meeting on an issue of
increasing importance that the Security Council should
address together beyond specific conflicts and very
much in its own right, in the view of the United Arab
Emirates. We also thank Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo, Ms. Nyabola and Mr. Druet for their really
insightful briefings today.
Digital technologies advance at a dizzying speed.
Let us think back to 1989, when the World Wide Web was
created. By the end of the next decade, Larry Page and
Sergey Brin had invented Google. Little did we know
at the time that that new idea, coming from a garage
in California, was going to change our lives forever.
Fast-forward a decade, Google was in everyone’s smart
phone, and it was an indispensable part of work and
life, bringing about enormous progress and change.
Let us now imagine the same warp speed on the
nefarious side of technology happening today, as
we heard, under our watch. For example, ongoing
advancements in digital technologies are multiplying
the possibilities of what devices such as drones are able
to do. In the near future, it will be possible that swarms
of drones, utilized by terrorist groups, could carry out
cross-border attacks, using facial technology and other
features enabled by artificial intelligence, without the
possibility of attribution to either a State or a non-State
group. How will States, including those around this
table, respond to such an attack in the future legally
and in accordance with international humanitarian law.
To prevent that dystopian future, we need to take
urgent action now in the United Nations, the Security
Council and other forums. What is clear is that we
should not expect meaningful answers to emerge from
the political and ethical debates that have been raging for
more than two decades and that have not caught up with
22/28

23/05/2022

the technologies that are now ubiquitous and that have
the potential to be utilized in such destructive ways.
There is no doubt that digital technologies bring
their fair share of risks and challenges, particularly as
that force multiplier for terrorist groups. But, as we also
heard, that is not the whole story.
Digital technologies can also be peace enablers, as
we heard today. For example, natural disaster warning
systems, relying on the latest technologies and data,
allow us to predict extreme weather events, such as
droughts, hurricanes and floods, and pre-position aid
accordingly. Successive anticipatory action programmes
in Somalia have helped communities to address
devastating water shortages and droughts. Thanks to
such technologies, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and other partners have been
able to mitigate the loss of livelihoods and the decline
in food consumption, ensure access to water and
keep children in school, where they belong. Proper
information puts the international community in a
better position to respond to climate security threats. It
saves lives and helps prevent fragility from becoming a
trigger of instability.
As we consider the dual nature of digital
technologies, it is time for the Council to move
beyond admiring the problem and to discuss specific
ways in which the Council can leverage technological
innovations to contribute to sustainable peace and
security. Today the United Arab Emirates would like to
address five specific issues.
First, as others have mentioned, terrorist and
extremist groups such as Da’esh, Al-Qaida and many
others must not be allowed to use the Internet to
propagate their agendas and manipulate social media
and its billions of users. Technology companies have
increasingly invested in detection tools based on
artificial intelligence and human moderation teams to
remove such content from their platforms. However,
it has been clear to Governments for a while that
business as usual is not enough, because terrorists and
extremists continue to radicalize and recruit online.
This problem is by no means limited to developing
countries. The perpetrators of a number of recent
high-profile hate crimes against religious and ethnic
minorities in much of Europe and the United States
have been radicalized through these online platforms,
as were countless Da’esh recruits around the world.
So although we have seen progress in recent years
22-35745

23/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

strengthening regulatory and legislative frameworks
to protect users from terrorist and extremist content,
we obviously need to fast-track these efforts, since the
international normative framework is not catching up.
This responsibility lies not only with the technology
companies but also with Governments.
Secondly, we must address the pernicious
effects of online disinformation and misinformation
campaigns using social media platforms, including
on peace operations and humanitarian activities.
These should be safeguarded. We have seen instances
where peacekeepers and humanitarian relief workers,
who are already putting themselves in harm’s way to
protect civilians, become further imperilled by the
spread of misinformation and disinformation against
them. Effective responses to fighting disinformation
are needed at multiple levels, including through the
use of the private sector via rules and regulations,
fact-checking, the labelling of information and media
literacy campaigns. The suggestions made today by
the briefers that the United Nations should scale up its
capacity and ability in that regard should be welcomed.
Thirdly, we should leverage digital technologies
to strengthen the protection of civilians against harm.
For example, in the physical world, medical and certain
humanitarian actors use the red cross or red crescent
emblems to signal their specific protection under
international humanitarian law. As those actors are
facing new digital threats from attacks on their digital
backbones, we should start considering whether there
might be a digital emblem to clearly signal that medical
and humanitarian actors must never be targeted, online
or offline. That emblem should not only reinforce the
idea not only that those networks need to be protected
but also that there should be accountability for any
violations and that international law applies here.
Fourthly, digital innovation is having an impact
on the physical world, multiplying the possibilities of
what devices such as drones can do. I mentioned this at
the beginning of my remarks. Commercially available
drones can now fly faster, travel further, carry larger
payloads and leverage artificial intelligence and other
tools to operate without manual control. And drones
do not just operate in the air. On 3 March 2020, as I
briefed the Council, the Houthi terrorist group used
a remotely operated drone boat laden with explosives
to attack an oil tanker off the coast of Yemen. Had it
been successful, the attack would have had devastating
effects — not only on the tanker and its crew, but on

S/PV.9039

the environment, on global supply routes and on local
communities along the Yemeni coast that depend on
the sea for their livelihood. We are in a Hobbesian
state of nature regarding the use of technology by
super-empowered non-State actors. Inaction is not an
option because when there is no regulation, we are only
encouraging proliferation.
It is clear today by the evidence shown and other
reports that terrorist groups and non-State actors
increasingly have access to such technologies. We
strongly condemn their use to conduct cross-border
attacks, target civilians or civilian infrastructure, in
violation of international law. But that threat will only
grow more dangerous as technology advances, and it
must be addressed in the United Nations. Governments
should enhance coordination, support capacity-building
measures and exchange good practices and guidance to
counter that threat.
Finally, we have talked about the importance of
digital technologies to protect humanitarian actors. Let
us now talk about their role in scaling up humanitarian
action. Digital innovations such as artificial
intelligence, predictive analytics, digital cash transfers
and blockchain technology can improve humanitarian
operations. These emerging technologies not only
help humanitarian actors anticipate and prepare for
crises but also enable them to move more quickly and
efficiently when such crises arise.
As we consider digital innovation, let us not forget
the digital divide. An estimated 37 per cent of the
world’s population — almost 3 billion people — have
never used the Internet. The divide remains wide,
and it disproportionately impacts women and girls.
Only 19 per cent of women in the least developed
countries are using the Internet — 12 per cent less
than men. Inequality in the physical world is clearly
being replicated in the digital world. As we think of
how innovation can help us amplify our impact, let us
prioritize those who have yet to see the dividends of
technological developments that are now commonplace
in other parts of the world.
As an early champion of frontier technologies,
the United Arab Emirates is leveraging their benefits
domestically and abroad. That is why, four years ago,
we championed the establishment of the SecretaryGeneral’s High-level Panel on Digital Cooperation,
which reflected our belief that digital technologies
can positively contribute to global peace and security.

22-3574523/28

S/PV.9039

Maintenance of international peace and security

We actively supported implementation efforts and are
encouraged to see the idea of establishing a global
digital compact in the Secretary-General’s Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982). We all need to further
champion this multilateral work.
The United Arab Emirates will continue to work
with all gathered here and all stakeholders to ensure
that the world benefits from digital technologies as a
key enabler to bring about more resilient, equitable and
inclusive societies.
Mr. De Oliveira Marques (Brazil): Brazil thanks
the United States presidency for organizing today`s
briefing on the impact of digital technologies in
maintaining international peace and security. We also
express our appreciation to Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo, Ms. Nyabola and Mr. Druet for
their insightful presentations.
The process of digital transformation brings great
benefits and opportunities for humankind, including for
building peace and understanding and for empowering
underrepresented and vulnerable groups.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has shown
society the great benefits of the use of digital
technologies, which have proved to be efficient tools to
keep daily life possible, with the restrictions imposed
by the threat of the virus. Education, trading and
banking systems, among many others, have been able
to adapt existing technologies to the sudden new reality.
The Council and the United Nations system depended
on them to continue to hold meetings, and today we
have even gotten used to the idea of listening to briefers
who are not able to attend a meeting in person. Of
course, those benefits have not been enjoyed equally
everywhere, due to persistent inequalities in the access
to information and communication technologies.
Tackling that digital divide remains an important task
of the international community.
As we are well aware, the same digital technologies
that have revolutionized our lives by allowing the
generation, storage, dissemination and access to vast
amounts of information have often been misused by
Governments and non-State actors. Today’s discussion
has touched upon some of those challenges, which
are diverse in nature and therefore require different
modalities of State responses.
The General Assembly has recognized that
international law, in particular the Charter of the United
24/28

23/05/2022

Nations, is applicable to States’ activities in cyberspace
and is essential to maintaining peace and stability,
respecting human rights and promoting an open,
secure, peaceful and accessible digital environment.
International human rights law and international
humanitarian law must be respected online as well
as offline. We also underline the importance of
adhering to the voluntary, non-binding norms for the
responsible behaviour of States in cyberspace endorsed
by the General Assembly, including through protecting
critical information infrastructure supporting essential
services to the public.
To address the challenge of disinformation,
Governments and societies must adopt broad strategies.
Educational campaigns and open debates to raise
awareness, as well as cooperation between public and
private actors such as social media companies can help
tackle the misuse of digital platforms for the purpose of
incitement to violence and terrorism.
International cooperation regarding the use of
digital technology has greatly improved our capacity
to identify common threats, including from non-State
actors such as terrorist groups. As technologies evolve,
we can also use them more efficiently to improve
the transparency and agility of the Security Council.
We should encourage the use of new technologies to
provide women, young people and civil society with
greater access to peace processes and peacebuilding
and peacekeeping initiatives.
United Nations peacekeeping operations should
make use of existing digital technologies to their full
potential in order to improve the implementation of
their mandate. I would like to highlight the importance
of new technologies for strategic communications in
peacekeeping missions. Strategic communications
act as enablers and have a multiplier effect across all
mandated areas, notably in relation to the protection
of civilians and the women and peace and security
agendas. Furthermore, they are crucial in addressing
misinformation and disinformation that might hinder
mandate implementation and threaten the safety and
security of peacekeepers.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for taking the initiative to convene
this meeting, which gives us the opportunity to consider
the impact of digital technologies on the maintenance
of international peace and security. In recent times,
the issue has become more and more prominent on the
22-35745

23/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

international peace and security agenda. I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo,
as well as Ms. Nyabola and Mr. Druet, for their
enlightening briefings.
The theme at the heart of our discussions today
reminds us more than ever that technological progress
has pushed back the limits of our physical world
into the infinity of the digital and the cybernetic.
That implies, on the one hand, an expansion of our
possibilities at all levels, including in the maintenance
of international peace and security, yet, on the other
hand, a reconfiguration and recalibration of the threats
to them.
Now more than ever, peacekeeping relies on a
robust ecosystem of technology and innovation that not
only strengthens conflict management and prevention
tools but also promotes better situational awareness,
improves mission support and facilitates an enhanced
implementation of United Nations peacekeeping
mandates, often in complex environments.
Technological progress also contributes to the
reinforcement of the security of peacekeepers and
civilian populations and allows for improved preventive
actions, particularly in the humanitarian field. The use
of unmanned aerial vehicles and point analysis systems
are increasingly becoming the preferred means of
observing and anticipating movements in hard-to-reach
areas such as battlefields, in order to obtain reliable
information for more timely and efficient responses.
It is clear that the world is at a tipping point towards
the robotization and digitization of our societies, our
governance — both national and global — and, in
particular, our rights and obligations. Unfortunately,
that technological mutation is not exclusively
advantageous. It is accompanied by consequences and
sources of concern, like any science that is not draped
in a mantle of consciousness.
Often considered as a force multiplier,
technological progress also reveals itself as a factor
of exacerbation in situations of conflict. Indeed, hate
speech, radicalization, incitement to discrimination
and violence in all their forms, disseminated via the
Internet and social networks and of which women
and youth are the primary vulnerable targets, have
today become preferred vehicles of terror, fear and the
perpetuation of crises.

S/PV.9039

The manufacturing of more powerful and more
sophisticated weapons, refined by technological
progress, brings with it an amplified capacity for
nuisance and dehumanization, which must be subjected
to a strict legal and ethical framework at the risk of being
a real danger to humankind. The sad spectacle of armed
and terrorist groups that freely acquire increasingly
sophisticated weapons and new technologies to
strengthen their power of destabilization in several
regions in Africa recalls the need for peacekeepers, as
well as the regular forces of the countries concerned, to
also have access to the latest technologies.
The viability of those States in the grip of such
negative forces and the survival of the populations
concerned, caught in a terrible vice between the
impotence of States with decadent authority and the
torments inflicted by armed groups with an agenda
of terror and chaos, are at stake. It is crucial that
peacekeeping forces have access to technological
equipment that is commensurate with the scale of
emerging threats and adapted to the challenges that
must be met, particularly in asymmetric armed conflicts
against terrorist groups.
We share the conviction that it is necessary to
encourage technological innovation and progress in the
field; to maximize the potential of existing and new
technologies to improve the ability of our peacekeeping
missions to effectively carry out their mandates; enable
peace operations to detect, analyse and address threats
to civilians, peacekeepers and humanitarian and
political missions in a timely and integrated manner;
and, finally, ensure a more responsible use of digital
technologies by peace operations while respecting
human rights wherever they are at risk.
My country supports the Strategy for the Digital
Transformation of United Nations Peacekeeping, as
well as the United Nations Strategy and Plan of Action
on Hate Speech.
Gabon remains firmly committed to the peaceful
and responsible use of technology for the maintenance
of international peace and security and calls for the
strengthening of triangular cooperation, which is
essential, inter alia, for the implementation of resolution
2518 (2020), on the safety and security of peacekeepers.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance
of mobilizing at the international, regional and national
levels to achieve optimal governance of the digital
space and technological progress and to make it a

22-3574525/28

S/PV.9039

Maintenance of international peace and security

genuine catalyst for the mandates of United Nations
peace missions and major instruments for international
peace and security.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I would like to thank the
briefers for their very interesting statements. I also
thank the United States for facilitating this important
discussion within the Security Council.
Over the past year the Council has engaged, in
different formats, in discussions on technology and
security, from the Arria Formula meeting on emerging
technology and security held in May 2021 by the
Permanent Mission of China to the open debate in
June, when Estonia put cybersecurity on the Council’s
agenda for the first time (see S/2021/621). This is a timely
continuation of those discussions.
Emerging and evolving digital technologies present
great opportunities in a number of areas. Indeed,
without digital technology, the Security Council itself
would not have been able to function during the initial
stages of the coronavirus disease pandemic. At the same
time, digital technologies may also raise concerns and
challenges. When used for malicious purposes, there is
no doubt that they can pose a threat to international
peace and security. Today’s discussion is therefore
at the core of the mandate and the responsibility of
the Council.
Digital technologies are brought about and used
not only by States. That underlines the importance of
cooperation between States and other stakeholders.
We need to cooperate with all those that develop
and use technologies, including with academia and
non-governmental organizations. Only by working
together can we make sure that new technologies help
us move forward in a direction that benefits us all. The
United Nations forms an important global platform for
such interaction.
The misuse of digital technologies can affect peace
and security globally, for example, through Internet
shutdowns or the massive spread of disinformation.
Norway is concerned that the evolving misuse of the
digital domain can bring about consequences that may
escalate tensions, including human rights violations and
abuses. Wilful restrictions on access to the Internet,
in full or in part, represent but one type of misuse.
The spread of targeted disinformation through digital
technologies represents another — one that often limits
people’s access to reliable information at times when it
is needed the most.
26/28

23/05/2022

Nevertheless, we should not underestimate the
positive effects of digital technologies. They can help
promote inclusion in decision-making processes by
allowing access for groups that have traditionally
been excluded, such as women and minority groups,
including through the use of video-teleconference in
the Security Council itself to facilitate the participation
of more and diverse civil society briefers.
Disinformation also remains a challenge in
many areas, including posing a risk to our own
United Nations peacekeeping missions, for example,
when false information is spread to create a more
hostile environment among the communities that the
peacekeepers are deployed to help. Yet the best defence
against disinformation is a free, independent and
professional media sector. It is essential that the media
are free to convey important information, ask critical
questions and report on human rights violations and
abuses. Supporting independent and pluralistic media
and ensuring the safety of journalists can therefore also
help reduce tensions and prevent conflict.
I thank you once again, Madam President, for
placing this issue on our agenda. I look forward to this
being a continuing discussion on how we can prevent
and counter disinformation and other challenges
resulting from the misuse of digital technologies,
without losing sight of the immense benefits that such
technologies offer to the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): I thank you, Madam
President, for this discussion today. We are also very
grateful to the briefers for their contributions, as they
illustrated that technology is changing how we monitor,
understand and respond to conflict and humanitarian
crises around the world.
It is clear that, first, technology can play a role
in actually preventing the outbreak of conflict. If
we can see risks in advance, then we can and should
act before a crisis hits. Timelier decision-making
enables early and preventive action, which is an area
that I believe the Security Council should explore
more, in conjunction with the Secretariat. It is
also why we are working with others and industry
to develop artificial-intelligence-driven conflictprevention models.
Secondly, during conflict itself, accurate situational
awareness for United Nations peacekeepers on
missions is essential. Combining digital technologies,
22-35745

23/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

such as remote monitoring with improved intelligence,
surveillance and reconnaissance processes, can enable
peacekeeping and monitoring missions to improve
their understanding of threats and vulnerabilities
on the ground. If we can get those drones described
by our colleague from the United Arab Emirates to
help peacekeepers instead of attack people, we can
make progress.
Thirdly, technology also enables greater
accountability. As we heard today, including from
our brilliant briefers, social media enables greater
accountability; it empowers people to tell the world
about the conflicts, as they experience them, and ensures
that the world knows what is happening on their terms.
That means that the truth, including evidence of mass
atrocities or violations of international humanitarian
law, cannot be hidden by those who wish to hide them.
As we also heard today, technology is being used
by States and other actors to suppress human rights and
spread disinformation and as a tool in conflict. We see
some States attempt to hide the truth by blocking access
to social media or independent media sites. As others
have noted, we saw that last year when the military
junta shut down the Internet in Myanmar. We also see
authoritarian regimes using surveillance technology
to monitor and persecute their own citizens, denying
them their human rights. Technology can also be used
by those seeking to destabilize, and that is particularly
true in the context of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine,
where Russia has conducted cyberattacks and, as we
have reported, used an online troll factory to spread
disinformation and manipulate public opinion about its
illegal war.
Fortunately, technology can also help us combat
disinformation. Russia tried once again today to
claim that the bodies of victims lying in the streets of
Bucha were a “staged provocation” by Ukraine. They
suggested that the Ukrainian forces had undertaken
that staged provocation after they retook the town. But
satellite imagery proved that the bodies in the streets of
Bucha had been there for several weeks, making it clear
that they were killed during the period when Russian
forces occupied the town.
Today, rather than talk of a staged provocation, we
were spun some new nonsense about obsolete artillery.
That is another Russian tactic to attempt to distract
and confuse us and obfuscate. Layers of contradictory
and competing lies are pushed out so that people
are confused and do not know what to believe. But

S/PV.9039

no one should be fooled by this. We look forward to
the International Criminal Court undertaking a full
investigation so that we can know the truth about what
happened in Bucha, based on real evidence. Hopefully,
indictments will flow from that.
Combating misinformation and defending media
that are committed to reporting the truth online are
critical to the proper functioning of the international
system. Therefore, when the Russian delegation
bemoans the fact that it is sanctioned on social media
or that its State propaganda outlets are blocked, it
should not be doing so. In the digital space, as in all
spaces, we must strive to protect the truth from this
new doublespeak.
In conclusion, we need to work together, including
with civil society organizations, the private sector and
other communities, to realize the benefits of, as well as
counter the risks associated with, digital technologies.
That will involve adapting institutions and upholding
norms that are rooted in high standards, human rights
and democratic values. The Council must ensure that
existing frameworks and international law remain our
guiding principles, as we do that. And if we succeed in
doing that, we can ensure that digital technologies are
a force for good and a transformative opportunity for
sustaining peace and development.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I thank our briefers.
As we have heard today, technology is a positive
force for good in our lives but can also be a powerful
weapon for fomenting violence and conflict.
Cyberattacks, cybercrime and the abuse of technology
to spread disinformation are severely damaging trust,
while advances in modern technology are contributing
to the changing nature of conflict. Hate speech can
be spread and amplified within minutes, thereby
polarizing communities, undermining democracy and
fuelling intolerance and violence across the globe.
There are countless examples of such risks. Russian
State-controlled media has cultivated disinformation
narratives in an attempt to create a pretext for its illegal
unjustified war in Ukraine. As the war continues, so do
the Russian Federation’s efforts to distort reality and
deny its brutal aggression on the ground.
In Myanmar, as we have heard from others,
the curtailment of Internet access prior to the coup
signalled the subsequent erosion of fundamental
freedoms, repression, surveillance and brutal violence.
In Ethiopia, we have seen the misuse of technologies to

22-3574527/28

S/PV.9039

Maintenance of international peace and security

oppress human rights defenders, conduct surveillance on
activists, spread hate speech and incite tensions through
social media. In many other cases, new technologies
are being misused to threaten the security and integrity
of States, target critical infrastructure, interfere in
democratic processes and curtail human rights.
While the proliferation of digital technologies
presents new risks and challenges, it also has the potential
to play a vital role in support of peace. From Colombia
to Libya, we have seen how digital technologies have
supported greater inclusivity, promoted engagement
in peace processes and complemented face-to-face
interactions. They can and should facilitate and broaden
the participation of women, youth and minorities.
Ireland welcomes the work of the Mediation Support
Unit and Innovation Cell of the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs in that regard. However,
those efforts must take note of the particular risks faced
by those groups in online spaces, as well as the global
gender digital divide.
We encourage all around the table to be more open
to the positive role that technology can play in conflict
prevention and in addressing global challenges such as
climate change. Capacity-building, confidence-building
measures and initiatives, including the programme of
action for advancing responsible State behaviour in
cyberspace, which Ireland was proud to co-sponsor, are
central to such efforts.
Technology can also act as a force multiplier in
peacekeeping missions, offering our peacekeepers
greater situational awareness and improved data
analysis capabilities. Those critically important
enablers improve safety, security and operational
efficiency, thereby enhancing mandate implementation.
That is why implementing the Strategy for the Digital
Transformation of United Nations Peacekeeping is
so important.
It is precisely during times of armed conflict that
we must vigorously defend the right to freedom of
expression, online as well as offline, and access to
information — freedoms essential to the promotion
of lasting peace, understanding the nature of conflict
and ensuring accountability. Today I pay tribute to the
private citizens, journalists and human rights defenders
in Ukraine who are using digital technologies to share
harrowing stories from the front lines, often at great
personal risk. They are working tirelessly to collect,
verify and preserve digital evidence of the attacks, in
28/28

23/05/2022

the hope that it will be used to hold those responsible
to account.
It is beyond question that international law, including
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law, applies in cyberspace. Our approaches to
digital technologies must be grounded in human rights,
the rule of law and democratic values.
Ireland supports a free, safe, secure, inclusive
and accessible cyberspace. We know that digital
technologies do not exist in a vacuum. It is clear
that non-State actors play a leading role in driving
technological innovation. The active and meaningful
participation of civil society, including human rights
defenders, women’s groups, technical experts, academia
and the private sector in our work to identify solutions
to shared challenges is critical. Ireland also strongly
encourages the Peacebuilding Commission to consider
the impact of digital technologies, both positive and
negative, in its discussions and advice.
In conclusion, investing in the potential of digital
technologies is investing in peace. When it comes to
the use of digital technology, Ireland firmly believes
that multilateralism, responsible State behaviour,
transparency and human accountability are key to
building and maintaining the trust that underpins
international peace and security.
The President: I shall now make a further
statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United States.
Let me start by thanking all of my colleagues today
for engaging in a very constructive dialogue about
the role that digital technologies play in advancing
international peace and security. Unfortunately, Russia
chose to be unconstructive by launching into baseless
attacks to intentionally spread the exact kind of
disinformation we are here today, in part, to talk about
preventing and addressing.
I will not go down the rabbit hole of Russia’s
conspiracy theories. Instead, we will work together in
future with other members of the Council to continue
these important conversations in the weeks and months
ahead. I would again like to thank the briefers for their
contributions today. I would also like to thank all of
my colleagues.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.
22-35745
