72

General Assembly-Fortieth Session

6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Conclusion of effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclearweapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons".
113th plenary meeting
12 December 1985

40/87. Prevention of an arms race in outer space
The General Assembly,
Inspired by the great prospects opening up before mankind as a result of man's entry into outer space,
Recognizing the common interest of all mankind in the
exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Reaffirming that the exploration and use of outer space,
including the Moon and other celestial bodies, shall be carried out for the benefit and in the interest of all countries,
irrespective of their degree of economic or scientific development, and shall be the province of all mankind,
Reaffirming further the will of all States that the exploration and use of outer space, including the Moon and other
celestial bodies, shall be for peaceful purposes,
Recalling that the States parties to the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration
and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other
Celestial Bodies, 20 have undertaken, in article III, to carry
on activities in the exploration and use of outer space,
including the Moon and other celestial bodies, in accordance with international law and the Charter of the United
Nations, in the interest of maintaining international peace
and security and promoting international co-operation and
understanding,
Reaffirming, in particular, article IV of the above-mentioned Treaty, which stipulates that States parties to the
Treaty undertake not to place in orbit around the Earth
any objects carrying nuclear weapons or any other kinds of
weapons of mass destruction, install such weapons on
celestial bodies or station such weapons in outer space in
any other manner,
Reaffirming also paragraph 80 of the Final Document of
the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 10 the
first special session devoted to disarmament, in which it is
stated that, in order to prevent an arms race in outer space,
further measures should be taken and appropriate international negotiations held in accordance with the spirit of the
Treaty,
Recalling its resolutions 36/97 C and 36/99 of9 December 1981, as well as resolutions 37/83 of 9 December
1982, 37/99 D of 13 December 1982, 38/70 of 15 December 1983 and 39/59 of 12 December 1984,
Gravely concerned at the danger posed to all mankind by
an arms race in outer space and in particular by the
impending threat of the exacerbation of the current state of
insecurity by developments that could further undermine
international peace and security, retard the pursuit of general and complete disarmament, and risk creating obstacles to the development of international co-operation in
the peaceful uses of outer space,
Mindful of the widespread interest expressed by Member States in the course of the negotiations on and following the adoption of the above-mentioned Treaty in
ensuring that the exploration and use of outer space should
be for peaceful purposes, and taking note of proposals sub20 Resolution 2222 (XXI), annex.
2 1 See Report of the Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration
and Peaceful Use of Outer Space. Vienna, 9-21 August 1982 (A/CONF.IOI/
I O and Corr. I and 2), para. 426.

mitted to the General Assembly at its tenth special session
and at its regular sessions and to the Conference on Disarmament,
Noting the grave concern expressed by the Second
United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space at the extension of an arms race
into outer space and the recommendations 21 made to the
competent organs of the United Nations, in particular the
General Assembly, and also to the Committee on Disarmament, 15
Convinced that further measures are needed for the prevention of an arms race in outer space,
Recognizing that, in the context of multilateral negotiations for preventing an arms race in outer space, bilateral
negotiations between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America could make a significant contribution to such an objective, in accordance with
paragraph 27 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session, 10
Noting with satisfaction that bilateral negotiations
between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the
United States of America have begun in 1985, on a complex of questions concerning space and nuclear arms, both
strategic and intermediate-range, and in their interrelationship, with the declared objective of working out effective agreements aimed, inter alia, at preventing an arms
race in outer space,
Anxious that concrete results should emerge from these
negotiations as soon as possible, as was urged in resolution
39/59,
Taking note of the part of the report of the Conference
on Disarmament relating to this question, 22
Welcoming the establishment of an Ad Hoe Committee
on the prevention of an arms race in outer space during the
1985 session of the Conference on Disarmament, in the
exercise of the negotiating responsibilities of this sole multilateral negotiating body on disarmament, to examine, as
a first step at this stage, issues relevant to the prevention of
an arms race in outer space.,
Mindful that consensus had not yet been reached in the
Conference on Disarmament on concrete proposals for reestablishing the ad hoe committee on this question during
the 1986 session of the Conference on Disarmament,
I. Recalls the obligation of all States to refrain from
the threat or use of force in their space activities;
2. Reaffirms that general and complete disarmament
under effective international control warrants that outer
space shall be used exclusively for peaceful purposes and
that it shall not become an arena for an arms race;
3. Emphasizes that further measures with appropriate
and effective provisions for verification to prevent an arms
race in outer space should be adopted by the international
community;
4. Calls upon all States, in particular those with major
space capabilities, to contribute actively to the objective of
the peaceful use of outer space and to take immediate
measures to prevent an arms race in outer space in the
interest of maintaining international peace and security
and promoting international co-operation and understandmg;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member
States to submit their views on the possibility of enhancing
international co-operation in the field of preventing an
arms race in outer space and the peaceful uses of outer
22 Official Records of the General Assembly. Fortieth Session, Supplement
No. 27(A/40/27 and Corr I). sect. 111.E.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

73

space, including the desirability of establishing relevant
machinery for that purpose, and to submit a report to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session;

40/88. Implementation of General Assembly resolution 39 /60 on the immediate cessation and
prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests

6. Reiterates that the Conference on Disarmament, as
the single multilateral disarmament negotiating forum, has
the primary role in the negotiation of a multilateral agreement or agreements, as appropriate, on the prevention of
an arms race in outer space in all its aspects;

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned about the intensification of the
nuclear-arms race and the growing threat of nuclear war,
Recalling that over the past three decades the need for
cessation and prohibition of nuclear-weapon testing has
been in the focus of attention of the General Assembly,
Reaffirming its conviction that the conclusion of a multilateral treaty on the prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests by
all States would constitute an indispensable element for
the success of efforts to halt and reverse the nuclear-arms
race and the qualitative improvement of nuclear weapons,
and to prevent the expansion of existing nuclear arsenals
and the spread of nuclear weapons to additional countries,
thus contributing to the achievement of the final goal of
the complete elimination of nuclear weapons under appropriate verification,
Stressing once again that the elaboration of such a treaty
is the task of the highest priority and should not be made
dependent on the attainment of any other measure in the
field of disarmament,
Welcoming the proposals contained in the Delhi Declaration issued on 28 January 1985 by the heads of State or
Government of six States Members of the United
Nations 24 - Argentina, Greece, India, Mexico, Sweden
and the United Republic of Tanzania - and their joint
message of 24 October 1985 addressed to the leaders of the
United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, 25
Recalling its previous resolutions on this subject, in particular resolutions 39/52 and 39/60 of 12 December 1984,
by which it called for a moratorium or moratoria on all
nuclear-test explosions and for the negotiation of a treaty
for the prohibition of all nuclear-weapon tests,
Deeply deploring that the Conference on Disarmament
has been unable to carry out negotiations with a view to
reaching agreement on such a treaty,
1. Urges the Conference on Disarmament to proceed
promptly to negotiations on all aspects of this matter,
including adequate measures of verification, with the aim
of preparing without delay a draft treaty that would effectively ban all test explosions of nuclear weapons by all
States everywhere and would contain provisions, acceptable to all, preventing the circumvention of this ban by
means of nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes;
2. Resolutely urges all States, and especially all
nuclear-weapon States, to exert maximum efforts and
exercise political will for the elaboration and conclusion
without delay of such a treaty;
1. Welcomes the unilateral cessation by one major
nuclear-weapon State of all its nuclear explosions, effective
6 August 1985, as well as the proposal for the suspension
of all nuclear tests for a period of 12 months, with the possibility of its extension, contained in the joint message of
24 October 1985 addressed to the leaders of the United
States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics by the Heads of State or Government of six
States Members of the United Nations;
4. Expresses its hope that all other nuclear-weapon
States will also consider joining in such a moratorium;
S. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session an item entitled "Implementation of

1. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to consider as a matter of priority the question of preventing an
arms race in outer space;
8. Also requests the Conference on Disarmament to
intensify its consideration of the question of the prevention of an arms race in outer space in all its aspects, taking
into account all relevant proposals including those
presented in the Ad Hoe Committee on the prevention of
an arms race in outer space at the 1985 session of the Conference and at the fortieth session of the General Assembly;

9. Further requests the Conference on Disarmament to
re-establish an ad hoe committee with an adequate mandate at the beginning of its session in 1986, with a view to
undertaking negotiations for the conclusion of an agreement or agreements, as appropriate, on the prevention of
an arms race in outer space in all its aspects;
10. Urges the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and
the United States of America to pursue intensively their
bilateral negotiations in a constructive spirit aimed at
reaching early agreement for preventing an arms race in
outer space, and to advise the Conference on Disarmament periodically of the progress of their bilateral sessions
so as to facilitate its work;
11. Calls upon all States, especially those with major
space capabilities, to refrain, in their activities relating to
outer space, from actions contrary to the observance of the
relevant existing treaties or to the objective of preventing
an arms race in outer space;
12. Invites Member States to transmit to the SecretaryGeneral, not later than 1 April 1986, their views on the
scope and content of the study being undertaken by the
United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research 23 on
disarmament problems relating to outer space and the consequences of extending the arms race into outer space, and
requests the Secretary-General to convey the views of the
Member States to the Advisory Board on Disarmament
Studies for consideration in order to enable it, in its capacity of Board of Trustees of the Institute, to give the Institute such possible guidance with respect to the elaboration
of its study as it may derive from those views;
13. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to
report on its consideration of this subject to the General
Assembly at its forty-first session;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Conference on Disarmament all documents relating to the
consideration of this subject by the General Assembly at
its fortieth session;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Prevention of an arms
race in outer space".
113th plenary meeting
12 December 1985
23 See A/40/725, paras. 47-54.
24 A/40/114-S/16921, annex. For the printed text, see Official Records of
the Security Council, Fortieth Year, Supplement for January, February and
March I 985, document S/ 16921, annex.
•

25 A/40/825-S/l 7596, annex. For the printed text, see Official Records of
the Securrty Council, Fortieth Year, Supplement for October. November and
DPCember 1985. document S' 17596. annex.
