A/59/PV.92

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-ninth session

92nd plenary meeting
Friday, 15 April 2005, 11.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 12.05 p.m.
Agenda items 45 and 55 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/59/L.60)
The President (spoke in French): Members will
recall that the General Assembly, at its 73rd plenary
meeting, on 17 December 2004, adopted resolution
59/145, on the modalities, format and organization of
the high-level plenary meeting of the sixtieth session of
the Assembly.
In connection with the two items before it, the
General Assembly now has before it another draft
resolution issued as document A/59/L.60.
I should like at the outset to express to all
delegations my deep gratitude for their support and
their spirit of cooperation and understanding
throughout the consultations on the draft resolution
that I have submitted to the Assembly. I should also
like to express my heartfelt congratulations to the two
facilitators, His Excellency Mr. Eduardo Sevilla
Somoza, Permanent Representative of Nicaragua, and
His Excellency Mr. Johan Løvald, Permanent

(Gabon)

Representative of Norway, on
dedication and on all their efforts.

their

As I mentioned during the open-ended informal
consultations of the plenary held on 1 April 2005, the
draft resolution’s main objective is to formalize those
practical modalities for organizing the high-level
plenary meeting that were not covered by resolution
59/145. The draft resolution contained in document
A/59/L.60 is the result of members’ observations and
comments on the text that they received on 1 April and
of the intensive consultations that the two facilitators
and I conducted over the past two weeks with Member
States.
What struck me throughout my discussions with
Member States was their heightened sense of
responsibility given their awareness that, above and
beyond the practical organization of the September
2005 high-level plenary meeting, we must work
together so that we can effectively meet the challenges
and face the threats of our time. Members showed
flexibility when it was imperative that we find a
balanced solution, and I am grateful to them for that. I
was also aware of the widely shared conviction that we
must finalize the organizational aspects of the
September 2005 high-level plenary meeting as swiftly
as possible so that we can focus totally on substantive
issues in the weeks and months to come.
I should now like to draw attention to the main
changes made to the text that we considered on 1 April.
Of course, the changes are reflected in the draft
resolution now before members.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

05-30796 (E)

*0530796*

unfailing

A/59/PV.92

Members will note that subparagraphs (a) to (g)
of the second preambular paragraph of the 1 April
document — which recalled certain operative
paragraphs of resolution 59/145 — have been deleted
for the sake of conciseness, since that resolution is
referred to specifically in the preambular part.
In operative paragraph 1, the phrase “which
should lead to the adoption of a balanced document”
has been added at the end.
Operative paragraph 2 has been rewritten and
now reads:
(spoke in English)
“Welcomes the submission by the
Secretary-General on 21 March 2005 of the
comprehensive report entitled ‘In larger freedom:
towards development, security and human rights
for all’”.
(spoke in French)
Paragraph 9 is new.
With respect to paragraph 11, I would like to
make a revision by adding the following phrase at the
end of the paragraph: “taking into account the views
expressed by Member States”. With that addition, and
with the changes made to the 1 April text, paragraph 11
now reads as follows:
“Requests the President of the General
Assembly to continue to hold open, inclusive and
transparent consultations with all Member States
with a view to reaching the broadest possible
agreement on all major issues relating to the
High-level Plenary Meeting, taking into account
the views expressed by Member States”.
Paragraph 11 of annex I has been changed and
now reads as follows:
“Representatives
of
non-governmental
organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council, civil society
organizations and the private sector, one from
each grouping, selected during the informal
interactive Hearings of June 2005, may also be
included in the list of speakers for the plenary
meetings of the High-level Plenary Meeting in
consultation with the President of the General
Assembly, time permitting”.
Paragraph 13 of annex I is new.

2

Turning now to annex II, paragraph 9 of that
annex is also new.
We conclude with annex III, whose paragraph 5 is
new as well.
Those are the main changes that have been made
to the draft resolution. As I noted at the start of the
meeting, those changes are the result of the
consultations conducted by the two facilitators and me.
With respect to paragraph 11 of annex I, I am
convinced that this wording will in no way undermine
the General Assembly’s desire for interaction with the
representatives of non-governmental organizations and
civil society and private sector organizations.
I would request that any technical corrections
necessary to harmonize the texts in the various official
languages be conveyed to the Secretariat. The
Secretariat will take note of them and take them into
account when it publishes the resolution as document
A/RES/59/291.
I would like again to thank all Member States and
the various groups for their great attention to the
consideration of the draft resolution. I would also like to
thank them for their important contributions and the
excellent cooperation and willingness they demonstrated
throughout the consultations.
In adopting this draft resolution by consensus, as
I encourage delegations to do, you will enable our
respective leaders and States to be better prepared for
the high-level plenary meeting of September 2005.
May I take it that the General Assembly decides
to adopt draft resolution A/59/L.60, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/59/L.60, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 59/291).
The President (spoke in French): I call now on
delegations wishing to explain their positions on the
resolution just adopted.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Mr. President, first, we
would like to thank you for your efforts in steering
draft resolution A/59/L.60 towards adoption by
consensus. We congratulate you on those efforts and
trust that the consensus that we have reached on this
resolution will be a strong precedent for our continuing
to use the practice of achieving decisions by consensus
in the process on which we are embarked to prepare for
the September summit. I would also like to recognize

A/59/PV.92

the contributions and hard work of your two facilitators
and to thank them for their cooperation.
The Pakistan delegation has consistently held that
it is essential to have full clarity about the process, the
outcome and the decision-making related to the
September high-level event. It was for that purpose that
we suggested certain changes to the text as it was
originally drafted.
First, with regard to the objectives and priorities
of the September high-level event, the first preambular
paragraph of the resolution just adopted recalls
resolution 58/291. We must all remember that in that
resolution — specifically, in its paragraph 2 — we set
out the objectives of convening the high-level event.
By paragraph 2 of resolution 58/291 of 6 May 2004,
the General Assembly decided that the major event
would
“undertake a comprehensive review of the
progress made in the fulfilment of all the
commitments contained in the United Nations
Millennium
Declaration,
including
the
internationally agreed development goals and the
global partnership required for their achievement,
and of the progress made in the integrated and
coordinated implementation, at the national,
regional and international levels, of the outcomes
and commitments of the major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic, social
and related fields, on the basis of a
comprehensive report to be submitted by the
Secretary-General”.
My delegation and, I am sure, a large number of
other delegations, will continue to be guided by that
provision, which clearly affirmed the priority to be
accorded to development at the forthcoming high-level
event.
Secondly, with regard to the process, this is the
second, very crucial, phase of the preparatory process
for the high-level event in September. The membership
has received three key inputs in the shape of the Highlevel Panel report (A/59/565), the Millennium Project
report (A/59/727) and the Secretary-General’s report
(A/59/2005). But the process is now entirely an
intergovernmental one. We believe that the outcome
document should be based primarily on the inputs and
proposals presented by Member States. During the
current process, Member States will thus be presenting
their views and inputs, and we hope that those inputs

will become the basis for the broadest possible
agreement, to which the resolution refers. We are
grateful that the words “taking into account the views
of Member States” have been added at the end of
operative paragraph 11 in order to affirm the
intergovernmental nature of the process.
Thirdly, with regard to decision-making, it is also
clear to my delegation that we will have to achieve the
broadest possible agreement. We are seeking a new
consensus for the United Nations, and that new
consensus must be achieved by consensus. We
therefore welcome the consensus adoption of the
resolution. We have joined the consensus because we
believe in consensus.
Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like, first of all, to thank you,
Mr. President, for introducing the new version of the
resolution on preparation for and organization of the
high-level meeting of the General Assembly. We note
that the text incorporates new elements, some of which
respond to the concerns expressed by some
delegations. We believe, therefore, that it constitutes an
improved version of the initial draft text that was
submitted to us for consideration.
Yesterday afternoon, shortly after we received a
copy of the new draft text, the Cuban delegation sent to
your Office a note containing number of amendments
to it. We did so with a view to improving the draft and
in the interests of coming up with language that would
make it possible for the important September event to
be held in a more open and inclusive format. It was our
intention to present those amendments today for the
consideration of other delegations and to have an open
and transparent discussion about them. However, in
response to a specific request from your Office, Sir, we
decided not to submit those amendments. Through that
gesture, Cuba is once again showing its respect for you
and for what you represent, as well as demonstrating
its great flexibility in the interests of the swift adoption
of the resolution with a view to an immediate
substantive discussion of the items that will be
addressed by Member States during the September
event.
In conclusion, my delegation hopes that,
henceforth, and in accordance with the mandate of the
resolution, there will be genuine, open, inclusive and
transparent consultations with all Member States on all

3

A/59/PV.92

important issues relating to the high-level plenary
meeting.

September summit will achieve a far-reaching and
balanced outcome.

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Cuba for his understanding.

Mr. Mirafzal (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Mr. President, we wish to thank you and your
facilitators for the efforts you have made in preparing
for and conducting the negotiations on this procedural
resolution.

Mr. Hoscheit (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): The
European Union, on whose behalf I am taking the floor,
welcomes the adoption of the resolution on preparation
for and organization of the September summit. We would
like to express to you, Mr. President, and to the
facilitators — the representatives of Nicaragua and of
Norway — our sincere gratitude for their tireless work,
and that of Member States, which enabled us to arrive, in
a timely manner, at a draft text that we were able to adopt
today by consensus.
The European Union fully supports the approach
that you, Mr. President, have suggested. The adoption
of the resolution today will enable us to concentrate
fully on negotiations on issues of substance, beginning
on Tuesday next, under your leadership and with the
guidance of the facilitators.
As resolution 58/291 prescribes — and as recalled
in subparagraph (f) of the second preambular paragraph
of the President’s draft circulated on 1 April — the
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General of
21 March (A/59/2005), which the European Union would
like once again to welcome, provides the basis for our
discussion of very important issues, which have been
clustered thematically in that report.
The European Union also welcomes the decision
to open the summit to representatives of nongovernmental organizations, civil society organizations
and the private sector, as was done in 2000 during the
Millennium Summit. During consultations on the draft
resolution, we took the opportunity to express
emphatically, on several occasions, our preference for
the greatest possible participation of such actors in the
various segments of the September summit. In this
respect, we would like to reaffirm the principle of the
participation of non-governmental organizations, civil
society organizations and the private sector in the
summit’s plenary meetings. We are fully confident that
you, Mr. President, will facilitate such participation.
You can rest assured, Sir, that you, the
facilitators, groups of States and individual States will
continue to find the European Union an attentive
participant that is firmly committed to ensuring that the

4

My delegation joined the consensus on the
resolution just adopted by the General Assembly on the
understanding that this resolution is of a procedural
nature and in no way affects or addresses matters of a
substantive nature. Therefore, in our view, this
resolution does not refer explicitly or implicitly to the
content or the substance of the report of the SecretaryGeneral entitled “In larger freedom: towards
development, security and human rights for all”.
The President (spoke in French): By deciding to
adopt this resolution by consensus, the General
Assembly has just confirmed its staunch determination
to move forward on the path towards the holding of the
high-level plenary meeting in September 2005.
We now know the practical organizational
modalities and the general frame of reference for the
high-level plenary meeting, at which our leaders will
meet with a view to reaching agreement on the
important decisions they will have to take in order to
strengthen our Organization and to endeavour better to
respond to the aspirations of our respective peoples for
a more decent and a safer life, with full enjoyment of
their freedom and their dignity.
We thus have a good basis for work, since we
have now agreed, in accordance with resolution
58/291, to conduct our consultations on the basis of the
report of the Secretary-General.
Of course, it is the views of Member States that
will enable us to reach the broadest possible agreement
on all major issues to which solutions must be found.
That is obvious.
We must now prepare to continue our substantive
consultations as of 19 April. Towards that end, I
addressed a letter to members yesterday, Thursday,
14 April, in which I specified both the timetable and
the general guidelines for the informal thematic
consultations. The 10 facilitators who will be
conducting these consultations are completely
available to respond to members’ concerns, and, of

A/59/PV.92

course, members should not hesitate to contact me
directly whenever necessary.

inclusive manner, be it be in the framework of
consultations in plenary, or in informal consultations.

Lastly, I should like once again to recall the
fundamental principle that has always guided us and
which will continue to guide my work — that of
conducting our consultations in a transparent, open and

The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda items 45 and 55.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

5
