S/PV.6985

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6985th meeting

Tuesday, 25 June 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Kadangha-Bariki
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2013/338)

13-37256 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1337256*

S/PV.6985

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

concluded preliminary agreement; preparations for
the elections; and the humanitarian and human rights
situations. Mr. Ladsous will focus more specifically on
strategic and operational issues related to the transition,
and Ms. Haq on the complex issue of support to the
Mission.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2013/338)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Mali to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome the presence
at the Council table of His Excellency Mr. Tiéman
Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of the Republic of Mali.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Albert Koenders, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali and
Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali; Mr. Hervé Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
and Ms. Amira Haq, Under-Secretary-General for Field
Support, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Koenders,
who is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Bamako.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/338, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
I now give the floor to Mr. Koenders.
Mr. Koenders (spoke in French): It is an honour and
a pleasure for me to address the Security Council from
Bamako in my new capacity as Special Representative
of the Secretary General for Mali. The report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali, which is
before the Council in document S/2013/338, follows
up on resolution 2100 (2013) of 25 April, establishing
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
I wish to offer an overview of the situation on
the ground in my briefing, focusing on four main
themes: the security situation; the mediation process
and national reconciliation, including the recently

2

The security situation has gradually improved as
a result of the military operations launched in January
by the Malian army and France against extremist
groups in northern Mali. Most large cities in the north
have been taken. Since these large-scale operations,
the forces of Operation Serval and the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA) have
undertaken tactical operations. There have been no
major clashes. Since these operations, some extremist
elements have joined the population and others have
left the country. The major fighting has stopped and
the security situation in Timbuktu and Gao is gradually
returning to normal, thanks to the presence of AFISMA
and Operation Serval alongside the Malian forces. The
incidents recorded in these areas recently should be seen
as isolated acts of banditry. Furthermore, the extremist
groups seem to be avoiding direct confrontation with
the Malian army and its allies. However, scattered
operations continue, leading to the discovery of several
weapons caches.
Despite this improvement in the security situation,
the situation remains complex and fragile. We have
reported clashes between the Mouvement national pour
la libération de l’Azawad (MNLA) and various armed
groups in the north — essentially the Mouvement arabe
de l’Azawad, the Mouvement pour l’unicité et le jihad
en Afrique de l’Ouest and other armed Tuareg and
Arab elements. Several reasons have been behind the
clashes, including fighting for control of some routes
used for drug trafficking and other goods, as well as
acts of revenge for the atrocities committed against
civilians during the occupation. In addition, another
armed Tuareg movement — the Haut Conseil de
l’Azawad — has been established as a coalition of the
Mouvement islamique de l’Azawad and elements of the
MNLA.
As for the region of Kidal, the MNLA has maintained
control of the city of Kidal and its surroundings and
strengthened its presence in some localities. Meanwhile,
the Malian army has reinforced its presence in Gao.
On 4 June, the Malian army launched an attack on the
MNLA, taking the town of Anefis, which it holds to
this day.

13-37256

S/PV.6985

As the threat of asymmetric actions and violent
clashes remains signficant, the protection of civilians
and the security of United Nations personnel are
among my main concerns as we lay the groundwork for
MINUSMA in Bamako and the regions of the north. In
this fragile security situation, regional and international
partners, including the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
European Union and the United Nations have stepped
up their efforts to convince the Government of Mali and
the MNLA to resume dialogue under the auspices of
the ECOWAS mediator and his team in Ouagadougou,
Burkina Faso.
(spoke in English)
In that context, I am happy to report that on 18 June
the transitional Government of Mali and armed groups
in the northern regions, particularly the MNLA and
the Haut Conseil de l’Azawad signed a preliminary
agreement on the presidential elections and inclusive
negotiations. The Mouvement arabe de 1’Azawad and
the popular front officially adhered to the preliminary
agreement on the same day. I signed as a witness on
behalf of the United Nations.
The preliminary agreement is, in my view, an
important first step towards the full restoration of
constitutional order and territorial integrity. It paves
the way for the holding of elections nationwide,
including in Kidal, and subsequent dialogue with
elected officials on governance, justice, security sector
reform and reconciliation issues. From 1 July onwards,
if the Council so agrees, the MINUSMA Force
Commander will chair the established Joint Technical
Security Commission, which has started overseeing the
implementation of the ceasefire in Kidal. This includes
the process of cantonment as a first step in the process
of disarmament and demobilization, the return to Kidal
of the Malian armed forces with Serval and AFISMA,
and the return of the administration.
For my part, I will chair on behalf of the United
Nations the international commission that will monitor
and oversee the implementation of the agreement. An
international commission of inquiry will also have
to be established to investigate war crimes, crimes
against humanity, crimes of genocide, crimes of sexual
violence, drug trafficking and other serious violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
throughout the territory of Mali.

Although a first and preliminary step, the agreement
is critical, not only because of the forthcoming elections,
but also because it commits the parties to a postelectoral dialogue. If it is to be successful, the dialogue
will need to be comprehensive and inclusive, and tackle
the root causes of the recurrent crises in Mali.
Some limited progress was also registered on the
broader political front. The long-awaited National
Commission for Dialogue and Reconciliation was
established on 25 April and its 33 members, including
its President and two Vice -Presidents, were appointed.
The Commission came under some criticism for the
perceived lack of transparency and inclusiveness in
the selection of its members. Its mandate and scope
were also deemed by many as too broad. However,
people generally welcomed its establishment
and look forward to the start of its activities if it
addresses long-standing issues of truth and impunity.
The Commission nonetheless faces technical and
logistical challenges. The international community
on the ground is determined to provide the necessary
support and resources, and has established for this
purpose a coordination mechanism at the request of the
Commission and led by MINUSMA.
Meanwhile, importantly for the Council,
preparations are under way for the elections, starting
with the presidential polls on 28 July. At the request
of the Government, MINUSMA is supporting the
deployment of sensitive and non-sensitive electoral
materials to the northern regions as we speak. These
include the national identification card — known
as NINA cards — which will be the sole cards
allowing individuals to vote. Meanwhile, coordination
mechanisms have been established to enhance joint
United Nations support to the elections as the Mission
continues to deploy.
Major challenges remain, including the need to
maintain the broad political consensus on technical
aspects of the elections, the timely delivery of electoral
materials, and issues of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and refugees. One of the challenges is to ensure
that IDPs can retrieve their NINA cards so they can
vote in their current places of residence. Concerning
the participation of refugees, on 14 June a Government
delegation visited Burkina Faso, Mauritania and Niger to
conduct a census of refugees with a view to identifying
potential voters and discuss modalities for setting up
polling stations in the respective countries. The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,

13-372563

S/PV.6985

the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
and the International Organization for Migration are
working closely with the Government in this regard.
Concerning the provision of security throughout the
electoral period, the Government has requested the
support of MINUSMA, particularly for the northern
regions. We are currently assessing the needs in the
context of our capabilities.
Humanitarian needs in Mali remain of concern
to me. About 3.5 million people are considered food
insecure, with 1.4 million of them in need of immediate
food assistance and at least one in five households
in the three northern regions facing a severe food
shortage. Some 660,000 children under the age of five
remain at risk of acute malnutrition. Mali, north and
south combined, has the third highest child mortality
rate worldwide, with 176 deaths per 1,000 live births.
Humanitarian activities in the northern regions are
being carried out where possible in spite of the security
challenges and the coming rainy season, which will to a
certain extent limit the delivery of assistance. Although
most of the administration has returned to the Gao and
Timbuktu regions, the delivery of services remains a
very serious challenge. Some schools have reopened in
those regions, but in Kidal the administration has yet to
deploy and no schools are functioning. It is estimated
that more than 100,000 children still have no access
to education in the north. Access to health care also
remains limited. As of 18 June, the consolidated appeal
process for Mali for 2013 was 32-per cent funded,
having raised $133 million. In my view, additional
resources are urgently needed to address the basic
needs of millions of Malians and pave the way for early
recovery, which will be critical to gaining and retaining
the trust and support of the people.
The human rights situation remains precarious. I
have sent human rights teams to Gao, Gossi, Timbuktu
and Kidal. They have registered violations committed
by all parties. These include disappearances,
extrajudicial executions, ill-treatment, looting of
private property, illegal arrests and arbitrary detention,
as well as impunity, which is exacerbated by ethnic
tensions between different communities. In addition,
there is a severe shortage in the delivery of basic
services such as clean water, health care and education,
which are our top priorities. Following the organization
of the national colloquium on transitional justice,
discussions are taking place as we speak in Bamako on
transitional justice processes, entailing truth-seeking,

4

investigations, the prosecution of perpetrators and
reparations, with the support of UNDP and MINUSMA.
Meanwhile, the Mission continues to mainstream
gender issues throughout its activities. In cooperation
with UN-Women and the Ministry of Women’s Affairs,
it is supporting the national strategy for women’s
participation in the elections, as well as advocacy
towards the allocation of a women’s quota in the electoral
process. Also, the Mission is setting up mechanisms to
address and prevent conflict-related sexual violence. In
turn, these mechanisms will pave the way to support
for the Government in the establishment of institutional
structures to address sexual and gender-based violence
in the framework of security sector reform.
With regard to support for cultural preservation,
UNESCO and the Government of Mali have recently
jointly assessed the damage to Timbuktu’s cultural
heritage, including the situation of ancient manuscripts.
A total of 14 of Timbuktu’s mausoleums, including
those that are part of the UNESCO World Heritage
sites, have been totally destroyed, along with two others
at the Djingareyber Mosque. The emblematic El Farouk
monument at the entrance to the city was also razed.
An estimated 4,203 manuscripts from the Ahmed
Baba research centre were lost, while another 300,000
that had been pre-emptively removed — mainly to
Bamako — and are in urgent need of conservation.
On the basis of this early assessment, MINUSMA and
UNESCO will join hands, as requested by the Security
Council, in efforts to support the safeguarding of
Malian cultural and historical heritage, which has been
seriously affected by the armed conflict in northern
Mali.
The situation in Mali has, as Council members
know, broad regional and international repercussions.
The recent attacks in Niger are a stark reminder of the
magnitude of the problems facing the Sahel region.
As international attention is focused on Mali, terrorist
and other criminal groups will continue to shift their
operations to neighbouring countries as a result of
the porous and extremely weak border management
control systems in place. Effectively addressing the
challenges facing the Sahel region will require time
and very concerted efforts. The upcoming meeting
of the Support and Follow-up Group on Mali on
1 July in Bamako and the presentation of the United
Nations integrated strategy to the Council tomorrow
will provide good opportunities to further highlight

13-37256

S/PV.6985

the transnational nature of threats and the need for a
coherent and coordinated approach in tackling them.

us and contribute critical and immediate resources,
military and police personnel, and key enablers.

As we focus on the wider region, we also need to
acknowledge that long-term support will be required.
In Mali, the root causes of the crises will need to be
addressed, as noted above, including bad governance,
corruption, cleavages within and between regions and
groups, a sense of political exclusion on the part of a
new generation, poverty and the lack of security sector
reform. Any solution can only be Malian in nature, and
accompanied by the international community. For that
to happen, broad based dialogue is needed, thoroughly
analysing the complex causes of the crisis that has
shocked so many Malians, in order to prevent it from
happening again.

In closing, allow me to thank the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States and
other international partners for their commitment to
addressing the Malian crisis. I particularly would like
to extend my gratitude to the African Union Special
Representative for Mali and Head of AFISMA, former
President Pierre Buyoya, for his personal role and
involvement in ongoing stabilization efforts. Also,
I would like to commend AFISMA troops for their
courage and dedication to the cause of peace and
stability in Mali and reiterate my condolences to the
bereaved families of their fallen brothers in arms.

The international community is showing
great solidarity, and I urge all Malians to seize
this opportunity to steer their country in the right
direction. In this regard, I welcome the preliminary
agreement and call on the parties to support its full
implementation in the spirit of national cohesion and
long-lasting peace. Further, I invite the political class
to reach a firm consensus on the electoral process, in
spite of anticipated risks, and encourage all Malians
to ensure an inclusive non-violent electoral and postelectoral period. Supporting the transitional authorities
in providing an environment conducive to the
holding of peaceful and transparent elections and the
implementation of the preliminary agreement will be a
key focus of my efforts in the weeks to come.
The robust mandate the Council has given us
includes the stabilization of key population centres
and the protection of civilians. It underlines the need
to emphasize a political solution to the fundamental
problems of the country, including human rights,
the restoration of State authority and the rule of law
sectors. It underlines, if agreed, the need to deploy a
peacekeeping operation in a context of asymmetric
threats that will be taken very seriously.
At present, naturally, our resources are still limited.
We are immediately called to assist in two key areas —
the implementation of the preliminary accord and the
upcoming elections — that constitute preliminary steps
towards the next important phase. The success of these
activities will depend on key confidence-building and
assistance to put Mali on the path of stability. I take this
opportunity to call on Member States to fully support

The President: I thank Mr. Koenders for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Hervé Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to address the
Security Council at this undoubtedly decisive juncture
in our collective involvement in Mali. Indeed, if the
Council decides today that the security situation
prevailing in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
areas of responsibility allow for a transfer of authority
from the African-led International Support Mission in
Mali (AFISMA) to MINUSMA on 1 July, MINUSMA
will eventually become the third largest United Nations
peacekeeping operation. MINUSMA will operate
under robust rules of engagement. Its military and
police forces will absorb the majority of the AFISMA
forces. There will be a grace period of four months
to allow military and police units to strengthen their
contributions and incorporate the capabilities requested
by the United Nations in terms of staffing, training
and equipment. The support of international partners
will be very important in that regard. I would note
that the United Nations continues to receive additional
commitments from potential contributors, enabling us
to reach the maximal authorized personnel levels and
thus respond to the Mission’s needs. But we still face
critical gaps, especially with regard to enablers and
force multipliers.
MINUSMA will therefore play a key role in the
stabilization of Mali and the protection of its citizens
threatened by insecurity in the north of the country.
Political engagement with Malian actors in order to
promote dialogue and reconciliation between and

13-372565

S/PV.6985

among communities remains the cornerstone of our
involvement, as was the case last week during the recent
negotiations in Ouagadougou. MINUSMA will also be
very active in promoting human rights and support for
the restoration of the authority of the State, including
in the areas of justice and strengthening the rule of law.
MINUSMA troops and police officers will help create
a safe environment that is conducive to stabilization
by deploying from major cities in northern Mali. They
will conduct patrols, both alone and together with the
Malian defence and security forces. MINUSMA troops
will be mobile and will conduct operations across
a wide area on the basis of integrated analysis and
information-sharing with partners. A limited presence
will be maintained in Bamako, and all MINUSMA
operations will take into account the need to minimize
the risk to civilians.
In preparation for the transition, AFISMA
has continued to gradually assume operational
responsibility for several areas in northern Mali,
as Operation Serval has begun to draw down. As of
today, 25 June, the strength of AFISMA stands at
6,148 troops, with personnel deployed in the towns and
regions of Timbuktu, Gao, Ménaka, Tessalit, Aguelhok,
Douentza, Diabaly and now Kidal.
Since its establishment on 25 April, MINUSMA
has begun to implement its mandate in terms of political
good offices, electoral support, human rights and, in
close cooperation with United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes, support for the restoration of State
authority. The MINUSMA military component will be
built up in the coming months. On 1 July, MINUSMA
will have an initial operational capability, including in
the force headquarters. The Force Commander arrived
in Mali today and the Deputy Force Commander
deployed last week. The two sector headquarters in Gao
and Timbuktu will also be operational soon, with staff
for all headquarters to be further and quickly built up
over the next two months. The two Sector Commanders
have been recruited and will deploy shortly. By the end
of July, we expect 100 staff officers to be on the ground
and all headquarters to be fully staffed by the end of
August. I can therefore state that we anticipate reaching
full operational capability by 31 December.
I would note that some have raised concerns about
the transition of the AFISMA Chadian troops as Blue
Helmets, given Chad’s listing by the Secretary-General
among the countries that have allowed child recruitment
in their armed forces. Clearly, the Government of Chad

6

will need to comply with and implement the five shortterm measures of its action plan to end the recruitment of
child soldiers within the four-month grace period I just
mentioned, as agreed with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. Let me assure the Council that the United
Nations is making every effort to screen the Chadian
contingent that is to be re-hatted and ensure that no
troops under 18 are among them, as well as enhance
our efforts on training on child protection issues.
With respect to the police, we intend to re-hat
the three formed police units currently deployed with
AFISMA in Bamako, Gao and Timbuktu on 1 July,
if the Council so decides. Assessments of those units
are currently being conducted. Twenty additional
individual police officers from AFISMA will also be
re-hatted, while 10 new police officers are expected
on the ground by 1 July. Two additional formed police
units and 50 individual police officers are expected to
be deployed in August.
Training will play a key role in managing the
transition in Mali from AFISMA to MINUSMA. We
are deploying a mobile team to Mali today to conduct
initial training for AFISMA personnel to undergo the
transition to MINUSMA. Its immediate focus will
be on the officer ranks, so as to ensure that the most
important messages regarding the mandate, as well as
the posture, attitude and conduct of the United Nations
force, reach the troops deployed throughout the country.
The majority of our civilian, police and military
staff will be in the north. We are currently looking at
establishing civilian field offices in Timbuktu and Gao
and, very quickly, a small presence in Kidal to support
the implementation of the preliminary agreement.
We will also maintain a military presence in the key
population centres, defined for the purposes of the
mandate as Douentza and Diabaly; the key cities of
Timbuktu, Gao and Kidal; and the towns of Ménaka
and Tessalit. Our emphasis will be on a mobile force
able to project influence across the wide geographical
areas in the north.
I would reiterate that we continue to seek pledges for
important outstanding capabilities, including mediumutility helicopters, armed helicopters, intelligence,
information operations and special forces. We are
counting more than ever before on the continued support
of both our traditional and our new troop-contributing
countries to help us fill those critical shortfalls.

13-37256

S/PV.6985

I think that the activities that we are conducting
in Mali are an excellent example of the unique
nature of United Nations peacekeeping as a
political-military endeavour. Under the leadership of
Special Representative Albert Koenders, whose role
in the Mission I commend, the Mission has played a
key role alongside the Economic Community of West
African States and the African Union in the political
negotiations leading to the preliminary agreement on
Kidal. MINUSMA will now have critical and immediate
responsibilities to support the implementation of the
preliminary agreement — signed, as the Council is
aware, on 18 June — particularly with regard to the
ceasefire provisions.
As outlined by Mr. Koenders, those include
chairing the commission that will monitor the ceasefire,
accompanying the return of the Malian army and
administration to Kidal, and overseeing the cantonment
of armed groups. The posture and capacities of future
MINUSMA forces will be critical to the success of
that process. The rapid deployment of AFISMA troops
to Kidal town will be also be key to ensuring that the
process is off to a good start, and I am pleased to report
that an AFISMA contingent was deployed to Kidal over
the weekend for that purpose.
Just over four weeks remain until the first round
of the presidential elections. As experience in other
countries has taught us, a poorly managed electoral
process could further aggravate instability. To that end,
MINUSMA will continue to actively support all efforts
to develop consensus among stakeholders on the rules
of the game and a shared commitment to accepting the
outcome of the elections.
Throughout the process, MINUSMA will provide
security, technical and logistical support, to the extent
possible, given the early stages of its deployment. We
are closely looking at ways to strengthen the Mission’s
capabilities in those areas. To that end, for example, we
are bringing additional resources from neighbouring
countries under existing arrangements for inter-mission
cooperation. My colleague Ms. Haq will elaborate
further on the critical role of inter-mission cooperation
in the success of our efforts in Mali. We will need
agreement from contributing countries to realize the
full potential of that important tool.
As we embark on this ambitious new chapter
in the history of peacekeeping, it is worth taking a
moment to contemplate the magnitude of the challenge

before us. Past instances of failure, or partial failure,
we know have had lasting implications for United
Nations peacekeeping doctrine and practice and, most
importantly, for civilians and peacekeepers on the
ground. With that in mind, we must be aware that we
are facing new and unique challenges.
First, the United Nations is deploying a
peacekeeping operation in a geopolitical context
characterized by asymmetrical threats not previously
encountered in a United Nations peacekeeping
environment. MINUSMA has a mandate to use all
necessary means to ensure the implementation of many
elements of its mandate, including taking active steps
to deter and prevent the return of armed elements to
key population centres. While that does not describe
a peace-enforcement or counter-terrorism role, which
will be undertaken by others who have capacities
beyond the scope of and means of the United Nations
mandate and capabilities, it will require the United
Nations to be as robust as possible in implementing that
mandate in an environment characterized by threats.
However, with respect to circumstances where the
Mission might be under imminent and serious threat,
we are finalizing a technical arrangement with France
that will define the modalities to be used by the United
Nations and by France for the provision of support by
the latter to MINUSMA.
Secondly, in spite of the progress that I outlined
earlier, three significant challenges remain for the
transition, under the best conditions possible, from
AFISMA to MINUSMA. Our central priority will
be to maintain seamless continuity between the two
operations so as to preserve the security gains made
so far and avoid creating any security vacuums while
supporting elections and the ceasefire agreement. An
initial transition period of six months will see the
buildup of all of our additional military capacities and
the concomitant extension of the Mission’s operations.
Thirdly, the realities on the ground, the harsh
climate, the very limited infrastructure and the vast
size of the geographic area of responsibility that we will
have will create unique challenges for the sustainment
and support of the Mission. The generation of logistical
enablers will be an absolute initial priority to enable
the establishment and sustainment of the Mission in
northern Mali. My colleague Ms. Haq will elaborate on
those efforts in greater detail.

13-372567

S/PV.6985

However, we must be realistic and accept that not
all of those capabilities and means will be immediately
available. The deployment of mission components must
also take account of such things as improved security
conditions and the establishment of infrastructure. We
will require patience, concerted support and significant
investments to ensure that the gains made so far are
protected, strengthen stability in Mali and make every
effort to guard against the spread of insecurity to the
surrounding region.
I would like to conclude by thanking all the
members of the Council for their contributions and
support as we prepare to launch the newest operation.
Our ongoing joint efforts in Mali remind us that
peacekeeping is truly a global partnership. We will
build on the success of France’s Operation Serval and,
with the support of the Council and our partners in the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), who have deployed their
forces under AFISMA, we will continue to engage
Malian actors on a political resolution to the conflict. I
would also like to take this opportunity to express our
deep appreciation to the African Union and ECOWAS
for all of their efforts. I also thank the brave women
and men of AFISMA for the exemplary work they have
done to support the restoration of stability in Mali since
the beginning of 2013. Moreover, our development
partners, including the World Bank, bilateral donors
and the specialized agencies of the United Nations, will
also continue to have a critical role to play to make the
new peace in Mali sustainable.

seem to be going in the opposite direction in terms of
the oral briefings from the Secretariat to the Council.
I now give the floor to Ms. Haq.
Ms. Haq: Thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Council on mission-support
efforts in Mali.
The immediate priority of the Department of
Field Support is to establish the initial operational
capability of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
as soon as possible. My colleague, Hervé Ladsous,
has set the substantive compass according to which
mission-support efforts in MINUSMA are guided. In
my briefing to the Council today, I will explain how,
despite formidable constraints, we are on track to
meeting requirements and how we plan to satisfy the
operational needs of MINUSMA as best we can from
the transition on 1 July and onwards.
MINUSMA mission support is simultaneously
engaged in two other complex endeavours, namely,
preparations for the presidential elections, the first
round of which will take place on 28 July, and followup to the interim agreement signed in Ouagadougou
last week. That would be a formidable triple challenge
in any context, but it is complicated by several features
of the operating environment in Mali, and specifically
in the northern part of the country.

The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.

Our efforts to set up the Mission currently focus
on several priorities, including the provision of rations
for troops, fuel for vehicles and premises for work
and living. We are confident that our systems for the
distribution of rations and water after 1 July will meet the
needs of MINUSMA troops. We still face some critical
information gaps with regard to fuel, but we anticipate
that the MINUSMA fuel-distribution capacity will be
operational by 1 July. With regard to the premises for
the Mission, we are making arrangements to establish
the various force and sector headquarters in Bamako
and the north, starting with Gao and Timbuktu. A
mission presence in Kidal will be established in due
course.

I recognize that we are discussing the launch of
an important new mission, but maybe this is the time
to remind Secretariat briefers that they should limit
their remarks to 15 minutes. We have made some good
progress in recent months in restricting the size of the
written reports from the Secretary-General, but we

In support of the elections, we have been involved
in transporting election materials to Gao and Timbuktu.
The agreement signed by the Government of Mali
and representatives of the Mouvement national pour
la libération de l’Azawad last week in Ouagadougou
has significant implications for MINUSMA mission

As the United Nations assumes command of
operations in Mali, we now call on our other partners to
join this campaign for peace, justice and reconciliation.
As I said earlier, that will be a challenge that requires
efforts by all stakeholders — first and foremost
the Malians themselves, but also the international
community, and especially the countries of the Sahel
region. Lastly, it will be a challenge for the entire
Organization. I am confident that we will meet it
through our united efforts.

8

13-37256

S/PV.6985

support. In particular, MINUSMA is expected to
support and supervise the cantonment of combatants
in one of the most challenging environments in the
country, namely, Kidal.
MINUSMA is rightly considered to be one of
the most logistically challenging missions the United
Nations has ever launched. That is so for several
reasons.
First, the climatic conditions in northern Mali,
where most of our operations will be located, are
harsh, to put it mildly. Sixty-five per cent of Mali’s
landmass, which is twice the size of France, is desert
or semi-desert. The temperature in Timbuktu, which
will be the sector-west headquarters for MINUSMA,
regularly reaches 48˚C, or 120˚F. Last week, our team
visited Kidal when the afternoon temperature there
reached 52˚C, or 125˚F. There is no functioning power
grid in Gao. Our energy needs there, as in Timbuktu
and Kidal, will therefore be met through mobile
power generators. At such temperatures, even highcapacity generators will be put to the test. Indeed, all
information and communication technology, vehicles,
refrigeration and tentage ultimately to be used in Mali
will be exposed to climatic conditions that accelerate
their decay. We already know that certain technological
options are out of the question. For example, we are
unable to deploy our mobile communication system to
Kidal because its sensitive components will melt.
Under those extreme conditions, it comes as little
surprise that water availability is limited, particularly
in the arid north, where our operations will be
concentrated. An initial engineering assessment by
the Mission has already confirmed that in Kidal the
Mission will jeopardize local water supply by tapping
into local reservoirs. Therefore, conscious of the
explicit request in resolution 2100 (2013) to manage
the Mission’s environmental impact carefully, we are
looking into other technologies that would allow us to
produce water from air humidity.
True operational capability means that MINUSMA
must be able to provide a broad range of essential
aviation services: ground services such as cargo
handling, fire fighting and fuel delivery and storage;
the ability to carry out search and rescue missions;
and airfield and helicopter landing-site construction
and renovation. Given the long distances that must be
traversed in Mali, each and every one of those services
must be in place, intact and functioning. Those are also

highly technical and capital-intensive endeavours that
take time to establish from scratch.
The airfields in northern Mali are unable to service
large aircraft. The airstrips allow for only small to
medium aircraft, which carry limited passengers and
cargo. For the time being, therefore, we will need to
rely on military helicopters for an unusually large
share of air transport requirements. We are eagerly
awaiting confirmation from various Member States
as to the provision of helicopters for the Mission.
The central importance of medical support to United
Nations personnel is recognized by all. We all agree
that we must ensure casualty evacuation and medical
evacuation capability. In northern Mali that translates
directly into more helicopters.
Of course, under those circumstances, road
transport becomes all the more important, but there
are challenges in that regard as well. Last week, when
trying to determine the most feasible way to transport
some computers, a satellite dish and some generators to
the north, we discovered that there was no way for the
equipment to arrive safely by road.
The problem is twofold. First, the road infrastructure
in the north is spotty, often consisting of little more
than sand over long stretches. Secondly, with respect
to the security situation, even with the agreement with
the Mouvement national pour la libération de l’Azawad
(MNLA) in Kidal, there are still armed groups that have
sworn to oppose and attack the United Nations at every
opportunity. We need only recall the concerns raised
by the suicide-bomb-making workshop discovered by
French forces two weeks ago just a few miles outside
of Gao, or the several thousand pounds of fertilizer,
uniforms and uniform-making equipment that was
seized.
We have deployed some of our most experienced
mission-support colleagues to lead the effort in
Bamako — our “A-team”. These are colleagues with
experience in starting up and sustaining some of the
most challenging missions of the past 30 years. If
anyone can get this done, they can, and I am confident
that they will.
Others are chipping in. Because of the shortage of
aircraft, the United Nations Mission in Liberia has lent
its B200 aircraft to meet its short-term needs. Because
of the time it would normally take to procure critical
items, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
has made reserve equipment available for immediate

13-372569

S/PV.6985

delivery. The United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
(UNOCI) has made available air assets, equipment and
a range of back-office support functions, including
human resources, finance and procurement staff. For
its part, the Global Service Centre has drawn from
the strategic deployment stocks in Brindisi to provide
vehicles, communications equipment and security
material for airlifting to Bamako.
The Global Field Support Strategy (GFSS)
articulates a vision wherein the United Nations provides
faster, higher-quality support for a win-win situation
that benefits troops, civilian staff and the United
Nations system as a whole. In sum, due to exigency as
well as the upholding of GFSS principles, inter-mission
cooperation, shared services and a smaller footprint
with less risk to staff all are central features of the
MINUSMA start-up and will remain central features
throughout the life of the Mission.
Together with Hervé Ladsous and Jeff Feltman, we
have instructed all peacekeeping and special political
missions to expedite the release of staff who are needed
in Mali.
The Department of Field Support and other
departments have played an important part in staffing,
financing and establishing the Mission during this
critical start-up phase, with a strong emphasis on
flexibility, pragmatism and timely action. The contract
to rent several major facilities, including the building
that will serve as force headquarters in Bamako, was
prepared with staff from the Department of Field
Support, the Department of Management, ONUCI
and MINUSMA, and was concluded and signed by
all parties concerned within one week of the initial
interface with the landlord in Mali. For the United
Nations, that is lightning speed. While United Nations
rules and regulations are being closely adhered to, the
emphasis on flexibility is leading to positive results
indeed.
In Mali, neither the challenges nor the risks at
hand should be underestimated. Much is beyond our
control. But our efforts to date and the results achieved
by MINUSMA thus far suggest that with commitment,
vision and the continued support of Member States, we
just may be able to beat the odds. When we reduce the
Mission’s environmental footprint by introducing solar
power or technologies for local water production, we
also reduce the costs, and security risks, of an exposed
and vulnerable supply chain. When the Global Service

10

Centre deploys engineering expertise, vehicles and
information-technology equipment from its holdings,
a mission becomes operational more quickly than
it would have otherwise. This is a new way of doing
business. This is a better way of doing peacekeeping.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mali.
Mr. Coulibaly (Mali) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, allow me at the outset, on behalf of
the delegation of Mali, to convey to you our warmest
congratulations on the accession of your country, the
United Kingdom, to the presidency of the Security
Council in June. I wish also to welcome the convening
of this meeting dealing with the consideration of the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali
(S/2013/338).
Exactly two months ago, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2100 (2013)
establishing, under Chapter VII, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA). Since then, a number of new
developments have occurred in the context of the
implementation of the resolution.
Mali welcomes the report under consideration,
which sets out the considerable progress that has
been achieved in the security and political areas,
particularly with regard to the effective implementation
of the transition road map, the development of the
dialogue and reconciliation process, the stepping up
of preparations for the presidential and legislative
elections, improvement in the human rights situation
and the appointment of a Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Mali and of the MINUSMA
Force Commander.
In terms of security, the end of large-scale fighting
around the main urban areas in the north, the routing
of the armed groups and the drastic drop in their
capacity to be spoilers thanks to the joint efforts of
the Malian, African and French armed forces, all are
favourable indicators with respect to the transfer of
competence from AFISMA to MINUSMA within the
time limit set by resolution 2100 (2013). That is why
my delegation fully endorses the appeal made by the
Secretary-General calling on Member States to support
the deployment of MINUSMA.
Politically, I am pleased to recall the fact that
on 18 June last, the Government of Mali, faithful to

13-37256

S/PV.6985

its commitments to the international community in
the quest for a peaceful and lasting solution to the
crisis in Mali, signed the preliminary agreement for
the presidential elections and for inclusive peace
talks in Mali, with the coordination of Malian armed
movements.
Signed in Ouagadougou under the auspices of
President Blaise Compaoré, President of Burkina
Faso and mediator for the Mali crisis, the agreement
represents a decisive step towards the re-establishment
of the territorial integrity of Mali and creates conditions
conducive to the holding of the presidential elections
throughout the national territory.
In essence, the agreement provides for the
immediate cessation of hostilities, the cantonment and
disarmament of armed groups, and the deployment
of administrative and basic services and the Malian
defence and security forces in the Kidal region.
The Coordination des mouvements et forces
patriotiques de résistance and the Mouvement arabe
de l’Azawad have expressed their support for the
agreement.
Along those same lines, the President of the
Republic, Mr. Dioncounda Traoré, held a number
of meetings with political leaders with a view to the
improved implementation of the agreement and the
holding of transparent and peaceful elections.

I cannot end this chapter of my statement without
reiterating the urgent appeal of the Government of Mali
to the Council to ensure the transfer of competencies
from the African-led international support mission
for Mali to the new United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
That transfer must take place quickly so as to ensure
that MINUSMA will be in Mali for as short a period
as possible. The brevity of its mandate will serve as
evidence of its success in Mali. For their leadership
and invaluable contribution to resolving the crisis in
Mali, we would like especially to thank His Excellency
President Alassane Ouattara of Côte d’Ivoire, ECOWAS
Chairman-in-Office; His Excellency Blaise Compaoré
of Burkina Faso, mediator for the Mali crisis; and
His Excellency President Goodluck Ebele Jonathan
of Nigeria, the joint mediator. To the United Nations,
the European Union, France, Chad and its army and to
all our bilateral and multilateral partners, we express
our sincere thanks and deep gratitude for the crucially
essential role they continue to play for the definitive
return of peace and stability in Mali.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion of
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

13-3725611
