47

Resolutions adopted on the reporte of the $.,cond Committee

tern, and its resolutions 2810 (XXVI) of 14 December
1971 and 2970 (XXVII) of 14 December 1972,
Expressing its satisfaction with the efforts directed
towards the implementation of resolutions 2659 (XXV)
and 2970 (XXVII),
Reaffirming its conviction that the United Nations
Volunteers programme has the potential to render
valuable service to the developing countries, particularly the least developed among them,
Reaffirming that the involvement of youth in the
collective efforts of the United Nations system will
enhance international understanding and co-operation
between nations and constitutes an important additional source of trained manpower in the over-all
development efforts in the United Nations system,
Taking note of the co-operation provided by the
volunteer organizations, in particular the International
Secretariat for Volunteer Service, to the United Nations Volunteers programme in its early phase,
Bearing in mind that, after the initial phase, the
programme ultimately should assume the principal
responsibility for its own recruitment,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General and the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme concerning the
United Nations Volunteers programme34 and expresses
its satisfaction with the progress of the programme;
2. Endorses the action plan for the future development of the United Nations Volunteers programme as
outlined in paragraphs 28 to 31 of the report;
3. Requests the Administrator and the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme
to continue to provide the United Nations Volunteers
programme with every possible assistance to ensure its
rapid expansion and progressive integration into projects assisted by the United Nations;
4. Further requests the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme, the specialized agencies and other organizations concerned within the
United Nations system, as well as the resident representatives of the Programme, to continue their efforts
to promote, with the agreement of the countries concerned, the use of United Nations volunteers in projects a~sisted by the United Nations and to co-ordinate
all voluntary activities in those projects with the Coordinator of the United Nations Volunteers programme;
5. Requests the Co-ordinator of the United Nations Volunteers programme to continue to pay special attention to the recruitment of a larger proportion
of volunteers from developing countries;
6. Endorses the measures being taken by the United
Nations Volunteers programme to assume the responsibility for its own recruitment. working directly with
sponsoring agencies and organizations interested in
participating in the programme;
7. Requests Governments, international organizations and individuals to contribute to the Special Voluntary Fund for the United N:.itions Volunteers;
8. Requests the Secretary-General and the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme
to report, through the Governin~ Council of the Programme and the Economic and Social Council, to the
34 E/5342.

General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session on the
progress made in implementing the provisions of the
present resolution.
2199th plenary meeting
13 December 1973
3126 (XXVIII). Reports of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme

The General Assembly
1. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of
the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme on its fifteenth 35 and sixteenth36 sessions;
2. Takes note also of the comments made by delegations during the consideration of these reports.

2199th plenary meeting
13 December 1973

3127 (XXVIII). Multilateral food aid

The General Assembly
Takes note with appreciation of the progres...;;
report37 submitted l:.y the United Nations/F AO
Intergovernmental Committee of the World Food Programme on the implementation of the recommendations contained in its report, issued in 1970, regarding
food aid and related issues during the Second United
Nations Development Decade.

2199th plenary meeting
13 December 1973

3128 (XXVIII). United Nations ConferenceExposition on Human Settlements

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision, in resolution 3001 (XXVII)
of 15 December 1972, to hold a United Nations
Conference~Exposition on Human Settlements,
Noting the importance and priority given to the
problems of human settlements by the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment, held at Stockholm from 5 to 16 June 1972,38
Noting further the full support for the ConferenceExposition expressed by the Committee on Housing,
Building and Planning at its eighth session, held at
Geneva in October 1973, the comments of the Committee regarding the Conference-Exposition and the
offer of its expertise,39
35 Official Records of the Economic and Social Co;mci/,
Fifty-fifth Session. Supplement No. 2 ( E/5256 and Corr. I ! .
:io Ibid., Supplement No. 2A (E/5365/Rev.1).
:i1 WFP/IGC: 23/20. Transmitted to ,the mernliers of \he
Economic and Social Council by a note of the &crctarvGeneral (E/5318/ Add.1).
:is See Report of the United Nations Con.faencc on the
Huma11 F11i-ironme11t (United Nations publication. Sak~ No.
E.73.11.A.14).
~ 9 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifr_v-sixr/1 S, , . :,.,n. Suprlement No. 2 (E/5.1-17).
