S/2020/1286

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 December 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 23 December 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by Judge
Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf, President of the International Court of Justice, as well as
the statements delivered by the representatives of Belgium, China, the Dominican
Republic, Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia, the Niger, the Russian Federation,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam, in
connection with the video-teleconference on “The promotion and strengthening of
the rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security: strengthening
the cooperation between the Security Council and the International Court of Justice”,
convened on Friday, 18 December 2020.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for
this video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted written
statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Austria, Bangladesh, Brazil, Denmark,
Japan, Liechtenstein, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, Peru and Portugal.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the
attached briefing and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Jerry Matthews Matjila
President of the Security Council

20-17735 (E) 301220 280121

*2017735*

S/2020/1286

Annex 1
Statement by the President of the International Court of Justice,
Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, and the Republic of South
Africa on your presidency of the Security Council during the month of December.
I am grateful for the opportunity to brief the Council one more time before the end
of my term as President of the International Court of Justice. Among the various
questions that were suggested for our discussion today, I wish to examine the leading
one: “How can we strengthen the partnership between the Council and the Court to
uphold the rule of law at the international level?”
In my view, that partnership is already strong, but I have no doubt that it
can be further strengthened. Council members may recall that in my most recent
briefing to the Security Council on 28 October, I referred to the fact that the Council
has only once exercised its powers under Article 36, paragraph 3, of the Charter of
the United Nations to recommend that disputing parties settle their dispute through
the Court — in the case of Corfu Channel (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland v. Albania). The Council has also only once requested an advisory
opinion from the International Court of Justice under Article 96 of the Charter — in
the case of Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South Africa in
Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970).
One may therefore ask: how can the partnership be characterized as strong if the
Council has relied so sparingly on its powers under the Charter to make use of the
functions of the Court? My answer is that the vitality of the relationship between the
two principal organs cannot be evaluated by the quantity, but rather by the quality,
of our collaboration.
Let me start with the Corfu Channel case. As some may know, the Corfu
Channel case was the very first case brought before the Court. It could therefore be
said that the Council helped to kick-start the judicial activities of the Court in 1947.
Moreover, the referral of the Corfu Channel case to the Court helped avoid a dispute
that could have degenerated into a full-blown war involving several protagonists,
just a couple of years after the end of the Second World War. That case demonstrated
that the Charter’s system of cooperation between the Court and the Council, which
the drafters had designed in 1945, could produce results. It reinforced faith in the
Charter’s framework vis-à-vis the maintenance of international peace as a whole.
At the international level, the Corfu Channel case also contributed to the rule
of law, as it provided the opportunity for the Court to reaffirm that the “policy of
force” had no place whatsoever in the Charter era. The Court’s judgment also clarified
the scope of some of the most fundamental principles of the contemporary legal
order. For instance, the Court reaffirmed that between independent States, respect
for territorial sovereignty is an essential foundation of international relations. The
Court also laid down the principle of States’ responsibility for illegal acts committed
on their territory, a topic that is still very relevant today, especially in relation to the
fight against terrorism, cyberattacks and transboundary environmental damage.
At the same time, the Corfu Channel case gave the Court the opportunity to
test some of its procedural tools for the first time, when it exercised jurisdiction based
on forum prorogatum, that is to say, consent to the jurisdiction of the Court given
by the respondent after the initiation of proceedings. The basis for that jurisdiction
of the Court, which is not mentioned in its Statute, was later codified in article 38,
paragraph 5, of the Rules of Court. In addition, the Corfu Channel case remains one
of the few instances in which the Court appointed experts, under Article 50 of its
Statute, to provide it with their opinion on issues of a technical or scientific character.
2/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

The same may be said about the 1971 advisory opinion on the Legal
Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South Africa in Namibia
(South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970). As the
Council may recall, that case arose from the decision of the apartheid regime in
South Africa to maintain its presence and authority in the territory of South West
Africa (Namibia) despite the termination of South Africa’s mandate by the General
Assembly. Similar to the Corfu Channel judgment, the Namibia advisory opinion
also contributed significantly to the rule of law at the international level, as it was
the Court’s first opinion to fully take into account the fundamental principle of
equal rights and the self-determination of peoples enshrined in the United Nations
Charter. The Court noted in the advisory opinion, among other things, that an
international instrument has to be interpreted and applied within the framework of
the entire legal system prevailing at the time of the interpretation. It also stated that
“the subsequent development of international law in regard to non-self-governing
territories, as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, made the principle of
self-determination applicable to all of them”, including the territory of South West
Africa (Namibia).
The clarification by the Court of the applicability of the right to selfdetermination to the people of Namibia, together with the identification of the
legal consequences that attached to resolution 276 (1970) of the Security Council,
paved the way for concrete actions that later facilitated the access of Namibia to
its independence.
There are also less visible ways in which the Court and the Council contribute
to each other’s work and thus cooperate with each other — mainly through their
respective contributions to the development of international law and, hence, to the
strengthening of the international rule of law. A few examples here will suffice.
For instance, the Security Council has increasingly used international law as
a parameter to identify threats to international peace and security. That was the case
with resolution 1296 (2000), in which the Council made the link between violations
of international law and threats to international peace and security. Some may recall
that, in that resolution, the Security Council held that
“the deliberate targeting of civilian populations or other protected persons
and the committing of systematic, flagrant and widespread violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law in situations of armed
conflict may constitute a threat to international peace and security”
(resolution 1296 (2000) para. 5).
In addition to using international law as a parameter for determining the
existence of threats to peace, the Council has also used it to address such threats.
For instance, the Security Council expanded the scope of the rules of international
law to non-State actors in order to maintain international peace and security.
The Court has consistently supported the Security Council’s mission to
maintain international peace and security. I will mention here only a few examples,
starting with the confirmation by the Court, in its advisory opinion on Certain
Expenses of the United Nations (Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Charter), that the
Security Council could establish peacekeeping forces that were to be funded by the
general budget of the Organization as part of the “expenses of the Organization”
under Article 17, paragraph 2, of the United Nations Charter.
Similarly, the Court has clarified how to interpret and determine the binding
character of Security Council resolutions in its advisory opinions on the Legal
Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South Africa in Namibia
(South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970) and
20-177353/51

S/2020/1286

on Accordance with international law of the unilateral declaration of independence
in respect of Kosovo, respectively. Those two opinions have contributed to the
effectiveness of Council resolutions by removing any doubts that the addressees of
such resolutions may have had with regard to their legal value or their interpretation,
which must be resolved if they are to be appropriately implemented.
In this second part of my statement, I would like to make some specific
suggestions that could further reinforce cooperation between our two organs.
I will start with the appeal I made to the Council at the end of my last briefing
on 28 October. As members may recall, I made an appeal to the Security Council to
resume its past tradition of recommending the referral of legal disputes to the Court
and to again make use of the Court’s advisory function on legal questions. I said that
the United Nations Charter allows the Council to do so. That is true. However, allow
me to make a distinction between the two possibilities.
I can understand the reluctance of the Council to recommend the referral of
a dispute by the parties concerned to the Court unless it is clear that both parties
are ready for it. After all, the wording of Article 36, paragraph 3, of the Charter
refers to “recommendations” by the Council, which would be legally non-binding.
The Council cannot, therefore, establish the jurisdiction of the Court over a dispute
without the consent of the parties. As such, it might be difficult for the Council to
make such a recommendation without first ascertaining the consent of the parties to
the Court’s jurisdiction.
However, the request for an advisory opinion is a different matter. Such an
opinion would not be binding and would not be directly addressed to States, but rather
would be rendered for the benefit of the Council to clarify a specific legal issue. The
Security Council would then be free to do whatever it wished with that opinion.
The General Assembly, in its resolution 43/51, of 5 December 1988, entitled
“Declaration on the Prevention and Removal of Disputes and Situations Which May
Threaten International Peace and Security and on the Role of the United Nations in
this Field”, declared that
“the Security Council, if it is appropriate for promoting the prevention and
removal of disputes or situations, should, at an early stage, consider making
use of the provisions of the Charter concerning the possibility of requesting
the International Court of Justice to give an advisory opinion on any legal
question” (General Assembly resolution 43/51, annex, para. 15).
Much has been said since then by United Nations organs, including the
Security Council, about preventive diplomacy and the need to resolve disputes or
diffuse situations at an early stage. The General Assembly was of the view that a
request for an advisory opinion from the Court could play an important role in the
Council’s work on the prevention of situations or disputes from becoming a threat
to international peace and security. I share that view, and I believe that the Council
could consider that possibility more often.
My second suggestion relates to the possibility of expanded dialogue between
the Court and the Security Council. I therefore suggest that, in addition to the annual
briefing of the President of the Court to the Security Council, the Security Council
could include in its schedule a visit to the Court once every three years, following the
triennial change in the composition of the Court, in which the Council participates
through the election or re-election of judges. That would allow the Council to see,
at first hand, the work of the Court and discuss issues of common interest with all
15 members of the Court. In that regard, I wish to recall that the last visit of the
Council to the Court took place on 11 August 2014, six years ago.
4/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

My third, and last, suggestion concerns the jurisdiction of the Court.
The Security Council issued presidential statements in 2006, 2010 and 2012
(S/PRST/2006/28, S/PRST/2010/11 and S/PRST/2012/1), in which it called upon States
to consider accepting the jurisdiction of the Court in accordance with its Statute.
In its 19 January 2012 presidential statement, the Council emphasized
“the key role of the International Court of Justice, the principal judicial organ
of the United Nations, in adjudicating disputes among States and the value of
its work. To this end the Council calls upon States that have not yet done so to
consider accepting the jurisdiction of the Court in accordance with its Statute.”
However, in the last eight years, no further presidential statements have been issued
by the Council. We believe that such statements contribute to strengthening the
relationship between our two organs, as well as the international rule of law. They
could be made periodically — every three to five years — starting from today. As
the Council knows, to date only 74 Member States have made declarations accepting
the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court. It is my view that accepting the jurisdiction
of the Court means adhering to and strengthening the rule of law at the international
level. Without a court of law to which disputes can be referred for peaceful resolution,
the existence of international rule of law may be called into question.
I submit those three modest suggestions to the consideration of the Council,
and I remain at its disposal for any questions or clarifications.

20-177355/51

S/2020/1286

Annex 2
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Philippe Kridelka
[Original: French]
I would like to thank South Africa for organizing this open debate, and
Mr. Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf, President of the International Court of Justice, for his
excellent and enlightening briefing to the Security Council.
Belgium particularly appreciates the convening of this open debate,
which makes it possible to include all States Members of the United Nations in a
comprehensive discussion on cooperation between two of the principal organs of the
United Nations whose mandates focus on respect for international law.
I will address three points in particular: first, the central role of the
International Court of Justice in an international order based on the rule of law;
secondly, our desire to see the Security Council cooperate more with the Court; and,
lastly, the need to ensure the inclusiveness of the international legal order.
First of all, it should be recalled that international law is the cornerstone of
our multilateral system. Seventy-five years ago, at the end of the Second World War,
51 of us signed the Charter of the United Nations. We made the clear choice for an
international order based on the rule of law as a key element of international stability,
democracy and prosperity. The United Nations family has almost quadrupled since
then. That illustrates the very essence of international cooperation, which, through
the establishment of common rules and institutions, is an essential tool for the
prevention and resolution of conflicts. In that regard, both the International Court
of Justice and the Security Council play an important role by contributing to the
development of international law and its implementation.
That brings me to my second point. The number of new cases submitted to
the International Court of Justice, the geographical diversity of the States concerned
and the range of issues on which it is called on to rule attest to its universal character
and the fundamental role that it plays in the application and interpretation of
international law. While 74 States accepted its compulsory jurisdiction, nevertheless
it is regrettable that only five current members of the Council, including only one of
its permanent members, have made a declaration to that effect.
Despite the increased trust among States in the International Court of Justice,
the Security Council has nevertheless largely refrained from using it in discharging
its mandate. The Charter unambiguously grants it three powers for cooperation with
the Court. That can be done at the outset by recommending that disputes be submitted
to the Court or by requesting an advisory opinion. It can also be done subsequently
by making recommendations, or even taking measures to enforce a decision of the
Court, without which the Court cannot be truly effective.
In addition to those three specific functions, the Security Council could also
innovate by, for example, as suggested in the concept note (S/2020/1194, annex)
for this debate, inviting the President of the International Court of Justice to brief
it when non-compliance with Court decisions could threaten international peace
and security.
A particular area in which the Security Council could also be more involved
is on follow-up to provisional measures specified by the International Court of
Justice to safeguard the respective rights of either party pending the final ruling. The
Council could clearly benefit from confidential access to the information provided
in the compliance reports that are increasingly requested by the Court. That could
6/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

assist the Council in monitoring the implementation of the provisional measures
notified to it by the Court and then, if it deems it necessary, make recommendations
or decide on measures to be taken to enforce the Court’s decision.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight the specific role that the Court can
play in capacity-building. Last Monday, the General Assembly unanimously adopted
resolution 75/129, which establishes a trust fund to make the Judicial Fellowship
Programme of the International Court of Justice more accessible to talented young
lawyers from the South. That is the result of President Yusuf’s efforts to encourage
greater inclusiveness in the way in which the Court works and contributes to the
development of international law. Belgium welcomes that initiative and will consider
how it can contribute to that.

20-177357/51

S/2020/1286

Annex 3
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Dai Bing
[Original: Chinese and English]
China thanks President Yusuf for his briefing on behalf of the International
Court of Justice. This year coincides with the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
adoption of the Charter of the United Nations and the centenary of the Statute of
the Permanent Court of International Justice. It is timely and highly relevant for us
to discuss how to strengthen the cooperation between the Security Council and the
International Court of Justice.
The 75 years of the United Nations has seen the rapid development of
multilateralism and the continued advancement of the international rule of law. As
principal organs of the United Nations, the Security Council and the International
Court of Justice have made important contributions to maintaining international
peace and security and promoting global equity and justice. Strengthening the
cooperation between the Security Council and the International Court of Justice under
the Charter is conducive to maintaining the United Nations-centred international
system and the international order underpinned by international law. China wishes
to make the following points.
First, it is imperative to defend the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter and firmly safeguard the central role of the United Nations in
international affairs. We must uphold the cardinal principles of international law and
the basic norms governing international relations, such as sovereign equality, noninterference in internal affairs, the peaceful settlement of disputes and non-use of
force, advocate multilateralism, implement the international rule of law and preserve
the centrality of the United Nations in global governance.
Secondly, we must safeguard the international collective security mechanism,
with the Security Council at its core, and steadfastly defend the mission and
authority of the Council. In fulfilling the mandate to maintain international peace
and security, the Council represents the will of all States Members of the United
Nations. The international community should support the Council in resolving
regional hotspot issues, responding to security threats and promoting multilateral
security cooperation, in accordance with the United Nations Charter, through
political means and constructive dialogue.
Thirdly, we must remain committed to the peaceful settlement of international
disputes and fully leverage the important role of the International Court of Justice. In
recent years, the numbers of cases submitted and the advisory opinions issued by the
Court of Justice has continued to increase, which is a testament to the international
community’s growing trust in the International Court of Justice. The International
Court of Justice should faithfully perform its duties pursuant to the United Nations
Charter, strictly abide by the principle of State consent, ensure the equal and uniform
application of international law and oppose double standards and exceptionalism.
Fourthly, we must strengthen the interaction between the Council and the
International Court of Justice and work together to make international relations more
democratic and rules-based. The Council should respect and support the independent
work of the International Court of Justice. The Court should use international law
to help maintain international peace and security. The two organs should perform
their respective duties and collaborate with each other under the United Nations
Charter to ensure that all countries abide by international law and the basic norms
8/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

of international relations, reject unilateralism and bullying and oppose unilateral
coercive measures in contravention of international law.
Seventy-five years ago, China was the first country to sign the Charter of the
United Nations. As the largest developing country and a permanent member of the
Security Council, China will continue to be a builder of world peace, a contributor
to global development and a defender of the international order. As always, China
will support the work of the Council and the International Court of Justice, work
hand in hand with all parties, embrace multilateralism and the international rule of
law, promote a new kind of international relations based on mutual respect, fairness,
justice and win-win cooperation and build a community with a shared future
for humankind.

20-177359/51

S/2020/1286

Annex 4

Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
After the most brutal political and military event of the twentieth century,
the political leaders of a group of countries, full of determination and still shaken
by the terrible effects of a war filled with totalitarian and anti-Semitic ideologies,
decided to establish an organization in order to unite in fellowship to fight for peace
and security in the world. A number of States soon joined the Organization, which
today has a total of 193 members out of the 194 nations recognized as independent
States. In other words, almost all the political authorities of the world converge in
that association of nations. Those authorities, executed through their leaders, can
generate well-being in humankind, but can also bring about its destruction.
Political powers therefore cannot be exercised in an authoritarian and
unlimited way. They are limited by the rule of law, where laws govern and regulate
their exercise, based on principles such as legality, legitimacy, democracy, equality
and due process.
The Charter of the United Nations states that one of the objectives of the
Organization is
“to bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity with the principles
of justice and international law, adjustment or settlement of international
disputes or situations which might lead to a breach of the peace”.
We have previously stated before the Council that there can be no peace where
there is no justice. That means that for there to be peace, the principles of the rule of
law and international norms must be respected and implemented fairly. Therefore,
the spirit of the drafters of the Charter of the United Nations was clearly that the
International Court of Justice should have a leading role alongside the Security
Council in the maintenance of peace. However, the relationship between the two
organs has remained largely inactive and minimal over the years.
On several occasions, the Dominican Republic has highlighted and promoted
the importance and necessity of strengthening conflict prevention. We therefore
believe that the Security Council should increase opportunities for cooperation with
the Court in that area as a peaceful mechanism for the settlement of disputes.
Emperor Justinian is quoted as having said: “Justice is the constant and
perpetual will to render each his due.” The International Court of Justice is necessary
and instrumental in strengthening the rule of law. It is therefore indispensable to
fulfilling the mandate of maintaining peace.
I am pleased to note that most of the border disputes that arose in Latin
America in recent decades were submitted to the jurisdiction of the Court. History
has well told us that many of the armed conflicts that took place in the past had their
origin in territorial disputes. Let us take such cases as good examples, where the
parties found in the Court a peaceful, albeit adversarial, setting for the settlement of
disputes. It is pleasing to think of the wars that this has prevented.
We urge the members of the Council to enhance the jurisdiction of the Court
and to explore new forms of cooperation, particularly in the areas of peacekeeping
operations and transitional justice.
Finally, the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to peace and
expresses its support for the International Court of Justice. We urge the international
community to advocate for a present and a future where peaceful coexistence is the
rule and war the exception.

10/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

Annex 5
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
We thank South Africa for organizing today’s open debate on an
important topic. We also thank His Excellency Judge Abdulqawi A. Yusuf for his
insightful briefing.
The Charter of the United Nations is of irreplaceable importance to a rulesbased international order. It has created a system of values, legal principles and
political tools that help to stabilize the world. The Charter provides a framework
for multilateral negotiations, conflict prevention and conflict resolution. It carried
forward a valuable system for the settlement of disputes.
The International Court of Justice contributes significantly to multilateralism
by upholding and promoting the rule of law at the international level. Estonia remains
a strong supporter of the role of the International Court of Justice in the peaceful
settlement of disputes in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. We
recognize that, while the Court’s judgments are binding upon the parties concerned,
its jurisprudence has a broader impact, including as guidance in the interpretation
of international law.
The seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter, and the United Nations system
more broadly, offers us the momentum to consider the role that the Security
Council plays, and could play, in the peaceful settlement of disputes — a role that is
complementary to the role of the International Court of Justice.
The mandate of the Security Council in relation to the International Court
of Justice is manifold. In accordance with the Charter, and as has repeatedly been
mentioned, the Security Council can request the International Court of Justice to
provide an advisory opinion, may recommend that parties to a legal dispute refer
it to the International Court of Justice and can proactively take measures to ensure
compliance with a judgment of the Court.
It is also not hard to see that those comprehensive tools have been far too
rarely used by the Security Council during the past 75 years of its existence. There is
indeed scope for improvement and further cooperation between the Security Council
and the International Court of Justice and among Member States. Estonia believes
that more frequent recourse to the International Court of Justice by the Council
could provide a useful avenue for the clarification of legal issues that contribute to
resolving disputes and thereby promote international peace and security.
We hope that the exchange today will contribute to further consideration of a
stricter application of paragraph 3 of Article 36 of the Charter of the United Nations,
namely, that legal disputes should, as a general rule, be referred to the International
Court of Justice.
At the same time, in order to enhance the upholding of the rule of law and a
rules-based international order, we emphasize the need for members of the Council
to apply initiatives that seek to deter the use of the veto in cases related to the
commission of atrocity crimes.
Another crucial step would be for a party to a dispute to recuse itself from
voting in the Council, in accordance with the Charter. We also echo the plea not to
use the votes of other members to block any recommendations regarding the judicial
settlement of disputes by the Council.
Estonia would also like to take this opportunity to call on all Member
States that have not yet done so to accept the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court.
20-1773511/51

S/2020/1286

Currently, only five countries out of the Security Council’s membership of 15 States,
including Estonia, and a total of only 74 States Members of the United Nations have
accepted that jurisdiction.
Finally, while the coronavirus disease pandemic continues to put our societies
and economies under exceptional strain, it is clear that multilateralism and respect
for democracy, human rights and the rule of law remain essential to coming out of
the crisis stronger.
Estonia is ready to support creating more space for the International Court of
Justice and the Security Council to work more closely in striving towards those aims.

12/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

Annex 6
Statement by the Minister Counsellor of France to the United Nations,
Diarra Dime Labille
[Original: English and French]
I would like to thank President Yusuf for his briefing, and South Africa for
putting this public debate on our agenda. At this time of challenges for multilateralism
and international law, the Security Council must reaffirm how essential the
International Court of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the United Nations,
remains as a major institution for peace and the international legal order.
The mandates of the Court and the Council are complementary for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The Court’s decisions contribute to
the pacification of relations between States and help them to reach a solution when
other means of peaceful settlement of disputes fail. While there have been many
examples over the past 75 years, we can recall the decisive contribution of the Court
to the resolution of border disputes, particularly on the African continent.
For its part, the Security Council adopts resolutions that are binding on States.
It exercises its functions within the framework of the Charter of the United Nations,
the summit of an international order based on law. That is the case when we establish
peacekeeping operations, fight against impunity by referring situations to the
International Criminal Court, authorize the delivery of humanitarian aid or decide
on measures against proliferation. The Court has had the opportunity to clarify the
law on several of those issues.
The Charter enshrines not only the missions but also the links between the
two organs. First of all, the Security Council must take into account the fact that
parties to a legal dispute should generally submit it to the Court in accordance with
its Statute. Once the Court has rendered a decision, the Council can then intervene to
ensure its full implementation. In that regard, the absence of a referral to the Council
under Article 94, paragraph 2, of the Charter tends to demonstrate the authority of
the Court’s judgments. The binding scope of decisions also applies to orders.
Finally, the Council, like the General Assembly, may refer matters to the
Court when legal questions arise in the course of its work that require clarification.
Those opinions are intended to provide a better understanding of international law
and are not a substitute for judgments in resolving bilateral disputes.
As a permanent member of the Security Council, France attaches paramount
importance to the Court. France has consented to the Court’s jurisdiction by
concluding numerous treaties that include arbitration clauses to that effect. That is, for
example, the case of the Protocol to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations,
which established the Court’s jurisdiction in the case relating to immunities and
criminal proceedings that gave rise to the judgment of 11 December. France is also
the only State to date to have agreed in practice the procedure for accepting a request
made by another State, also known as forum prorogatum.
Moreover, France supports the Court’s operations. In that regard, we welcome
the adoption this week by the General Assembly of resolution 75/129, co-sponsored
by France, which establishes a trust fund for the Judicial Fellowship Programme. That
initiative will enhance the geographical and linguistic diversity of the participants in
the programme, who will be selected solely on the basis of merit and talent. France
will make a financial contribution to the fund as soon as it is set up, which we hope
will happen quickly.

20-1773513/51

S/2020/1286

I would also like to reiterate the importance that France, like many partners,
attaches to the proper representation of the principal legal traditions and respect
for the Court’s language regime, which contribute to the quality of its work and the
legitimacy of its decisions. We congratulate the five judges elected this fall, who
reflect that valuable diversity.
France hopes that the Court and the Council will continue to work together,
within the framework defined by the Charter, to provide responses to today’s
challenges, which are also potential sources of conflict in future. There is no
shortage of topics — health, the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes, and, of
course, environmental protection and the fight against climate change. That is to
be expected.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate to the Court and all its members and
staff our gratitude for the work it has done.

14/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

Annex 7
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Germany to the
United Nations, Christoph Heusgen
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for putting the promotion of the rule
of law on the agenda of the Security Council during your presidency. I would like
to commend Judge Yusuf for his speech; I will come back to the concrete proposals
he made.
First, I would like to repeat what many if not most of the participants have
said — the Security Council and the International Court of Justice are essential for
guiding Member States on how to act in accordance with international law. With
the Charter of the United Nations at its core, respect for international law is the
basis for our multilateral cooperation. Effective multilateralism works only if the
international order is based on rules applicable to all.
Germany, as a member of the Security Council, has always shown determination
to uphold respect for, and adherence to, international law, including human rights
and humanitarian law. It is imperative that all of us accept and implement legally
binding decisions delivered by international courts and tribunals, including, and in
particular, when those institutions rule within their own competency to decide on
a specific case, even if, and when, those decisions go against immediate national
interests. We are convinced that in the long term a rules-based order itself lies in the
national interest of all.
With regard to the statement by Judge Yusuf, he said it very simply, but it
is very true — the policy of force has no place in the United Nations order that
we all live in. I found it remarkable that he also clearly said that the violation of
international humanitarian law and international human rights law constitutes a
threat to international peace and security. I think that is a very important position
that we have always held. I thank him for that confirmation.
I think it would be good if disputes were referred to the Court more often —
we only have that one case. We believe also that it could be valuable for the Security
Council to invite the President of the International Court of Justice to provide
briefings when instances of non-compliance with decisions of the Court might
threaten international peace and security. What Judge Yusuf also highlighted was
the use of advisory functions with regard to conflict prevention. He pleaded for the
Council to use that possibility more often. Germany totally subscribes to that.
Judge Yusuf referred to one very important advisory opinion, which I would
like to recall because we are commemorating the tenth anniversary of the advisory
opinion on Accordance with international law of the unilateral declaration of
independence in respect of Kosovo. The Security Council may remember that, at
the time, Serbia launched an initiative by the General Assembly to ask the Court
to determine if the declaration of independence of Kosovo was legal or not. The
judgment came 10 years ago and clearly stated that the declaration of independence of
Kosovo was in compliance with international law. I think it would help if everybody
read that again and followed the outcome — a recognition of Kosovo — because that
would resolve a lot of problems that we still have in that region.
In addition to the briefings by Judge Yusuf, we are very much in favour of the
possibility of the Security Council visiting the Court. Unfortunately, if the Security
Council decides to do that, my delegation will not be part of it. However, if Council
members travel to The Hague, they will meet a German judge there. I would like to
use this occasion to express our gratitude for the strong support that the Security
Council gave to Professor Georg Nolte a few weeks ago. We consider the election of
20-1773515/51

S/2020/1286

that outstanding German international law expert as Judge of the International Court
of Justice as of February 2021 to be a validation of Germany’s commitment to the
rules-based international order. At the same time, it is an obligation to continue our
efforts to promote international law.
Germany has subscribed to the acceptance of the compulsory jurisdiction of
the Court. There are 74 countries that have subscribed to it. We fully back that and
are working on a draft presidential statement. We should respond to the request of
Judge Yusuf and, in our presidential statement, should include the request that more
countries accept the compulsory jurisdiction, as we did in 2012.
We believe that the application of the Charter of the United Nations needs to
evolve over time to ensure continued authority and legitimacy. The purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter, such as the call to maintain international peace
and security and the prohibition of the use of force in international relations, are the
timeless and enduring core of international law, but their application is subject to
contemporary challenges. The coronavirus disease pandemic is only one striking
reminder of those challenges. The international community is jointly confronted
with a multitude of global and existential questions for the future of humankind,
such as climate change, the protection of our environment, pandemics and respect
for human rights.
The evolution of international law is reflected in both the practice of the
Security Council and the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice. Therefore,
cooperation between the Security Council and the Court of Justice is needed more
than ever. The Security Council determines any threat to, or breach of, peace or act
of aggression and decides on measures to maintain or restore international peace and
security. But in doing so the Council has demonstrated the adaptability, pragmatism
and creativity. It must do better when it comes to dealing with new challenges.
We commend the recent decision by the General Assembly to establish a
trust fund for the Judicial Fellowship Programme of the Court. That will increase
opportunities for law students from a wide range of geographic and linguistic
backgrounds to familiarize themselves with the work of the Court, develop their
skills in the field of the peaceful settlement of international disputes through law and
become supporters of the rules-based international order themselves. Again, I thank
you, Sir, very much for having put this important item on the agenda.

16/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

Annex 8
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
I thank you, Sir, for convening this important debate in the wake of the seventyfifth anniversary of the International Court of Justice and the hundredth anniversary
of the Statute of the Permanent Court of International Justice on 23 December 2020. I
would also like to thank Judge Yusuf, President of the International Court of Justice,
for his comprehensive briefing. We also welcome the draft presidential statement on
cooperation between Security Council and the International Court of Justice.
Indonesia firmly believes that, while the Court and the Security Council
have different powers and roles, both organs strive in their respective capacities
to promote and advance the fulfilment of the basic principles and objectives of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Having said that, let me make three brief points.
First, with regard to a mutually beneficial relationship between the Council
and the International Court of Justice, from our interactions with the Court during
Council meetings, we share the common view that international peace and security,
as envisaged by the drafters of the Charter of the United Nations, also rests on
effective cooperation between both organs. It is beyond question that the Court is
a fundamental part of the international system for maintaining peace and security;
therefore, it stands to reason that strengthening the relationship between both organs
could indeed advance and promote the achievement of that objective. Indonesia
therefore believes that the Council must be encouraged to engage in more dialogue
and interaction with the Court in the exercise of its mandate. We are separate organs,
but we are complimentary one to another and need to take advantage of the best of
each organ.
That leads to my second point, which concerns the essential role of international
law in the maintenance of international peace and security. International law plays
a critical role in promoting stability and order in international relations. For the
drafters of our founding Charter of the United Nations, justice and law are the
fundamental conditions for international peace and security. They wanted to see
an international community grounded in law. As we are living in a challenging
time when disputes are unfortunately on the rise in various parts of the world, it is
important to prevent the escalation of such disputes and to try, wherever possible,
to resolve them following appropriate legal procedures. That is exactly what the
Council, in close cooperation with the Court, must strive for.
Rest assured that the attitude of Indonesia towards international law,
particularly with respect to the peaceful settlement of disputes, including through the
Court, has been and will always be supportive. Indonesia and its neighbour Malaysia
chose to accept the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice in 1997, and both
countries have remained bound by its decisions.
That brings me to my final point, which is the interaction between both
principal organs of the United Nations. The Charter of the United Nations provides
tools to the Council to peacefully settle disputes between States by making use of
the Court’s jurisdiction in such cases or requesting its advisory opinions on legal
questions that arise in the Council’s work. However, facts and figures have shown
for many years that the Council has to some extent refrained from making use of that
provision. That should not be the case. The Council needs to be encouraged to make
use of those Charter tools.

20-1773517/51

S/2020/1286

Indonesia believes that stronger relations with the Court will assist the
Council in its work. We should continue to explore ways and means to reinvigorate
and reinforce the relations between both organs. We are fully convinced that is in
the interest of peace between and among nations. To that end, Indonesia calls on all
members of the Council to remain united in their support of the work of the Court.

18/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

Annex 9

Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Niger to
the United Nations, Niandou Aougi
[Original: French]
At the outset, I would like to congratulate South Africa for holding today’s
debate and thank the President of the International Court of Justice for his briefing.
My delegation also commends the members of the Court for their work in the service
of international justice through the peaceful settlement of disputes between States.
The Niger, in accordance with the ideals of the Charter of the United Nations,
which it joined in 1960, has always favoured the peaceful settlement of disputes with
its neighbours, through referral to the International Court of Justice. We remain
convinced of the primary importance of the role of the Court as the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations for the pursuit of international justice.
We therefore welcome the excellent relations that have always existed between
the Security Council and the Court, in keeping with the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular the briefings by the President of the Court, which keep the
Council informed about the activities of the Court.
The ability of the Court to issue decisions, pursuant to the Charter, on
matters relating to the maintenance of international peace and security, which is the
primary responsibility of the Security Council, is an extremely important aspect of
its jurisdiction that we must continue to promote with a view to strengthening the
complementarity between the two organs.
With regard to the Council’s prerogative under the Charter to request advisory
opinions from the Court whenever necessary, my delegation would like to see greater
involvement with the Court by the Security Council, as has happened in the past,
through the referral of legal disputes to the Court, in accordance with Article 36,
paragraph 3, of the Charter.
My delegation encourages the Court to continue to issue its decisions
objectively and impartially, as it has always done, in order to encourage States with
disputes to avail themselves of the path of peaceful settlement through justice.
Even if it requires great efforts, we must take measures to further encourage
States with disputes to submit them to the Court and to ultimately comply with its
decisions. That would only strengthen the rule of law at the national and international
levels and ensure the maintenance of international peace and security.
We also welcome the practice whereby the Court enables students from a
range of geographic and linguistic regions to become familiar with the work of the
Court and develop their skills in the field of the peaceful settlement of international
disputes. We believe that such a practice could be considered by the Council in order
to allow such young people to familiarize themselves with this organ; if done in a
coordinated manner, it would also encourage them to do comparative research and
analysis on the Council and the International Court of Justice.
With regard to the capacity of national judicial institutions to fully grasp
and better manage conflict situations, the Court could initiate relations with such
institutions in general, and with those of countries in conflict or post-conflict
situations in particular, with a view to building their capacity to take charge of
certain matters.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to reiterate its thanks to the President
of the Court and call on the two institutions to continue exchanging information
through such meetings with a view to maintaining dialogue and strengthening peace
and security in the world.

20-1773519/51

S/2020/1286

Annex 10

Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Gennady Kuzmin
[Original: Russian]
We thank you, Sir, for organizing this debate and welcome the participation of
the President of the International Court of Justice, Judge Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf.
The International Court of Justice is one of the primary instruments for the
practical implementation of the key principle of modern international relations: the
commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes. That principle — enshrined in
Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations (General Assembly resolution
2625 (XXV)) — is the very raison d’être of our Organization.
A key element of that principle is each State’s freedom to choose its own
peaceful means of settlement, including those set out in the Charter of the United
Nations. No solution must be preordained. Each State must be free to choose the
means of settlement most appropriate to any given situation. Neither the difficulty of
negotiations, nor the complexity of mechanisms nor time constraints should serve as
a reason to forego that principle. The most important thing is the readiness to engage
in dialogue and seek mutually acceptable solutions and compromises.
The peaceful settlement of disputes is a prerequisite for the inviolability of
another profound maxim of the Charter of the United Nations — the principle of the
non-use of force. The Charter was a hard-won achievement for humankind following
the horrors of the Second World War. It is important to remember that during the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations.
People realized both the need to resolve disputes by peaceful means and the
practicability of establishing an international judicial body long before the Charter
of the United Nations was adopted. The peace conferences initiated by Emperor
Nicolas II of Russia and convened in The Hague in 1899 and 1907 marked important
steps in that process.
The devastating consequences of the First World War led to the establishment
of a standing judicial body — the Permanent Court of International Justice. However,
it was the International Court of Justice that would eventually be endowed with the
status of the main judicial organ of the United Nations. As such, it is independent
and guided by international law. Even its geographical remoteness from the political
battles of New York is full of legal symbolism.
Each within its respective mandate, the International Court of Justice and the
Security Council interact with one another and contribute to the peaceful settlement
of disputes. Since the Court came into being, 178 cases have been referred to it.
That figure alone shows what a significant role the Court plays in settling disputes
between States. It is noteworthy that the very first of those cases was referred to the
Court upon the recommendation of the Security Council.
Russia firmly supports the stance that respect for the norms and principles of
international law, including the peaceful settlement of disputes, is the central pillar
of sustainable peace and security. We have unwavering respect for the International
Court of Justice and its mandate. In order to maintain the global legal order, it is vital
to faithfully make use of legal procedures to resolve legal disputes. Using judicial
procedures to incite political discord is unacceptable.

20/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

Over its many decades of work, the Court has managed to maintain high
standards of justice. We have the highest confidence in the wisdom of its judges.

20-1773521/51

S/2020/1286

Annex 11
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
I welcome President Yusuf and thank him for his briefing.
There exists a well-established link between justice and peace, and it has
long been recognized that neither one is able to thrive in isolation from the other. In
this new era of international disputes, which now encompass complex contemporary
issues such as terrorism and climate change, a comprehensive, pragmatic, wholeof-system approach across the various organs of the United Nations is now more
critical than ever. Seventy-five years since its establishment, the International
Court of Justice, as the guardian of the rule of law, remains an integral and relevant
component of the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Charter of the United Nations, in Chapter VI, envisioned a symbiotic
relationship between the Security Council and the International Court of Justice. It
considered that the Security Council would effectively fulfil its critical mandate not
on its own but bolstered by the valuable contributions of the Court. Yet in that regard,
the Security Council has not taken full advantage of the Court’s well-established
jurisprudence, grounded in robust decisions and advisory opinions. Consequently,
where the Court has jurisdiction, the Security Council ought to encourage Member
States to utilize the principal judicial organ of the United Nations in the pursuit of
the peaceful settlements of disputes.
Member States have an obligation to engage constructively with the Court.
Political will is needed to ensure that the decisions of the Court are not reduced to
ceremonial pieces of paper. They must be fully respected and effectively enforced
to promote and uphold the enduring principles of international law and strengthen
the rule of law. Failure to do so serves to undermine the multilateral system and
deters efforts aimed at conflict prevention, peacekeeping, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding. As such, in instances where judgments are disregarded, it is imperative
that the Security Council consider making recommendations to give effect to the
Court’s directions, in line with the Charter’s guidance as set out in Article 94.
We welcome President Yusuf’s continued efforts to ensure that the Court’s
Judicial Fellowship Programme is inclusive and fully representative of all geographic
regions and legal traditions. Indeed, the Programme is essential to capacity-building
and can have a long-term positive impact on systems of justice globally. Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines therefore firmly supports the establishment of a voluntary trust
fund in support of the Programme to provide more legal practitioners, particularly
from the global South, with an invaluable opportunity to enhance their knowledge
at the world Court.
The use of force, provocative rhetoric and other escalatory actions, such as
unilateral coercive measures, should always be rejected in favour of rational and
principled settlements of disputes. Similarly, we call on parties to disputes to pursue
dialogue and mediation, including through suitable regional mechanisms and
without prejudice to their rights to seek a judicial settlement. In that vein, the Court
and the Security Council must seek to continuously revitalize their complementary
partnership to build and sustain peace.
We reaffirm our unwavering support for the Court and recognize its irrefutable
contribution to peace and security through the ongoing development of the norms
of international law, as well as its reinforcement of the principle of the sovereign
equality of States.

22/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

In conclusion, we congratulate Judges Yuji Iwasawa of Japan, Georg Nolte of
Germany, Julia Sebutinde of Uganda, Peter Tomka of Slovakia and Xue Hanqin of
China on their election to the Court. We have full confidence in their abilities and
are certain that their contributions will be immense.

20-1773523/51

S/2020/1286

Annex 12
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Jerry Matthews Matjila
I would like to thank Judge Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf, President of the
International Court of Justice, for his interesting and thought-provoking briefing.
Since the establishment of the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague in
1899, which provided for dispute settlement by arbitration, the settlement of disputes
by peaceful means, rather than by resorting to the use of force, has been one of the
cornerstones of international law and diplomacy.
While disputes are an inevitable part of international relations, international
law knows no system of compulsory jurisdiction. The peaceful settlement of
disputes, by whatever means, remains voluntary, but its importance can never
be overestimated.
Therefore, as we celebrate the hundredth anniversary of the establishment of
the first permanent international institution for the judicial settlement of disputes —
the International Court of Justice’s predecessor, the Permanent Court of International
Justice — and the seventy-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Charter of
the United Nations, South Africa once again reflects on the significance of the
International Court of Justice as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations.
Living the legacy of Nelson Mandela, it is no coincidence that throughout
South Africa’s two-year term on the Security Council it has focused, inter alia,
on the promotion of the pacific settlement of disputes. We maintain that, while
the Security Council plays a significant role in ensuring international peace and
security, the role of the International Court of Justice in settling disputes before
they escalate into threats to international peace and security remains one of the
most important cornerstones of the international system. It is therefore very timely
to reaffirm our commitment to upholding and strengthening the rule of law in the
conduct of international relations.
With regard to the potential of the Court, if utilized fully and in a timely
manner, to contribute to international peace and security, we submit that those
ideals could be served by strengthening cooperation between the Court and the
Security Council.
Over the years, the Security Council and Member States have, unfortunately,
not often enough made use of the potential of the Court to settle disputes peacefully
and thereby contribute to the maintenance of international peace and security.
Member States could gain innumerable benefits by utilizing such an important tool
at their disposal. Peace and silencing the guns can be sustainable only if they go
hand in hand with justice. Therefore, when appropriate, the Security Council should
encourage Member States involved in a situation that threatens international peace
and security to resolve their disputes by referral to the Court.
Furthermore, the Security Council could also utilize its authority to request
advisory opinions from the Court on legal questions that may arise in the fulfilment
of its mandate. The members of the Security Council, in their consideration of
thematic agenda items and country-specific situations alike, should bear in mind
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations concerning the interaction of the
Security Council with the International Court of Justice and the possible role the
Court could play in assisting the Security Council in the execution of its mandate.
The Security Council could also invite the President of the International Court of
Justice to brief it when instances of non-compliance might threaten international
peace and security. It is therefore clear that those two organs — the Council and the
24/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

Court — have an important complementary role to play in the settlement of disputes,
the resolution of conflicts and the maintenance of international peace and security.
Turning to capacity-building in developing countries: as a developing African
country, for South Africa it is also important to highlight the role of capacitybuilding in the legal field with respect to the settlement of disputes and to express
appreciation for the Court’s efforts to expose young women and men to training
and thereby assist developing countries, in particular to develop their capacities to
resolve conflict.
We once again draw attention to the extremely worthy Judicial Fellowship
Programme of the Court, which was established in 1999, formerly known as the
University Traineeship Programme, which allows law graduates to gain experience
by working at the International Court of Justice and helps to enhance their
understanding of international law and the Court’s procedures. That is done by
practically involving them in the work of the Court under the supervision of a judge.
Admirable as that Programme is, it is unfortunately not accessible to most
law graduates from developing countries and deprives those worthy young law
practitioners of an opportunity to benefit from the wealth of knowledge and practice
that resides in the Court. The main reason for this is, as in most cases, the lack of
resources available to universities in developing countries that would like to sponsor
their law graduates.
In that regard, we would again like to express our support for President
Yusuf’s enthusiasm for giving more law graduates from developing countries an
opportunity to access and participate in the Judicial Fellows Programme. We have
done so by adding our support to General Assembly resolution 75/129, which aims
to address this shortcoming by creating a voluntary trust fund to allow more young
law graduates from developing countries to gain experience by working at the
International Court of Justice.
In 2012, South Africa, as a non-permanent member of the Security Council,
initiated a presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/1) that was agreed by the Council.
Our views then and now were informed by the need to resolve conflicts peacefully,
as reflected in Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations, the seventy-fifth
anniversary of which we are celebrating.
Today Africa accounts for most of the conflicts in the world. Millions have
lost their lives, millions are internally displaced and millions are refugees in foreign
lands. Those destructive conflicts and wars have torn some of our countries apart
and denied children an education and the right to grow up in an environment of
peace. It has also delayed African development, and some countries may not even
be able to realize the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. That has made
reconciliation difficult and nation-building even more so. We therefore welcome and
thank Judge Yusuf for the three recommendations that he made.
That is also why South Africa has drafted and placed before the Council for
its kind consideration a draft presidential statement addressing the aforementioned
issues and what all members have just restated in their national statements. We are
hopeful and look forward to reaching agreement on this text, which will help us to
advance the peaceful resolution of conflicts and to put an end to violent conflicts.

20-1773525/51

S/2020/1286

Annex 13
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Tarek Ladeb
I thank the President of the International Court of Justice, Judge Abdulqawi
Yusuf, for his insightful remarks on how best to strengthen the cooperation between
the Security Council and the International Court of Justice. I would also like to
express my appreciation to South Africa for having brought this timely debate to the
Council in the context of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the International Court
of Justice and the hundredth anniversary of the Statute of the Permanent Court of
International Justice.
The Charter of the United Nations established the International Court of
Justice as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations, with the primary
function of adjudicating inter-State disputes. The Court was further envisaged as a
jurisdiction that is voluntary in character, exercised solely over consenting States, in
accordance with the Statute of the International Court of Justice and the Charter of
the United Nations.
The sustained caseload of the Court, with a geographically diverse spread of
cases referred to it, is illustrative of its universal reach.
After a century of adjudication, the Court continues to be relevant as a
mechanism for the peaceful settlement of disputes and a key component of the
contemporary international peace and security architecture. The Court’s relevance
is best seen against the backdrop of the wide-ranging spectrum of subjects over
which it has exercised jurisdiction and developed ground-breaking international
jurisprudence, especially on the principles of the self-determination of peoples and
equal rights, as well as on the environment, the protection of human rights and others.
The relevance of the Court is additionally seen in its strengthening of the rule
of law through judicial capacity-building. In that regard, we welcome the adoption
early this week by the General Assembly of resolution 75/129, co-sponsored by
Tunisia, establishing a United Nations trust fund to facilitate access to the Judicial
Fellows Programme of the Court for the benefit of bright students from across the
world, particularly from universities in developing countries, to enhance their skills
in the field of the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The most recent contentious case with which the Court was seized,
concerning the application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide, is yet another illustration of the contribution of the
Court, as a compulsory jurisdiction through clauses in multilateral treaties, to the
maintenance of international peace and security and the protection of human life
through provisional measures.
By indicating provisional measures, the Court is viewed as an instrument
of preventive diplomacy, based on early warning and information-gathering, which
seeks to protect human life, prevent irreparable harm and preserve the rights of the
parties that constitute the subject matter of a dispute.
Turning to the relational perspective and the cooperation between the Security
Council and the Court, Tunisia, in spite of scarce practice, continues to see merit in
the two organs being separate yet complementary and mutually reinforcing, having
different yet related competencies in the settlement of international disputes, within
the framework of the Charter of the United Nations.
Tunisia calls for enhanced interaction and coordination between the Security
Council and the Court within their respective mandates by making full use of
26/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

the relevant international legal provisions, with the aim of defusing tensions and
securing peace through law at the international level.
The Security Council should therefore consider referrals to the Court and
requests for the Court to issue advisory opinions on any legal questions, as provided
for under Article 36, paragraph 3, and Article 96, paragraph 1, of the Charter, in
order to resolve international disputes and contribute to the clarification and further
development of international law.
We also acknowledge the role of the Court in spurring the Security Council to
action as provided for under Article 94 of the Charter.
The Security Council, being the primary organ for the maintenance of
international peace and security, has the political mandate and the political
responsibility for ensuring compliance and upholding the rule of law by giving
effect, where appropriate, to judicial decisions after the Court has allocated rights
and responsibilities and assessed competing legal claims among States parties.
Appraising the relationship between the Security Council and the International
Court of Justice invites a reckoning with the past and present of the international
system in order to enable fresh engagement with the future.
Seventy-five years after the establishment of the United Nations, we are
witnessing adversarial times in which the international community is being faced
with complex and unconventional threats and evolving challenges to global peace
and security, such as terrorism, pandemics, climate change, cybercrime and piracy.
The coronavirus pandemic has proved to be a particularly challenging test not
only for humankind but also for multilateralism and for the structure and functioning
of the system of international relations as established in 1945.
Tunisia believes that it is essential that cooperation and multilateralism continue
to prevail, that the Security council be reformed and expanded, and that creative legal
thinking be enabled within the boundaries of the Charter of the United Nations in
order to develop norms and instruments governing orderly relations between States
and effectively counter the emerging threats of the twenty-first century.
The codification and progressive development of international law along with
cooperation and multilateralist action should be allowed to continue hand in hand
through recourse to international organizations, tribunals and courts, and within
a genuinely representative international system, in order to bring about a fairer,
more orderly and more prosperous world and continue to live up to the purposes and
principles of the Charter.

20-1773527/51

S/2020/1286

Annex 14
Statement by the Minister Counsellor of the Permanent Mission
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Chanaka Wickremasinghe
I would like to thank the South African presidency for arranging this
important discussion today. I would also like to thank President Yusuf for his
enlightening briefing.
Article 1, paragraph 1, of the Charter of the United Nations makes clear that
the first purpose of the Organization is the maintenance of international peace and
security. And it further provides that this purpose is to be achieved through both the
Organization’s system of collective security and the peaceful settlement of disputes
in accordance with the principles of justice and international law. The International
Court of Justice, as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations, has a key role
in the peaceful settlement of disputes between States.
The basis of the Court’s jurisdiction in contentious cases is the consent of the
parties. The new cases initiated by States before the Court in recent years underline
both the confidence that States have in the Court as a forum for dispute resolution and
support for the Court as the venue in which the legal aspects of difficult political issues
can be adjudicated. The range of current cases also illustrates that the International
Court of Justice is truly a world court dealing with a diverse geographical spread of
cases and with a wide variety of subjects, including maritime disputes, diplomatic
and consular matters, interpretation and application of international treaties and
environmental protection.
Several of the cases currently on the Court’s docket have an impact on issues
of peace and security and underscore the importance of the Court’s role in assisting
States in resolving their disputes peacefully, in accordance with the purposes and
principles set out in the Charter, potentially avoiding altogether the need for the
Security Council to become engaged. However, the rule of law at the international
level and the role played by the Court would be further enhanced if more States were
to accept its compulsory jurisdiction.
The United Kingdom continues to be one of the Court’s strongest supporters.
We have accepted the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court and its predecessor, the
Permanent Court of International Justice, since 1929. We continue to hope that more
States will accept the Court’s jurisdiction as compulsory, further enhancing the
Court’s standing and effectiveness.
The United Kingdom welcomes the annual closed meeting between the
Security Council and the Court, held only six weeks ago, as a forum for discussion
and an example of the cooperation between the Council and the Court. We look
forward to further exchanges.

28/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

Annex 15
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations, Richard Mills
We are pleased that South Africa has organized today’s debate. The Security
Council receives an annual briefing from the President of the International Court of
Justice and exchanges views about issues of common interest, but those meetings by
custom are held in private. In this seventy-fifth anniversary year of the International
Court of Justice, it is fitting that we have a second opportunity to highlight the
crucial role of the Court and to do so at a public meeting.
I would first like to extend our congratulations to those candidates recently
elected or re-elected to the Court, as well as our deep gratitude to all of the candidates
for their dedication to the field of international law. We appreciate the opportunity
to address the relationship between the Court and the Security Council and the
complementary role these principal organs play in the maintenance of international
peace and security. The International Court of Justice plays a vital role in promoting
and preserving the rule of law and in advancing international peace and security
through the peaceful resolution of disputes.
The increasing workload of the Court demonstrates a recognition by States
Members of the United Nations that accept its jurisdiction that it is preferable to
resolve disputes peacefully through the Court rather than to allow them to fester
and possibly lead to conflict. That these disputes may, as a result, never reach
this Chamber reinforces the effectiveness of the United Nations framework. As
situations develop into matters requiring the Security Council’s attention, we must,
of course, remain mindful of where the Court might play a role while preserving the
fundamental principle of State consent to judicial settlement of disputes enshrined
in the Statute of the Court.
We are also mindful that, in Article 33, the Charter of the United Nations,
as we have heard, provides that parties to a dispute that is likely to endanger
international security and peace shall first seek a solution through the peaceful
means of their choice, which can run from negotiation, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration or judicial settlement. Many disputes are successfully resolved through
other means of dispute settlement, so that they never need to reach the Security
Council or the International Court of Justice. And with the multiplicity of available
dispute-settlement mechanisms, such as regional courts and international tribunals,
parties to a dispute have a range of avenues to consider for the resolution of their
disputes. And it is gratifying to know that for those Member States that accept its
jurisdiction, the Court stands ready to adjudicate their disputes.
We should not forget, on this seventy-fifth anniversary, that there once was a
day when territorial disputes, and even trade matters, were resolved, almost routinely,
through military means. We should not take for granted how transformative the
United Nations Charter and the Statute of the International Court of Justice were
when they were adopted, including in their advancement of the peaceful resolution
of disputes in accordance with international law. On this seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations and of the Court, we celebrate their contribution to the promotion
of the rule of law and the preservation of international peace and security.
Finally, let me also add a few words about the trust fund to support
participation in the International Court of Justice’s Judicial Fellowship Programme.
The programme was founded in 1999, through an initiative of a very prominent law
school in our host city: the New York University School of Law. The programme
has expanded over the years so that dozens of law school graduates have benefited
20-1773529/51

S/2020/1286

from this worthy, valuable opportunity to work with and learn from the Judges of
the Court.
We certainly agree that recent law school graduates from developing countries
should also have an opportunity to participate in the Court’s Judicial Fellowship
Programme. Increasing opportunities for future practitioners of international law to
learn about the Court and learn from its esteemed judges will itself serve to strengthen
the rule of law and help to spread awareness of the valuable role the Court can play in
the promotion of international peace and security. Accordingly, we were very pleased
to co-sponsor and join consensus on resolution 75/129, establishing the trust fund,
which the General Assembly adopted on Monday of this week (see A/75/PV.44).

30/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

Annex 16
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
It is with great pleasure that I welcome and thank Judge Yusuf, President of
the International Court of Justice, for his second insightful briefing to the Security
Council within two months (see S/PV.8653).
Viet Nam attaches great importance to the crucial role of the International
Court of Justice in promoting and strengthening the rule of law at the international
level. In discharging its mandate as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations,
including in particular through its adjudicative and advisory functions, the Court
has contributed significantly to reducing tension, preventing conflicts, restoring
friendly relations and facilitating lasting peace and stability.
As two central institutions in the robust post-war structure to ensure
international peace and security, the Security Council and the International Court of
Justice have separate but complementary roles. We believe there is still much space
for strengthening the coordination and cooperation between these two principal
organs. In this regard, we welcome today’s important open debate allowing for an
open exchange on a very important topic.
First, Viet Nam supports enhanced cooperation between the Council and
the Court in accordance with the established institutional framework. The Charter
of the United Nations empowers the Council to recommend to the relevant parties
procedures for the settlement of their dispute, and in doing so the Council may take
into consideration that legal disputes should as a general rule be referred by the
parties to the International Court of Justice in accordance with the provisions of the
Statute of the Court. Yet the Corfu Channel case is the first and only case in which
the Council recommended to the parties to refer their dispute to the Court.
We further take note that, among the 28 advisory opinions issued by the Court,
only one was made upon request of the Security Council, which was in the 1970
advisory opinion on the legal consequences for States of the continued presence of
South Africa in Namibia. We believe that the Security Council can build on its good
past practices to promote the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with
international law as a conflict prevention tool.
Secondly, we see necessity in strengthening dialogue between the two organs
on more substantive matters. Often a dispute involves aspects of law and politics.
The Council retains the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Court has been in many instances called upon to deal with
cases that relate to the same sets of events that are part of a situation of armed conflict
before the Security Council. Furthermore, the Court, through its jurisprudence,
applies, interprets, clarifies or otherwise reinforces the purposes and principles
enshrined in the United Nations Charter and other rules of international law. We
believe that the judicial expertise of the Court will make a significant contribution to
the work and activities of the Security Council in dealing with burning international
legal issues that might arise in thematic agenda items and in the context of conflict
or post-conflict situations.
Thirdly, the peaceful settlement of disputes is one of the most important
fundamental principles of international law embodied in the United Nations Charter
and many international and regional instruments. It is in our common interests
that more efforts could be made to build capacity in effectively using international
judicial and arbitration bodies as means of peacefully settling disputes. In this regard,
we commend the efforts of the International Court of Justice to engage young law
20-1773531/51

S/2020/1286

graduates through its Judicial Fellowship Programme. We believe that familiarizing
young academics with the work of the Court and the settlement of international
disputes through law is a legitimate investment that will bear long-term fruits.
It is Viet Nam’s consistent policy to support the peaceful settlement of disputes
and the non-use of force or the threat of force, enhancing the role of international legal
bodies in the promotion of friendly relations among nations and the maintenance of
international peace and security. Viet Nam has high regard for the work of judicial
bodies, including the International Court of Justice. We have participated in and
contributed to the work of the Court in several legal processes.
Nowadays, the international system and international law have come under
various forms of stress. Instances of violations of international law abound.
Challenges to international peace and security keep evolving and proliferate. In
that context, promoting adherence to the United Nations Charter and international
law is more critical than ever. My delegation takes this opportunity to reiterate our
commitment to upholding the United Nations Charter, respecting international law
and contributing to the maintenance of international peace and security.

32/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Austria to the United Nations
Austria has the honour of delivering this statement on behalf of the following
members of the Group of Friends of the Rule of Law: Argentina, Belgium, Cabo
Verde, Canada, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Guatemala, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Mexico, the Philippines, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, the European Union, and my own country,
Austria. In addition, Cyprus aligns itself with this statement.
As we reflect on the 75 years that have passed since the founding of the United
Nations and the establishment of the International Court of Justice, it is very timely
to reaffirm our commitment to international law and the rule of law as well as to
seeking ways to strengthen cooperation between the Court and the Security Council
in this field. We very much welcome today’s open debate, organized by South Africa.
We also thank the President of the Court for his briefing.
We reaffirm our commitment to the purposes and principles enshrined in
the Charter, which set out the three pillars on which the United Nations is built:
peace and security, development and human rights. Firmly based on the universal
values of equality, justice, freedom and the dignity and worth of the human person,
the Charter gives the same importance to universal respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms as it does to such fundamental principles of international law
as the prohibition of the threat or use of force, the territorial integrity of States and
the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The Security Council has often confirmed that the rule of law and justice
are fundamental building blocks of conflict prevention and resolution as well as for
sustainable peace. As we reflect on the lessons from our past full of wars, conflict
and human suffering, we recognize that peace and security and respect for human
rights and the rule of law are intrinsically linked. And as we face new and more
complex threats and challenges to international peace and security, atrocities,
brutality and suffering, we would do well to recall the foundations and principles
embodied in the Charter. Our collective response to threats to international peace
and security must be guided by the rule of law both at the national and international
levels. Both are inherently linked and intertwined, for, as set forth in the report of
the Secretary-General entitled “In larger freedom: towards development, security
and human rights for all”,
“every nation that proclaims the rule of law at home must respect it abroad
and ... every nation that insists on it abroad must enforce it at home.” (A/59/2005,
para. 133)
We call on all States to abide by all their obligations under international law,
including human rights law and international humanitarian law. We firmly believe
that respect for and compliance with international law is the very foundation of a
functioning, just rules-based international system. We reiterate the call on States to
ratify and implement multilateral treaties and to settle their disputes peacefully, in
particular through the International Court of Justice.
Respect for the Court’s decisions, judgments and advisory opinions is crucial
to upholding the Charter and international law and to consolidating the success of
the international justice system. The increasing number of submissions by Member
States from around the world demonstrates their trust in the Court.
All the Court’s activities are aimed at promoting and strengthening the rule of
law. Through its judgments and advisory opinions, the Court contributes to clarifying
international law as well as its further development. We would like to emphasize our
20-1773533/51

S/2020/1286

appreciation for the Court’s work and its important role as the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations. We encourage all Member States to consider accepting,
without reservations, the compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of
Justice in accordance with Article 36 of the Charter.
In the same vein, we encourage the Security Council to make more use of
the Court’s expertise and use all the tools provided by the Charter in that regard.
Where appropriate, the Council should encourage States to refer legal disputes to
the International Court of Justice in its resolutions. When considering situations that
constitute a threat to international peace and security, the Council should always
examine whether the International Court of Justice should be seized of the matter.
As members of the Group of Friends of the Rule of Law, we reaffirm the
fundamental importance of the rule of law at the national and international levels to
the maintenance of international peace and security.

34/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, Rabab Fatima
I thank the South African presidency for convening today’s open debate. We
appreciate the focus of South Africa on the rule of law during its earlier and current
presidencies. I also thank the President of the International Court of Justice for his
insightful remarks (annex 1).
Over the past 75 years, the International Court of Justice has played a crucial
role in upholding the rule of law at the international level and promoting the pacific
settlement of international disputes, as stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations.
The sustained confidence of the international community in the Court is well
manifested through the broad range of subjects and cases being invoked under its
general jurisdiction. The jurisdiction ratione materiae of the International Court of
Justice in the resolution of disputes among parties to more than 300 bilateral and
multilateral treaties and conventions further reinforces the authority and credibility
of the Court in matters of international peace and security.
The pacific settlement of international disputes prevents such disputes from
turning into deadly conflicts. It can also end conflict at any stage and prevent its
escalation and recurrence. We therefore believe that the Security Council, as the
principal organ of the United Nations responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security, could make more use of the International Court of Justice as an
instrument or tool in exercising its mandate. The Court is indeed one of the most
cost-effective solutions for upholding the rule of law at the international level and
ensuring the effectiveness of the United Nations framework for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
As a nation with an unequivocal commitment to the peaceful settlement of
disputes, including through recourse to international law, Bangladesh recognizes
the judgments, advisory opinions, orders of provisional measures and other ongoing
work of the International Court of Justice regarding various international disputes
and compliance with international law.
We settled our four-decade-long maritime boundary dispute with our
neighbour through the international adjudication system, which thwarted threats of
conflict between neighbours. As a host country to the victims of atrocity crimes
committed against the Rohingya minorities in Myanmar, we take an interest in
the ongoing proceedings at the International Court of Justice between the Gambia
and Myanmar under the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide. We note the provisional measures announced by the Court in
January this year and call for the Council’s attention to the parties’ compliance with
the order.
Cooperation between the Council and the Court could contribute to upholding
the purposes and principles of the United Nations to serve humankind. Under Article
36, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations, the Council can recommend
that the conflicting parties refer their disputes to the International Court of Justice,
which has unfortunately not been done much. The Council can also make appropriate
use of Article 96, paragraph 1, of the Charter and refer questions of international law
and other legal questions pertaining to ongoing or emerging conflicts that arise in
the Council’s work to the International Court of Justice to seek its advisory opinions.
Non-compliance with the orders and judgments of the International Court of
Justice poses a serious threat to international peace and security. Article 94, paragraph
2, of the Charter gives the Council the power to “make recommendations or decide”
20-1773535/51

S/2020/1286

on measures to be taken to give effect to a judgment if a request is made by one of
the parties to the dispute, which can assist the Council’s efforts to address peace
and security in relevant contexts. The Council should take a proactive approach in
applicable cases to help uphold the sanctity of the Court’s orders by taking measures
to implement the Court’s judgments.
There should be more open discussions and exchange of views between the
Council and the Court on issues pertaining to international peace and security.
Although the Council and the Court currently engage in an annual private meeting,
the frequency of interaction could assist the Council in understanding the legal
aspects of disputes that threaten international peace and security or clarify the legal
standing of certain Council actions. In that regard, we would welcome more debates
in the Council that are open to the participation of all States Members of the United
Nations, particularly the countries affected.

36/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Brazil to the United Nations
Brazil commends South Africa for the pertinent topic chosen for this open
debate and for its exceptional concept note (S/2020/1194, annex). In times of
increasing challenges to international law, we must pay tribute to the institution
that has been upholding it for 75 years. The International Court of Justice has been
a beacon of stability and justice, and it continues to play an instrumental role in
advancing the goals of the United Nations.
The International Court of Justice and the Security Council have different,
albeit complementary, functions in pursuing the purposes of the United Nations.
As the Court highlighted in the past, there is no competition or hierarchy between
itself and the Security Council, each exercising its own competence. In situations
simultaneously dealt with by both organs, the world court was able to resolve legal
questions and thereby contribute to a peaceful outcome.
The world court contributes to the maintenance of international peace and
security by providing a reliable venue for the peaceful settlement of disputes. It
has promoted and encouraged respect for human rights throughout its case law and
facilitated cooperation among nations in resolving disputes related to a variety of
topics, including those of an economic, social, cultural and humanitarian character.
The Charter of the United Nations envisages a plethora of means for
cooperation between the Council and the Court, which should be further explored.
Brazil wishes to emphasize four such ways.
The first potential area for increased cooperation is the advisory jurisdiction
of the International Court of Justice. To date, the Security Council has seldom taken
advantage of the Court’s expertise in clarifying legal issues related to both countryspecific situations and thematic agenda items. In exercising its power to request
advisory opinions, the Council would not only signal its commitment to working
within the parameters of international law but also pre-empt potential questions as to
the legality of its decisions, including by regional and domestic courts. Until now, the
Namibia advisory opinion is regarded as a landmark in clarifying core legal issues
related to the working methods of the Council. Should the need arise for additional
legal guidance, including on tackling conflicting obligations and adapting to new
rules, the International Court of Justice would be well placed to assist through its
advisory functions.
The second potential avenue of cooperation is the continued dialogue and
mutual consideration of each organ’s views on issues of common interest. The
Court often refers to Security Council resolutions in its decisions. Judges rely on
the outcome of the Council’s discussions in developing their reasoning. Likewise,
when drafting a resolution or deciding on matters related to peace and security, the
Council should also take into account the views of the International Court of Justice,
which has already developed a solid foundation with regard to issues such as the
definition of armed attack, the scope and limits of self-defence and the law of armed
conflict, including aspects of the protection of civilians.
The third aspect of a revitalized relationship regards the possibility to
recommend that conflicting States submit their dispute to the International Court of
Justice. We have often heard in the Council that prevention is generally better than
reaction. Promoting the peaceful settlement of a dispute through institutionalized
and reliable means goes to the core of prevention, and should therefore be considered
more often.

20-1773537/51

S/2020/1286

The fourth area where more could be done lies in the enforcement of the
Court’s decisions. It is no secret that there have been only a few instances when States
in dispute attempted to resort to the Council to address instances of non-compliance.
On the one hand, that is evidence of the high level of implementation of the Court’s
decisions. On the other hand, the scarce results of past attempts to bring such matters
to the attention of the Council might suggest the existence of institutional difficulties
in giving practical effect to Article 94 of the United Nations Charter. One should
reflect, for instance, on whether issues of non-compliance fall under Chapter VI,
thus requiring that a party to a dispute abstain from voting on that matter.
In conclusion, Brazil welcomes the fact that important international issues
are increasingly being brought before the International Court of Justice. That is
an acknowledgement of the commendable work of the Court in responding to the
requests of Member States for legal advice on difficult questions. The willingness
of the Court to tackle challenging international matters and shed light on their legal
aspects is one of the factors that make it so relevant today and reinforce the argument
for increased cooperation between the Security Council and the International Court
of Justice.

38/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Denmark to the
United Nations, Martin Bille Hermann
I have the honour to submit this written statement on behalf of Finland, Iceland,
Norway, Sweden and my own country, Denmark. The Nordic countries would like
to thank the Security Council for this opportunity to address it on the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations and the centenary of the Statute of the Permanent
Court of International Justice.
As the Security Council Report’s fourth report on the rule of law concluded,
strengthening the relationship between the Security Council and the International
Court of Justice could further promote international peace and security. The Charter
of the United Nations envisages a close relationship between the Council and the
Court. The Charter therefore provides the two organs with ample opportunities for
intensive cooperation.
At a time when the rules-based order is increasingly under pressure, the
Security Council and the Court should use their Charter prerogatives and play vital
and mutually complementary roles in promoting the rule of law, including with
regard to human rights and peace and security.
The rule of law at the national and international levels is fundamental to peace
and security. It is an important tool for preventing and resolving conflicts and is
critical to building sustainable peace and protecting human rights in the aftermath
of conflict. It is therefore not surprising that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, in particular Goal 16, seeks to promote peaceful, just and inclusive
societies, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and
inclusive institutions at all levels.
The peaceful settlement of disputes forms an integral part of the rule of law.
Therefore, the Nordic countries would welcome intensified cooperation between the
Security Council and the International Court of Justice in order to uphold the rule
of law.
The large volume of cases indicates the trust and confidence that States place
in the Court by referring disputes to it for resolution. The Court´s many contributions
to the peaceful settlement of maritime and land boundary disputes have been decisive
in maintaining international peace and security.
We would like to highlight the vital role of young people, especially young
women, when it comes to promoting the rule of law in developed and developing
countries alike. We therefore welcome the efforts of the Court, as well as the Council,
to engage young people — for example, by giving students from various backgrounds
a chance to familiarize themselves with international law and the judicial settlement
of disputes.
Since its establishment in 2000, the Judicial Fellowship Programme of the
International Court of Justice has enabled 193 law graduates to enhance their
knowledge of international law. We welcome the recent establishment of a trust fund
to grant fellowship awards to selected candidates who are nationals of developing
countries, thereby guaranteeing the geographic and linguistic diversity of the
participants in the Programme.
The International Court of Justice is the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations. The Security Council has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Together, they have the potential to be a powerful
force for upholding the rule of law at the international level. In particular, the Nordic
20-1773539/51

S/2020/1286

countries would like to recall that, in accordance with Article 33, paragraph2, and
Article 96, paragraph a, of the Charter of the United Nations, respectively, the
Security Council may call upon States parties to any dispute to settle such disputes
by peaceful means and request advisory opinions from the Court on legal matters.
We urge all States to engage actively and constructively in international
cooperation to support the rules-based international order, of which the peaceful
settlement of disputes and international peace and security form integral and crucial
parts. We call upon States that have not yet done so to consider accepting the
jurisdiction of the Court in accordance with its Statute.

40/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

Annex 21
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative and Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of Japan to the United Nations, Osuga Takeshi
I would like to begin by thanking the South African presidency for organizing
this open debate. I also commend President Abdulqawi Yusuf of the International
Court of Justice for his in-depth briefing (annex 1).
Japan associates itself with the statement submitted by Austria (annex 17) on
behalf of the countries that attach great importance to the rule of law. Allow me to
add a few points in my national capacity.
Japan deems Security Council discussions on the rule of law to be of the
utmost importance. Therefore, Japan welcomes this open debate on strengthening
cooperation between the Council and the International Court of Justice and expects
the discussions on the topic to continue in the Council.
Japan holds in high regard the work of the International Court of Justice, as the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations. The international community today
enjoys the benefit of numerous peaceful means of dispute settlement other than the
Court, but the Court undoubtedly plays a special and central role among them. It has
delivered many important judgments and advisory opinions since its first meeting
in 1946, taking on a diverse range of cases requiring thorough legal examination. In
recent years, the Court has seen increasing demand for legal solutions and opinions
on complex questions. We expect that the legal wisdom of the Court, with its highly
qualified judges and their dedication, will continue to attract the respect and support
of all Member States.
Faced with the unprecedented challenge of the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the International Court of Justice has made concerted efforts to review its procedures
and working methods in order to continue discharging its judicial functions. Japan
commends the Court for its unwavering commitment to its work, including on issues
related to peace and security and the peaceful settlement of disputes; its flexibility in
deciding to hold hearings and readings of judgments by video link; and the adoption
of relevant amendments to the Rules of Court.
The International Court of Justice, as the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations, needs to continue rendering judgments and advisory opinions of the
highest quality. At the same time, the Security Council should duly respect the role
and function of the Court in its consideration of the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Member States of the United Nations should also respect and
comply with the decisions of the Court.
Japan became a State party to the Statute of the Court in 1954, two years
before it joined the United Nations. Japan has accepted the compulsory jurisdiction
of the Court since 1958, in the firm belief that disputes should be settled by law.
Japan is confident that conviction is shared by a large majority of Member States.
However, to date only 74 States have made the “optional clause” declaration under
Article 36, paragraph 2, of the Statute. Japan fully supports General Assembly
resolution 74/191, which, in its seventh preambular paragraph, calls on “States that
have not yet done so to consider accepting the jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice in accordance with its Statute”. We encourage all States Members of the
United Nations to do so.
In conclusion, Japan reiterates its unwavering support for the essential
role the International Court of Justice plays in maintaining stable, rules-based
international relations by applying international law in its respected judgments and
advisory opinions.
20-1773541/51

S/2020/1286

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Liechtenstein to the
United Nations, Christian Wenaweser
We welcome this opportunity to offer reflections on the interplay between
the Security Council and the International Court of Justice. Given the central
importance of the rule of law at the international level, the importance of the role of
the Court cannot be overstated. The Court’s work has been remarkably successful.
Its judgments and advisory opinions are widely respected and represent one of the
most important sources of the development of international law. There is, however,
much room to expand the Court’s work. The most obvious point is that only 74 States
Members of the United Nations have made a declaration under Article 36, paragraph
2, of the Statute to accept the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court. Given the
important relationship that the Council has with the Court, we believe that all States
serving on it, in particular its permanent members, should show their commitment
to the rule of law by making the relevant declaration.
The Security Council also has the competence to ask for advisory opinions
from the Court on questions of public international law. We welcome the significant
increase in the number of requests for advisory opinions in recent years, some of
which have led to landmark opinions by the Court — such as the advisory opinion
on the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons. At the same time, that
increase is due to the increased engagement of the General Assembly. The Council
has used its important power in that respect only once in its history, as far back
as 50 years ago. That is very surprising given that there is no lack of examples of
Council members differing, at times sharply, on questions of public international
law, and they certainly could have benefited from an advisory opinion on more than
one occasion. If two thirds of the lifespan of the Council have been spent without
resorting to an important legal tool, it can come as no surprise that the option is not
even discussed anymore. But that can also change, and perhaps today’s debate can
be the beginning of a new conversation on that. We encourage all Council members
dedicated to the rule of law to contemplate the option when it has the potential
to inform the decision-making of the Council and resolve differences in legal
interpretation that impede effective Council action.
The most important contribution by the Council to the rule of law is in
enforcing international law, beginning with its very own decisions. In that respect
the Council certainly must do better. When permanent members take policy
decisions that clearly violate Council resolutions, the authority of the Council as a
whole is undermined significantly. The same is the case when they commit flagrant
violations of international law, in particular the most serious forms of the illegal
use of force against another State. We have witnessed all of that in the recent past.
Those are actions that further remove the Council from its task to be a guardian of
international law — be it the Charter of the United Nations or its very own decisions.
As a consequence, the Council undermines its own authority and the obligation
Member States have to implement its decisions.
We are particularly concerned about recent trends concerning the application
of international law with respect to the use of force, including Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations. Excessively expansive and unchecked interpretations
of Article 51 undermine the regulatory system set up by the drafters of the Charter
75 years ago and embraced by all of us when we joined the United Nations. In addition
to its other powers reflected in the Charter of the United Nations, the Council also
now has the option of referring situations of manifest violations of the prohibition
of the illegal use of force provision for investigation by the International Criminal
42/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

Court, an additional tool with which the Council can live up to its obligation to
ensure the relevant parts of the Charter of the United Nations.
Finally, the use of the veto is a key element of every discussion on the
relationship of the Security Council with the rule of law. We share the view of those
who believe that the veto power given to the permanent members in the Charter of
the United Nations is a responsibility. In particular, they must ensure that no veto be
cast that obviously contradicts the purposes and principles of the United Nations. As
we all know, we have seen far too many vetoes in recent years that have not stood that
test. We are of the view that any decision aimed at ending and preventing atrocity
crimes should find the support of every Security Council member and never be
subject to a veto. We welcome the fact that 122 States, including 10 Security Council
members, have signed on to the code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group regarding Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. We hope that many others will join the code of
conduct soon and work with Council members who are committed to its application
in practice.

20-1773543/51

S/2020/1286

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Mexico to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Mexico thanks the South African delegation for organizing this open debate
and fully agrees with the fundamental role played by the Security Council in
strengthening the rule of law, in particular through cooperation with the International
Court of Justice.
As noted in the declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly
on the rule of law at the national and international levels, adopted on 24 September
2012, we reiterate our call to the Council to
“continue to ensure that sanctions are carefully targeted, in support of
clear objectives and designed carefully so as to minimize possible adverse
consequences, and that fair and clear procedures are maintained and further
developed” (General Assembly resolution 67/1, para. 29).
The work of the International Court of Justice is critical to the peaceful
settlement of disputes and preventing the escalation of conflicts. Mexico advocates a
preventive approach by the Security Council, for which cooperation with the Court
may be key. In that regard, we highlight the following considerations.
First, it remains a concern that, despite the Court being the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations, less than half of the Organization’s Member States
have accepted the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court, including only one of the
five permanent members of the Council. We take this opportunity to urgently call
on those that have not yet done so to make a statement in that regard as a show of
support between two principal organs.
Secondly, we believe that the Security Council can take greater advantage of
its ability to request advisory opinions from the Court in order to obtain an impartial,
legal and technical view of certain situations, thereby helping to depoliticize certain
items on its agenda and to seek negotiated and peaceful solutions to conflicts, in full
compliance with international law.
The Council should also fully support the Court’s decisions, especially in
cases involving threats or breaches of international peace and security. One example
is the sub judice case concerning the Application of the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (The Gambia v. Myanmar). The judgment
that the Court will issue in due course may be fundamental to the treatment of that
crisis, and the Security Council should be attentive to it and ensure that its eventual
consideration is in harmony with the corresponding ruling.
Thirdly, we stress the role of the Security Council in the execution of the Court’s
judgments under Article 94, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations. The
success of the Court’s preventive work is directly related to the enforcement of its
judgments. Without it, the Court’s preventive and adjudicative role will fail, putting
international stability at risk. Unfortunately, my country has experienced at first
hand the frustration that generates, even after having submitted several notes to the
Security Council at the time concerning repeated non-compliance with a judgment.
In that regard, we take this opportunity to endorse the content of General Assembly
resolution 73/257, of 20 December 2018.
In conclusion, Mexico reaffirms its support for the International Court of
Justice and reiterates that strengthening and promoting the rule of law throughout
the Organization is one of our country’s priorities, and will also be promoted by the
Council through Mexico’s participation during the 2021-2022 biennium.
44/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

Annex 24
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Morocco to the United Nations
[Original: French]
First of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate on a very important topic: the promotion and strengthening of the rule of law,
including the strengthening of cooperation between the Security Council and the
International Court of Justice.
As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations this year,
the Kingdom of Morocco reaffirms its commitment to the purposes and principles
set forth in its founding text, the Charter of the United Nations, which enshrines
the three pillars that continue to shape the essence of its action: peace and security,
development and human rights.
The Charter confers on the Security Council the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, which makes an essential
contribution to the peaceful settlement of disputes, the prevention of the outbreak
of conflicts and the preservation of peace and security throughout the world. To
that end, the Council must ensure respect for the territorial integrity of States, the
prohibition of the threat or use of force and the promotion of the peaceful settlement
of disputes.
For its part, when the International Court of Justice is applied to, it rules on
legal disputes submitted to it by States and may give advisory opinions on legal
questions that may be submitted to it by the two principal organs of the United
Nations and the specialized agencies of the United Nations that are duly authorized
to do so, in accordance with the mandate conferred on it both by the Charter and its
Statute, whose seventy-fifth anniversary we are also celebrating.
The action of those two organs in the exercise of their respective functions is
complementary and distinct. The strengthening of the existing cooperation between
the Security Council and the International Court of Justice, within the institutional
framework provided by the Charter of the United Nations and with full respect for
their respective mandates, as envisaged by the Charter, contributes positively to the
work of the Council.
The Security Council has often confirmed that the rule of law and justice are
fundamental elements of both conflict prevention and the peaceful settlement of
disputes and are the cornerstones of sustainable peace. Drawing lessons from the
bellicose past of humankind, from conflicts and from human suffering, we recognize
that peace and security, respect for territorial integrity and respect for human rights
and the rule of law are intrinsically linked.
Far from being a legal issue in the strict sense, strengthening the rule of law
is closely linked to various political, economic and social factors. Strengthening
the rule of law should be an integral part of the political process and should be
coordinated with such processes, and not separated from them, so that they can
reinforce each other.
The Kingdom of Morocco’s commitment to good governance is unwavering.
That commitment is guaranteed by the Moroccan Constitution, which clearly
enshrines it in title XII. The rule of law does not arise out of circumstances; rather, it
is the fruit of a long-term and lasting commitment that is realized through continuous
efforts and concrete actions.

20-1773545/51

S/2020/1286

The coronavirus disease pandemic has brought about unprecedented global
challenges. As a result, the response, which can only be collective, will have to
be based on international cooperation and solidarity. Efforts must be redoubled to
maintain the primacy of the rule of law, and the pandemic must not be used as a
pretext for allowing progress to be eroded, particularly in the field of human rights
and humanitarian law. Morocco remains willing to continue to be part of any United
Nations effort to effectively and universally strengthen the rule of law.
We wish to commend the responsiveness of the Court, which has taken
commendable steps to ensure the continuity of its action and fulfil its judicial
function, in particular by adapting its working methods, amending its rules of
procedure and using technology to hold meetings and convene hearings by videoteleconference. Similarly, we welcome the adoption by the General Assembly of its
resolution 75/129, entitled “Trust Fund for the Judicial Fellowship Programme of the
International Court of Justice”, which our Mission co-sponsored, and we hope that
initiative will contribute to effective capacity-building in developing countries.
Finally, we thank the President of the Court for his tireless efforts throughout
his mandate and congratulate him for an outstanding presidency in these unique and
exceptional circumstances that we have all come to know and continue to experience.

46/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

Annex 25
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Myanmar to the
United Nations, Kyaw Moe Tun
Myanmar strongly believes that the rule of law is a foundation for relations
among nations. Multilateralism can succeed only if inter-State relations are based
on rules and the law. A rules-based international order could be the key platform for
bringing peace, harmony and development to our world today.
The United Nations was established to strengthen the rule of law at the
international level so as to govern States’ behaviour under the principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations. International peace and security cannot be
maintained without full compliance with international law and adherence to the
letter and spirit of the Charter, as well as respect for the rule of law.
One of the leading objectives of the United Nations since its inception has
been to strengthen the rule of law with a view to governing the conduct of States
in accordance with the principles set forth in the Charter. My delegation therefore
attaches great importance to the role the United Nations and its agencies play in
promoting and strengthening the rule of law. We also believe that the promotion of
the rule of law shall be in accordance with such universally established principles
and norms as respect for sovereign equality and territorial integrity, non-interference
in the internal affairs of other States, prohibition of the use or threat of use of force
and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
This year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of the International Court of
Justice, the sole and principal judicial organ of the United Nations, which has played
an essential role in maintaining global peace and stability since it was established in
1945. Through its jurisprudence, the Court has solidified the role of international law
and strengthened the rule of law so that peace and stability in a rules-based global
order shall prevail. In addition, the Court contributes fundamentally to promoting
and strengthening the rule of law through its judgments and advisory opinions on
the legal questions brought before it. Accordingly, the international community has
been able to enjoy the availability of numerous means of peaceful dispute settlement
over the past 75 years thanks to the Court.
In that regard, the Court is a linchpin to the implementation of Article 1,
paragraph 1, of the United Nations Charter, which articulated a first purpose for the
Organization, namely,
“to bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity with the principles
of justice and international law, adjustment or settlement of international
disputes or situations which might lead to a breach of the peace”.
The relationship between the Court and the other principal organs of the United
Nations, including the Security Council and the General Assembly, is therefore
fundamental to promoting and strengthening the rule of law at the international
level. However, we believe that the legal framework set out in the United Nations
Charter for cooperation between the Court and the other principal organs of the
United Nations, especially the Security Council, needs to be complementary and
should not allow for encroachment of each other’s courses of action.
Therefore, when we consider revitalizing the relationship between the Court
and the other principal organs of the United Nations, we should not — indeed must
not — overlook the legal limits set forth in the United Nations Charter to safeguard
the Court’s independent status. In addition, the term “principal judicial organ”,
stipulated in Article 92 of the United Nations Charter, mirrors the independent
status of the Court in the sense that, when exercising its judicial functions, it is not
20-1773547/51

S/2020/1286

subordinate or accountable to any external authority, including the other principal
organs of the United Nations. Therefore, any attempt to influence the course of an
ongoing case before the International Court of Justice by another principal organ
of the United Nations may more than jeopardize the independent status, legitimacy
and credibility of the Court; indeed, it may set a dangerous precedent and foment
uncertainty in the existing international legal order.
In recent years, we have witnessed abusive applications of the notion of the
rule of law. Some States Members of the United Nations have exploited international
legal institutions, including the United Nations, for their own political interests. As
such actions could undermine the established rules and principles of international
law, as well as the principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter, my delegation
would therefore like to express our serious concern at those illegal actions. We call
upon all Member States to work together to prevent such actions and defend the
United Nations Charter.

48/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

Annex 26

Statement by the Permanent Mission of Peru to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Peru welcomes the holding of today’s open debate and appreciates the
enlightening briefings and statements by all the speakers, who agree on the crucial
importance of strengthening cooperation between two of the principal organs of the
United Nations — the Security Council and the International Court of Justice. As
a country committed to multilateralism, international law and the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes, Peru can testify to the relevance and effectiveness of
both organs. On five occasions as a non-permanent member of the Security Council,
we have closely monitored the substantive contributions and commitment of that
organ to the maintenance of international peace and security. Similarly, we have in
the past resorted to the contentious jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice,
which has led to the resolution of disputes and given our relations greater stability,
to the benefit of our populations and those of other States.
To that end, we recognize the capacity and competence of the eminent judges
who make up the Court, as well as the representativeness of the various legal
traditions that they stand for. Those attributes undoubtedly enhance the prestige
and legitimacy of the highest international court, which is reflected in its sustained
level of activity. The diversity of the geographical distribution of the cases it hears
confirms the universal nature of its jurisdiction.
We note, however, that the Security Council has historically not taken
advantage of the full potential offered by its interaction with the Court. The practice
indicates infrequent contact, which contravenes the organic and synergic relationship
that both organs should maintain, in accordance with the provisions of the United
Nations Charter. The Security Council is empowered, at any stage of a dispute, to
make recommendations within the framework of its functions. In that respect, in
accordance with Article 36, paragraph 3, of the United Nations Charter,
“legal disputes should as a general rule be referred by the parties to the
International Court of Justice”.
In line with that provision, we consider it essential that the Council recommend on a
more regular basis that situations between States that jeopardize international peace
and security be referred to the Court.
Similarly, in accordance with Article 94, paragraph 2, of the Charter, if one of
the parties to a dispute fails to comply with the obligations arising from a ruling of the
Court, it is essential that the Security Council take a more active role, discussing the
matter in depth and dictating the necessary measures to ensure its implementation.
All that is in keeping with the unequivocal defence we believe it is up to the Security
Council to exercise in order to preserve the prestige and credibility of the Court.
We also recall that the Court is called upon to serve the international
community and contribute in particular to the maintenance of international peace
and security by issuing advisory opinions at the request of the Security Council, in
accordance with Article 96, paragraph 1, of the Charter. In that regard, we encourage
the members of the Council to promote the effective use of that prerogative because
of the benefits it can bring to resolving a dispute that threatens international peace
and security or to clarifying the legal basis of certain decisions of the Council.
Recourse to the means for the peaceful settlement of disputes under Chapter VI
of the Charter is an underutilized tool with a real capacity to offer positive alternatives
for action before, during and after conflicts. Among those, the submission of legal
disputes to the Court on the recommendation of the Security Council, as a visible
element of a rules-based international system, is certainly worth emphasizing.

20-1773549/51

S/2020/1286

Annex 27
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Portugal to the United Nations
At the outset, Portugal would like to congratulate South Africa for convening
today’s open debate on such an important topic. We would also like to thank the
President of the International Court of Justice for his briefing.
The International Court of Justice is the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations. Its mission is devoted to the pursuit of the Organization’s purposes, including
in matters related to the maintenance of international peace and security. My country,
Portugal, has strongly advocated the importance of peacefully settling disputes and
the Court’s role in fulfilling that purpose. For that reason, in the past, Portugal asked
the International Court of Justice to rule on disputes it had with other States on the
application of international law in two specific cases — Right of Passage over Indian
Territory (Portugal v. India) and East Timor (Portugal v. Australia).
Portugal values the fundamental role the Court plays in contributing to peace
and security through the judicial settlement of disputes between States. In addition,
and of no less importance, the Court has helped through its jurisprudence to clarify
the law applicable on a multitude of aspects related to sovereignty, jus ad bellum and
jus in bellum, human rights, natural resources and boundary delimitations, to name
just a few. Such clarification undoubtfully helps in the prevention of conflicts.
It is also worth noting that, under Article 94, paragraph 2, of the Charter of
the United Nations, the Security Council may be called on to take action to enforce a
judgment of the Court. Furthermore, the Council is directly involved in the election
of the judges of the Court. It is therefore clear that the respective operations of the
Security Council and the Court are complementary in nature. Their political and
judicial approaches to a conflict are in fact mutually reinforcing, albeit independent.
The strengthening of the cooperation between the Security Council and the
International Court of Justice would without a doubt reinforce the noble tasks that
the Charter confers to the United Nations, its States Members and specifically those
two organs. Among the concrete steps already provided for in the Charter that could
serve progress in that direction are the Council considering more often to recommend
the submission of a dispute to the Court pursuant to Article 36, paragraph 3, of
the Charter, which states that the Council should take into consideration that legal
disputes should be referred by the parties to the Court; the Council revisiting its power
to ensure compliance with Court judgments, pursuant to Article 94 of the Charter;
the Council taking a more proactive role and establishing an overview procedure,
together with the Court, to monitor compliance; and the Council requesting with
greater frequency advisory opinions of the Court, pursuant to Article 96, paragraph
1, of the Charter, as it has done so only once, in 1970, in relation to the situation in
Namibia, which contrasts with the practice of the General Assembly.
The foregoing steps, although essential, are not without difficulties. Members
have different views on the relationship between the Council and the Court and on
the role of the Court in settling disputes between States. That has had the effect of
the Council not having the custom or practice of using all the mechanisms available
to it with respect to its relations with the Court. Portugal therefore encourages the
Council to dedicate more attention and effort to that matter. A first step forward
could be the drafting of a road map on specific ways to implement the tools that the
Charter makes available to the Council.
In conclusion, we would like to renew our appreciation for the South African
leadership on a very important topic. We hope that its efforts and the Council’s
deliberations will bring about tangible results. For its part, Portugal will continue
50/51

20-17735

S/2020/1286

to closely follow the matter and join efforts aimed at fulfilling the Council’s and the
Court’s respective mandates in the maintenance of international peace and security.

20-1773551/51
