Genenl Allembly-Fortietb Session

156

programmes to human settlements activities as a proved
means of promoting economic and social development, as
well as to the fair distribution ofthe benefits ofsuch development to ali segments of the population;
4. Takes note of Commission on Human Settlements
resolution 8/12 of 8 May 198588 and, in that context, urges
the international community, including multilateral institutions and agencies, to consider, as appropriate, more
flexible strategies in lending for human settlements projects and programmes;
5. Commends those Govemments and others that
have made voluntary financia! contributions to the United
Nations Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation, particularly those that have done so on a regular basis, and
appeals to those that have not contributed to do so at the
earliest opportunity;
6. Decides, in accordance with Commission on Human
Settlements resolution 8/4 of 8 May 1985,88 to designate
the first Monday of October of every year as "World Habitat Day".
119th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

B
BIENNIAL CYCLE OF SESSJONS OF THE COMMISSJON ON
HUMAN SETTLEMENTS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/ l 62 of 19 December 1977,
by which it provided for the establishment of the Commission on Human Settlements and specified the duration of
the term of office of members of the Commission,
Reca/ling a/so its decision 38/429 of 19 December 1983
on the rationalization of the work of the Second Committee and its resolution 39/ 170 B of 17 December 1984, in
which it required the Commission on Human Settlements
to consider adopting a biennial cycle of sessions,
Taking note with satisfaction ofCommission on Human
Settlements resolution 8/1 of lO May 198588 on a biennial
cycle of sessions for the Commission,
Having considered the recommendation ofthe Commission that the duration of the term of office of its members
should be changed from three to four years in recognition
of the change to a biennial cycle of sessions,
l. W e/comes the decision of the Commission on
Human Settlements contained in its resolution 8/ 1 that,
beginning in 1987, its sessions will, on an experimental
basis, be held only in odd-numbered years;
2. Endorses the decision of the Commission on
Human Settlements contained in its resolution 8/1 to hold
a special session of shorter duration in 1988 devoted
exclusively to ensuring effective follow-up to the Intemational Year of Shelter for the Homeless which, pursuant to
General Assembly resolution 37/221 of 20 December
1982, will be observed in 1987;
3. Decides that, beginning with the terms of office commencing on l January 1987, membership in the Commission on Human Settlements will be for a term offour years
instead of three.
119th p/enary meeting
17 December 198 5
96 A/40/689.

e
CO-ORDINATION OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS PROGRAMMES WITHIN THE UNITED NATIONS SYSTEM

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
conceming the co-ordination of human settlements programmes within the United Nations system, 96
Taking note of the view on co-ordination expressed in
Commission on Human Settlements resolution 8/ 13 of 8
May 1985,88
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure effective participation of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) in the work of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination and its subsidiary machinery
relevant to its mandate, as contained in General Assembly
resolution 32/ 162 of 19 December 1977, taking into
account Assembly resolutions 32/ l 97 of 20 December
1977, 35/77 C of 5 December 1980 and 37/223 C of 20
December 1982, and to keep the matter under review for
consideration by the Economic and Social Council at its
second regular session in 1987 on the implementation of
the present resolution, taking into consideration the
follow-up of the cross-organizational programme analysis
in human settlements by the Committee on Programme
and Co-ordination.
119th p/enary meeting
17 December 1985

40/203. Intemational Year of Shelter for the Homeless
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/221 of 20 December 1982,
38/168 of 19 December 1983 and 39/171 of 17 December
1984 on the Intemational Year of Shelter for the Homeless,
Noting with satisfaction that more than one hundred and
fifteen countries have designated official national focal
points for the lntemational Year of Shelter for the Homeless, that many countries have already launched intensive
national programmes for the Year and reported thereon to
the Commission on Human Settlements at its eighth session, and that more than one hundred and sixty projects
for the Year are under way in sixty-five countries,
Expressing its appreciation to the twenty-nine developing countries and five developed countries that have
already made or pledged voluntary contributions to the
Intemational Year of Shelter for the Homeless,
Recognizing that an estimated one quarter ofthe world's
population does not have adequate shelter and lives in
extremely unhealthy and unsanitary conditions and that
the programme for the lntemational Year of Shelter for
the Homeless provides a necessary and unique opportunity for countries to review their prospects and priorities
for shelter and settlements and to develop, before or
during 1987, new national policies and strategies for
improving shelter for, and the neighbourhoods of, the poor
and disadvantaged by the year 2000,
Noting that most of the voluntary contributions pledged
to date have been pledged by developing countries and
that further voluntary contributions are now needed in
order to rarry out effectively the overall plans endorsed by
the General Assembly for activities to be undertaken
before and during the International Year ofShelter for the
Homeless, 97
97 See A/38/233-F.i 1983/74 and Corr.1

V.

Resolutions adopted on tbe reports of tbe Second Committee

l. Requests those countries that have not yet established official national focal points for the International
Year of Shelter for the Homeless to do so in the near
future, along the lines specified in the annex to General
Assembly resolution 38/168;
2. A/so requests those countries that have not yet formulated national programmes and plans of action for the
International Year of Shelter for the Homeless to do so
and periodically to provide information on them to the
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat)
so that ali national focal points can be regularly informed
of the activities, progress and achievements of the Year in
countries around the world;
3. Further requests those countries and international
organizations that have not yet done so to designate projects for the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless
aimed at improving access to land, financing, building
materials, training and employment, giving special attention to legal and institutional measures, and to send a project information sheet on each project to the United
Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat);
4. Requests ali countries in their periodic reports on
their national programmes and projects for the Year,
especially in reports to the Commission on Human Settlements at its ninth session, to give special attention to their
plans for developing and implementing new national policies and strategies for improving shelter for, and the
neighbourhoods of, the poor and disadvantaged by the
year 2000;
5. Appea/s once again to ali Governments that have
not yet announced a voluntary contribution, especially
those of developed countries, as well as to international
financia} institutions and intergovernmental and non-govemmental organizations, to provide effective financial and
other support to the programme for the International Year
of Shelter for the Homeless;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to
the Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of 1986 on progress achieved in the implementation
of the approved programme of measures and activities to
be undertaken before and during the lnternational Year of
Shelter for the Homeless; 97
7. Invites the Economic and Social Council to include
a special account of its deliberations on the subject in its
report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session;
8. Decides, in view ofthe fact that 1987 is the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless, to devote special
attention to the Year at its forty-first session.
119th p/enary meeting
17 December /985

40/204. Effective mobilization and integration of
women in development98
The General Assembly,
Taking note with appreciation ofthe world survey on the
role of women in development, 99
Recognizing that although the survey was submitted to
the World Conference to Review and Appraise the
Achievements ofthe United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace, it has yet to receive the
detailed attention it deserves,
Noting with satisfaction the adoption by the Conference
of the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the
98 See also sect. I, footnotc 17, and sect. VI, resolution 40/IOI.
99 A/CONF.116/4 and Corr. 1.
IOO Report o( the World Conference to Review ami Appra1se the Achievements ojthe Únited Nations T>ecadefor Women: Equality, T>eve/opment and

1:i7

Advancement of Women, 100 which constitute an important and positive contribution to the attainment of thc
objectives of the Decade and provide a policy framework
for the advancement of women to the year 2000,
l. Invites the Commission on the Status of Women at
its thirty-first session to make specific action-oriented recommendations based on the world survey on the role of
women in development as a part ofthe overall implemen ..
tation of and follow-up to the Nairobi Forward-looking
Strategies for the Advancement of Women, which should
be for action at the national and international levels, including co-operation among developing countries, within an
economic context, and should address sectoral and crosssectoral problems identified in the survey, and requests
that the report of the Commission be made available,
through the Economic and Social Council at its second
regular session of 1986, to the General Assembly at its
forty-second session under the sub-item entitled "Effective
mobilization and integration of women in economic
development";
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take those recommendations into account when formulating the systemwide medium-term plan for women and development 101
and to invite the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the
International Labour Organisation, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the International Training and Research Institute for the Advancement of Women, to take into account the implications of
the world survey when preparing their contributions to
that plan;
3. A/so requests the Secretary-General to update the
survey on the role of women in development on a regular
basis, focusing on selected emerging development issues
that have an impact on the role ofwomen in the economy
at the local, national, regional and international levels;
4. Decides that the first update ofthe survey should be
submitted to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session, in 1989;
5. Invites the Commission on the Status of Women at
its thirty-first session to make a recommendation on future
updates ofthe survey after 1989, bearing in mind the need
for effective co-ordination with the follow-up activities of
the World Conference to Review and Appraise the
Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace;
6. A/so invites the Commission on the Status of
Women to suggest terms of reference for the first update of
the survey, which should contain improved data and
information on the role of women in development, including, inter afia, their role in the informal sector of the
economy;
7. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to contribute to thr
preparation of the first update of the survey;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly, at its forty-second session, a progress
report on the preparation of the first regular update of the
survey, including preliminary views on its scope and content, so that the Commission on the Status of Women, at
its thirty-second session, can take that report into account,
together with the comments on the subject made by delegations in the General Assembly;
Peace. Nairobi, 15-26 Ju/y /98.1 (Umted Nations publication, Sales N,,
E.85.IV.10), chap. 1, sect. A.
IOI See Economic and Social Counc,I resolution 1985/46 of 3 I May 1985
