A /75/PV.56

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

56th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 3 March 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 33
The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict
Draft resolution (A/75/L.65)
The President: Trading in conflict diamonds
continues to be a matter of serious international concern.
These tiny pieces of carbon can have a devastating
impact on people’s peace, safety and security in
producing countries. Systematic and gross human rights
violations are synonymous with the conflicts fuelled by
the illegal trade in diamonds, conflicts that have had
a negative impact on regional security, particularly in
Africa, where the earth’s diamonds are concentrated.
It is imperative that Member States continue to take
action to curb the flow and impact of conflict diamonds
in order to meet their obligations regarding peace and
security as set out in the Charter of the United Nations.
Since its creation in 2003, the Kimberley Process
has explored ways and means of curbing the flow of
illicit diamonds to the legitimate diamond market. This
unique tripartite arrangement between Governments,
the diamond industry and civil society has helped to
control and monitor the international trade in rough
diamonds, including by helping to implement United
Nations resolutions effectively. It demonstrates what
we can achieve when we work together. I encourage
broad participation in the Process in order to curb
the flow of illicit diamonds. When legal, that trade
can fuel economic development rather than conflict.
Channelled effectively, this billion-dollar industry can

help countries reduce poverty and meet the Sustainable
Development Goals. The coronavirus disease pandemic
has exacerbated existing vulnerabilities and hurt those
most in need the hardest, and available resources,
including diamonds, must be channelled to meet their
urgent needs.
Draft resolution A/75/L.65, which has been
submitted to the Assembly for action today, reflects
the substantial progress and activity that have been
achieved under the aegis of the Kimberley Process. We
must ensure that the Process remains relevant so that
diamonds fuel development rather than conflict.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.65.
Mr. Varganov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Kimberley Process is a unique
intergovernmental mechanism for restoring peace and
promoting the legitimate trade in diamonds, primarily
for the benefit of the people of the African continent.
It has a key role in regulating the trade in rough
natural diamonds.
Over its more than twenty years of existence, the
Kimberley Process participants have not only agreed on
minimum rules applicable to the diamond trade but have
significantly expanded its agenda to include issues that
are an integral part of development, such as responsible
supply chains and business conduct, including respect
for human and labour rights, combating moneylaundering and the financing of terrorism, minimizing
the impact on the environment and protecting it, the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-05600 (E)

*2105600*

A/75/PV.56

03/03/2021

development of the regions of diamonds’ origin and
transparency in their production.

Certification Scheme, are happy to join the consensus
on draft resolution A/75/L.65 today.

The Russian Federation’s chairmanship of
the Kimberley Process in 2020 coincided with an
unprecedented global health crisis caused by the
coronavirus disease pandemic. The restrictions
resulting from the pandemic affected virtually every
area of international cooperation, and the Process was
no exception. Contacts had to be limited and annual
meetings cancelled, and the process itself was effectively
frozen for almost a year. In the circumstances, in August
2020 the participating countries took an administrative
decision to postpone the presidency of the Russian
Federation to 2021 and Botswana’s to 2022.

The year 2020 was like no other, including for
the Kimberley Process, which collectively decided
to make it a pause year and postpone the 2020 and
2021 chairmanships of the Russian Federation and
Botswana, respectively, by one year. The coronavirus
disease pandemic brought unprecedented challenges,
from the direct threat to health and well-being to the
severe disruption to societies and economies and the
devastating impact on lives and livelihoods. The EU
welcomes the resumption of the work of the Kimberley
Process despite the continuation of the pandemic.

Despite the freeze, the Russian Federation, in
its role as Chair, affirms its commitment to the
principles of the Kimberley Process and is ready to
foster cooperation within it. In that regard, we decided
to submit draft resolution A/75/L.65, entitled “The
role of diamonds in fuelling conflict”, to the General
Assembly for consideration during its seventy-fifth
session, under agenda item 33. The text is generally of
a technical nature.
We would like to thank all the delegations that
took part in the consultations on the draft resolution
for their constructive stance and flexibility during the
negotiations. Thanks to that attitude, we were able to
reach agreement in a spirit of cooperation and mutual
support. We also thank the countries that joined us as
sponsors, and we look forward to the adoption of the
text today by consensus.
Finally, we would like to express our regret that a
member of the 2021 Kimberley Process secretariat who
was supposed to travel to New York to introduce the
draft resolution could not attend due to the non-issuance
of a United States entry visa, despite the fact that the
application was submitted well in advance. That is
further evidence of the abuse by the United States
of its status as the host country of United Nations
Headquarters and of discriminatory measures against
individual delegations.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mrs. Vissers (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
European Union and its member States, which act
as a single participant in the Kimberley Process
2/21

The EU is proud of what the Kimberley Process has
achieved since the Certification Scheme entered into
force in 2003. This joint initiative of Governments, civil
society and the industry has reinforced the message that
diamonds belong to the communities that mine them,
not to militias. For several countries and communities,
the Kimberley Process has made the difference between
war and peace.
One of the unique, defining features of the
Kimberley Process is its tripartite structure. Both
industry and civil society are essential elements of
the Process. They have greatly contributed to its
establishment and operation. The EU has been at the
forefront of this unique global partnership, grounded
in the United Nations, since the very beginning. It
will continue to work to advance the objectives of
the Kimberley Process with a view to ensuring that
all participants meet the minimum requirements. As
Vice-Chair of the Kimberley Process Working Group
on Monitoring, the EU remains committed to working
together with Botswana to give impetus to that work
in order to further strengthen the effectiveness of the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme. The EU
welcomes the progress made towards the establishment
of a permanent secretariat. In that context, we welcome
Austria’s candidacy to serve as its host.
The EU continues to place artisanal mining
communities at the core of its work, in line with the
Brussels Declaration on Internal Controls of Participants
with Rough Diamond Trading and Manufacturing, the
Moscow Declaration on Improving Internal Controls
over Alluvial Diamond Production, the Washington
Declaration on Integrating Development of Artisanal
and Small-Scale Diamond Mining with Kimberley
Process Implementation and the 2030 Sustainable
21-05600

03/03/2021

Development Goals, in order to promote economic and
social development and prosperity. The EU therefore
continues to encourage and support cooperation on
the implementation of the Process with a regional
dimension in order to address common challenges,
building on the experience of the Mano River Union.
The EU strongly supports the calls for the Kimberley
Process to evolve and adapt to meet future challenges in
the global diamond supply chain and welcomes efforts
to continue strengthening it to ensure that it remains
fit for purpose and provides assurance that diamonds
are not tainted by violence and truly benefit those
who mine them. We strongly believe in transparency
and accountability in the rough-diamond supply chain
to ensure a diligent approach to responsible roughdiamond sourcing. As a member of the Kimberley
Process Central African Republic monitoring team,
the EU remains concerned about the situation on
the ground and continues to follow developments
closely. We welcome the continuing commitment of
the Government of the Central African Republic to
working collaboratively with the monitoring team
in order to ensure the traceability of rough-diamond
shipments as a crucial element in the integrity of the
Kimberley Process.
The Kimberley Process stands out as an example of
the positive change that the international community can
bring about when we work together towards a common
objective. It stands out as a practical example of rulesbased multilateralism that has had a real impact on the
lives of people and communities across the globe. The
EU remains committed to ensuring that the Kimberley
Process continues to fulfil its role as a unique tool for
conflict prevention, a catalyst for good governance
and transparency in natural-resources management
and as an instrument for peacebuilding and sustaining
peace. We look forward to working constructively
in that regard with the Chair, the Vice-Chair and all
participants and observers in the Kimberley Process in
the year ahead.
Mr. Mmalane (Botswana): We join other
delegations in thanking the Russian Federation for
spearheading the introduction under this important
agenda item of draft resolution A/75/L.65, entitled
“The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking
the link between the illicit transaction of rough
diamonds and armed conflict as a contribution to
prevention and settlement of conflicts”. Russia’s able
stewardship of the Kimberley Process in these difficult

A/75/PV.56

times of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
has been remarkable. The delegation has fought to
ensure business continuity to the best of its ability,
especially with regard to maintaining working groups
and committees.
The Government of Botswana welcomes the draft
resolution’s adoption today. We believe that it represents
the progress achieved in the Kimberley Process over
the past 18 years, but more importantly the challenges
that we as diamond-producing countries are facing
today owing to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic,
which has negatively affected the economies of all the
participants in the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme, without exception. My country, Botswana,
has been dependent on the proceeds from diamond
sales for more than four decades, proceeds that have
enabled us to implement and achieve our national
development agenda. It is diamond revenue that has
enabled Botswana to rise from being one of the poorest
countries in the world at its independence in 1966 to an
upper-middle-income country today. The importance
of diamonds to Botswana’s development agenda is
therefore unquestionable. My country’s diamonds
are for development. It is against that backdrop that
Botswana has been a sponsor of this resolution for the
past 18 years, with a view to protecting the integrity
of the diamond sector. The unanimous adoption of this
yearly resolution confirms anew the importance of the
diamond sector as a catalyst for promoting economic
and social development. I would like to highlight some
aspects of the draft resolution that are of particular
importance to my delegation.
Today’s draft resolution calls for ensuring that the
positive benefits of the legitimate diamond trade go
to the producing countries. It therefore underlines the
need for continued international action with regard to
the ethical exploitation, sale and trade of diamonds. It
also calls for efforts to enhance cooperative assistance
to diamond-producing countries on best practices,
capacity-building and compliance with Kimberley
Process standards, rules, procedures and certifications,
an area that my delegation has long advocated for. I
therefore want to take this opportunity to encourage
all participants in the Kimberley Process to continue
adhering to the high standards of the Certification
Scheme. We must not let our achievements to
date regress.
Since the establishment of the Process in 2003, the
numbers of conflict diamonds have dropped drastically,

21-056003/21

A/75/PV.56

in a clear indication of the success of the Certification
Scheme and the diversity of its membership. However,
the pandemic poses a threat to the success achieved so
far, owing to the disruption it has inflicted on some
of the activities of the Process. That is especially true
with regard to the programme of its Working Group
on Monitoring and its review visits. My delegation
therefore supports the call to include the subject of the
challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic to the
diamond trade, and how we will build back better, as an
agenda item for 2021.
In conclusion, I want to reaffirm my delegation’s
commitment to the Kimberley Process initiative and
to assure the Assembly and the Russian Federation
of our continued cooperation and support during its
chairmanship. We look forward to a constructive
intersessional and plenary session in Russia during
the year.
Mr. Reed (United Kingdom): The adoption of draft
resolution A/75/L.65 today is an opportunity for the
international community to reiterate its commitment
to working together to reduce the flow of conflict
diamonds. The United Kingdom would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Kimberley Process for warmly
welcoming our country as its newest participant. We
were a founding member of the Kimberley Process
and have been involved in this initiative since it
began. We see the Process as an important conflictprevention measure and continue to be committed to
its principles and values. The United Kingdom looks
forward to working with the whole Kimberley Process
community in order to make progress on its work to
prevent conflict and tackle other challenges facing this
important agenda.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): Let me begin by
congratulating the Russian Federation on its role as
caretaker of the Kimberley Process in 2020 during
the challenging circumstances of the coronavirus
disease pandemic. We also congratulate Russia on its
chairmanship of the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme in 2021, ably supported by Botswana as
Vice-Chair, and we assure them of South Africa’s full
support for their work.
As part of the group of southern African
diamond-producing countries that initiated the
Kimberley Process, whose membership has grown
to 56 participants — including the 27 members of
the European Union jointly, as one participant — the
4/21

03/03/2021

Kimberley Process has come a long way in the 18 years
since it was established in 2003, with its members
now accounting for approximately 99.8 per cent of the
global production of rough diamonds. However, while
great strides have been made by the Kimberley Process
in addressing the role of conflict diamonds in fuelling
conflict, including conflicts in Africa, and in creating
a positive development impact for people dependent
on the diamond trade, the continued trade in conflict
diamonds persists and remains a serious international
concern, as draft resolution A/75/L.65, which we are
adopting today, recognizes. Those persistent challenges
clearly point to the need for continually enhancing the
effectiveness of the Kimberley Process by means of
many of the measures highlighted in the draft resolution,
which we therefore welcome and fully support.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming South
Africa’s strong commitment to upholding the integrity
and credibility of the Kimberley Process and ensuring
that it remains relevant and effective in addressing the
issue of conflict diamonds.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/75/L.65, entitled “The
role of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the
link between the illicit transaction of rough diamonds
and armed conflict as a contribution to prevention and
settlement of conflicts”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/75/L.65, the following countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro,
the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Arab Emirates, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and Zimbabwe.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.65?
21-05600

03/03/2021

Draft resolution
(resolution 75/261).

A/75/PV.56

A/75/L.65

was

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 33?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolutions (A/75/L.62 and A/75/L.63)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.62.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): It is my
great pleasure to introduce draft resolution A/75/L.62,
on the commemoration by the General Assembly of the
International Day of Argania on 10 May every year.
Argania is an ancestral source of sustainable
development for millions of people in my country and
millions of workers, businesses, intermediaries and
consumers across the world. This essence, which is
unique to Morocco, was classified by UNESCO as an
intangible cultural heritage of humanity in 2014 and by
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO) as a globally important agricultural
heritage systems initiative in 2018.
By proclaiming 10 May annually as the International
Day of Argania, the United Nations will promote it
as a natural heritage of humanity and strengthen its
impact on the socioeconomic, ecological, cultural,
culinary, medical and sustainable development fronts.
Argan, and its culinary and cosmetic derivatives, is
an ancestral asset. Argan oil from Morocco, which is
produced from trees managed in a centuries-old way
by local people, and women in particular, working
in cooperatives, has been frequently promoted both
nationally and internationally and continues to be a
vector for development that deserves our full attention
and commitment.
This draft resolution promotes the role of the argan
sector in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), including SDG 5, on gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls, especially in

rural areas. More than 4,000 local cooperatives are
currently working on the production, manufacturing
and promotion of argania, as well as in thousands of
industrial and pharmaceutical cooperatives throughout
the world. By commemorating the International Day of
Argania, the United Nations is honouring the role of
women in rural areas in creating jobs and preserving
biodiversity. The International Day is also devoted
to farmers, entrepreneurs, men and women alike, in
supporting them in investing in sustainable techniques
and promoting equitable value chains in solidarity that
leave no one behind.
We are now in 2021, at the beginning of the Decade
of Action for Sustainable Development. That gives
the international community a deadline of 10 years to
accelerate the implementation of the SDGs by 2030. For
Morocco, the Decade of Action is also an opportunity to
call for the conservation and recognition of argania as
a national and international heritage whose intangible
importance transcends borders. In 2020, His Majesty
Mohammed VI launched a project to plant 10,000
hectares of argania in the vulnerable regions of SoussMassa, Marrakech-Safi and Guelmim-Oued Noun. That
project is large in scope and scale and its socioeconomic
and ecological effects very much reflect how important
resilience and adaptation to climate change are for our
country, as well as for the United Nations and the planet
as a whole.
In that connection, this draft resolution calls for
strengthening financial support to initiatives for climate
change led by developing countries, such as the Green
Climate Fund, which has contributed to the project
of preserving and planting argania in Morocco. The
draft resolution will also be a catalyst for international
cooperation with a view to supporting developing
countries, helping professional organizations and
local producers gain access to international markets
and strengthening scientific research to innovate and
add value.
Like many of the initiatives supported by
international and national stakeholders, this draft
resolution strengthens our collective choice to invest in
the framework of sustainable development. My country
will therefore continue to share its know-how to ensure
that argania’s full value is recognized and serves
as an example of adaptation to climate change and
socioeconomic development in developing countries,
particularly in Africa. The protection of argania extends
beyond the ecological dimension. It is a vocation that

21-056005/21

A/75/PV.56

fosters modern techniques for collecting and saving
water, using renewable energy. Modern technologies
and innovation are making possible what was once out
of reach.
In conclusion, I would like to warmly thank all the
delegations that collaborated on this draft resolution
and participated in its negotiation process. I would also
like to thank our national agency for the development of
oasis zones and argan, the United Nations Department
of Economic and Social Affairs, the FAO, UNESCO
and the World Health Organization for their fruitful
involvement in this issue. I enthusiastically invite
delegations that have not yet done so to sponsor this
draft resolution today and to align themselves with
my country’s drive to celebrate the International Day
of Argania. Together we can give new momentum to
sustainable development and contribute to releasing the
full potential of the value chain of the biosphere.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.63.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I have the honour of
introducing draft resolution A/75/L.63, entitled
“International Year of Millets, 2023”, submitted by
Bangladesh, Kenya, Nepal, Nigeria, the Russian
Federation, Senegal and my own country, India.
At the outset, we would like to thank the more than
60 delegations that have sponsored this initiative, and
we invite others to join as well. We call on all members
to join in promoting the International Year of Millets.
Millets, often called nutri-cereals, encompass a
diverse group of cereals and were among the earliest
plants to be domesticated. They have served as a
traditional staple crop for millions of families in
sub-Saharan Africa and Asia. More than 90 per cent
of millet production today takes place in developing
countries in Africa and Asia. Millets are more
nutritious than rice or wheat. They are gluten-free,
have a low glycemic index, are rich in protein, fibres
and micronutrients such as iron, zinc and calcium, and
hold immense promise for people with micronutrient
deficiencies. They provide high energy, high dietary
fibre, proteins with a balanced amino-acid profile and
many essential minerals, vitamins and antioxidants, all
of which play a substantial role in lowering diabetes.
Millets also grow in poor soils with little or no inputs,
have low carbon and water footprints, are resistant
6/21

03/03/2021

to many crop diseases and pests and can survive in
adverse climate conditions.
While millet cultivation has been historically
widespread, its production is declining in many
countries. There is an urgent need to promote the
nutritional and ecological benefits of millets to
consumers, producers and decision-makers to improve
production efficiencies, research and development
investments and food sector linkages.
The primary objective of the draft resolution before
the Assembly is to raise awareness and increase direct
policy action regarding the nutritional and health
benefits of millet consumption and the suitability of
millets for cultivation under adverse and changing
climate conditions. Its adoption will help focus
enhanced investment in research and development
and extension services related to millets. The draft
resolution is based on resolution 10/2019 of the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO), on the benefits of millet consumption, adopted
by the FAO at its forty-first session, held in Rome
in June 2019. The resolution requested the General
Assembly to declare 2023 the International Year of
Millets. The draft is also based on resolution 70/259,
which proclaimed the United Nations Decade of
Action on Nutrition, recommendation 10 of the second
International Conference on Nutrition and Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) 2, on ending hunger, and
3, on ensuring healthy lives and promoting well-being.
We believe that the commemoration of the
International Year of Millets will help to create greater
awareness of millet production. It will contribute to
food security, nutrition, support to the livelihoods
and incomes of farmers, poverty eradication and the
achievement of the SDGs, particularly in regions that
are drought-prone or threatened by climate change.
It will also help promote millets as a key component
of the food basket. We are confident that with the
active participation of all sections of society, we can
reap a range of benefits during this International Year
of Millets.
In conclusion, I would like to thank all the sponsors,
especially the delegations of Bangladesh, Kenya,
Nepal, Nigeria, the Russian Federation and Senegal, for
their support in the work that led to the submission of
this important draft resolution, whose adoption we will
deeply appreciate.
21-05600

03/03/2021

The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolutions A/75/L.62 and A/75/L.63. Delegations
wishing to make a statement in explanation of vote or
position before the vote on either or both of the draft
resolutions are invited to do so now in one intervention.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.62, entitled “International Day
of Argania”. I give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to the delegations listed in document
A/75/L.62, the following countries have also become
sponsors of A/75/L.62: Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Djibouti, Dominica, the Dominican Republic, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
the Gambia, Georgia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Malawi, Malaysia, the Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, the Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Qatar, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, the Sudan, Suriname, Tajikistan,
Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia and Zimbabwe.

A/75/PV.56

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to the delegations listed in document A/75/L.63,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
A/75/L.63: Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Belarus, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Brazil, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chile,
China, Colombia, Cuba, Egypt, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Georgia, Guatemala, Guinea, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Malaysia, the Maldives, Mali, Mauritius, Mongolia,
Nicaragua, the Niger, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
the Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Tajikistan, Togo, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Zambia.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.63?
Draft resolution
(resolution 75/263).

A/75/L.63

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position, I would like to remind speakers
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Leiby (United States of America): I have
two explanations of position. I will first deliver an
explanation of position on resolution 75/262, on the
International Day of Argania.
The United States joins the consensus on the
resolution, and we thank Morocco for its facilitation.
We underscore the fact that certain documents
referenced in the resolution, including the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda, are non-binding documents that do not
create rights or obligations under international law.

Draft resolution A/75/L.62 was adopted (resolution
75/262).

With regard to the twelfth preambular paragraph,
the United States recognizes the use of argan oil
in traditional and complementary medicine and in
cosmetic products but does not recognize benefits or
properties that have not been approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration.

The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.63, entitled
“International Year of Millets, 2023”. I give the floor to
the representative of the Secretariat.

On the fourteenth preambular paragraph, we
disagree with the implication that financial flows should
be one-way, from developed to developing countries,
and we stress the importance of market integration and

The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.62?

21-056007/21

A/75/PV.56

private-sector involvement in sustainable development
and climate adaptation and mitigation.
Lastly, on operative paragraph 4, the United Nations
should not be dictating scopes of work to organizations
through channels outside Member State and governingbody oversight, especially with no clear way of funding.
I shall now deliver our explanation of position on
resolution 75/263, on the International Year of Millets.
The United States joins the consensus on the
resolution, and we thank India for its facilitation. We
underscore that certain documents referenced in the
resolution, including the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda,
are non-binding documents that do not create rights or
obligations under international law.
On operative paragraphs 3 and 4, the United
Nations should not be dictating scopes of work to
organizations through channels outside Member State
and governing-body oversight, especially with no clear
way of funding.
Mr. Varganov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation welcomes the
adoption of resolution 75/263, on the International
Year of Millets, 2023, and we thank India for that
constructive and useful initiative.
Millet is one of the world’s most ancient agricultural
crops, including on Russian soil, where the grain
produced from it is used in traditional recipes. Despite
its nutritional value and health merits, in recent decades
global production of it has dwindled. Even in the Russian
Federation, a major millet producer and exporter, the
harvest during the past year totalled just under 400,000
tons. We believe that the initiative prepared by the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and
supported by the General Assembly on the International
Year of Millets will draw international attention to the
merits of that important crop. In our view, it will help
to facilitate the safeguarding of national gastronomic
traditions and agricultural biodiversity and help to
promote the principles of good nutrition and holistic
agricultural development.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 14.
8/21

03/03/2021

Agenda item 130 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(l) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe
Draft resolution (A/75/L.64)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.64.
Mr. Sautter (Germany): I have the honour
to introduce draft resolution A/75/L.64, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe”, on behalf of Germany, as the
current Chair of the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe, and Greece, as the previous Chair.
The cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe is characterized by a long tradition
and is based on our shared vision of the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
democracy, the rule of law and the importance of
dialogue and strengthening multilateralism.
The draft resolution was agreed on by the Committee
of Ministers in Strasbourg and subsequently submitted
to the General Assembly for further consultations. It
touches on numerous important issues such as human
rights; the rule of law and democracy; gender equality
and the fight against sexual and gender-based violence,
including domestic violence and violence against
children; the promotion of the rights of persons with
disabilities; and the fight against racism and multiple
and intersecting forms of discrimination. The draft
resolution also elaborates on the disproportionate effect
of the coronavirus disease pandemic on women and girls
and the deepening inequalities caused by the pandemic,
as well as on the work of the two organizations to
counter the pandemic and their efforts to implement
the Sustainable Development Goals, the protection of
refugees and migrants, and the fight against terrorism,
trafficking, organized crime and drugs.
We regret that it was not possible to include language
on issues that are extremely relevant to the Council of
Europe, owing to the resistance of some Member States
in New York. The abolition of the death penalty is a
cornerstone of the Council of Europe and a prerequisite
for any State joining the Council. We respect the fact
that different positions within the General Assembly
21-05600

03/03/2021

A/75/PV.56

exist on this issue; however, we deeply regret that
even our compromise proposals, which did not create
any form of obligations and focused solely on the
role of the Council of Europe, were not acceptable to
some delegations.
The Council of Europe will continue its fight
against the death penalty, which is a cruel and
inhumane punishment that has been proven to have no
deterrent effect. Similarly, we would have preferred
a stronger reference to the discrimination against
persons of diverse gender identities and sexual
orientation. Widespread discrimination against them
and scrutiny of them, sadly, continues to be a daily
reality. Nevertheless, we believe that the current draft
resolution presents a suitable compromise for moving
forward with a view to ensuring cooperation between
the two organizations. We thank all 40 delegations that
sponsored this important draft resolution and invite
everyone else to become sponsors today.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.64, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to the delegations listed in
document A/75/L.64, the following countries have
also become sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania,
Andorra, Angola, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico,
Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Portugal, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.64?
Draft resolution
(resolution 75/264).

A/75/L.64

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position, I would like to remind speakers

that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Horváth (Hungary): Regarding resolution
75/264, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Council of Europe”, Hungary joined
the consensus and would like to add the following
remarks in its national capacity.
The Hungarian Government acknowledges the
contribution of the Council of Europe to strengthening
multilateralism, protecting and promoting fundamental
human rights and freedoms, and guaranteeing
democracy and the rule of law. We consider it extremely
important to support its work and operation. However,
the present resolution, which aims to deepen the
cooperation between United Nations and the Council
of Europe, contains certain references that are not
acceptable to us.
Hungary reaffirms that it cannot support any
reference to the Council of Europe Convention on
Preventing and Combating Violence against Women
and Domestic Violence, as in operative paragraph
17. In that regard, throughout the negotiations we
repeatedly voiced our concerns and asked for a neutral,
factual reference to the Istanbul Convention, in line
with the original proposal and with the formula that is
widely used in the resolution when referring to other
conventions of the Council of Europe. When referring
to those conventions, the resolution merely states that
they are open for accession, without explicitly inviting
States to sign or ratify them. We deem it important
that the facts should reflect an equal approach to
all conventions.
Hungary wants to express that we maintain our
position on the Istanbul Convention. In line with our
declared national zero-tolerance policy on violence
against women, Hungary fully agrees with the crucial
aim of fighting violence against women and children
and domestic violence, which has been an independent
statutory definition in the Hungarian criminal code
since 2013. In our view, it is not the ratification of a
treaty but the tangible results of Government actions
that make the prevention and combating of violence
against women and domestic violence a reality. The
Hungarian Government regards effective action against
every form of violence against women as one of its
most important priorities, and that goal is constantly
reflected in the Government’s legislative efforts. We
can therefore accept only a factual reference to the

21-056009/21

A/75/PV.56

existence of the Convention, and we cannot support
calls and invitations for its signature and ratification.
Finally, it must be emphasized that Hungary has
adopted neither the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration nor the global compact on refugees.
The Hungarian Government therefore does not accept
any references to those documents. Since the outbreak
of the 2015 migration crisis, Hungary has consistently
emphasized that the root causes of migration should be
addressed locally. Instead of promoting migration, we
have to stem all mass migratory movements, and we
should focus on providing assistance to third countries
locally by creating stable and secure conditions,
thereby ensuring that people can stay in their homeland
in peace and prosperity. It should also be highlighted
that an uncontrolled influx of migrants, in addition to
being an extremely serious security threat, also poses a
serious public-health risk, especially during the current
pandemic situation. Accordingly, Hungary dissociates
itself from operative paragraph 19 as well.
Mr. Shahin (Egypt): We thank the co-facilitators,
Germany and Greece, for their spirit of flexibility
and compromise during the consultations on the
draft resolution entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Council of Europe” (resolution
75/264). We appreciate adopting a consensual and
inclusive approach and listening to the concerns of
Member States.
However, we note that some language was
incorporated into the resolution without sufficient
consultations, and we would point out that we have a
reservation about the term “multiple and intersecting
forms of discrimination” in operative paragraph 3. Due
to its ambiguity and lack of a specific definition, we
confirm that we do not accept its use to denote or refer
to any non-consensual categories of rights and indicate
that the term “multiple and aggravating forms of
discrimination”, included in the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action, is consensual and more relevant.
Mr. Ilnytskyi (Ukraine): I would like to express
our gratitude to the delegations of Germany and Greece
for facilitating the preparation of resolution 75/264,
which we have just adopted.
The item on cooperation between the two
organizations was first included in the agenda of the
General Assembly a little more than 20 years ago. We
would like to point out that at the time it was stressed that
there was a need to enhance cooperation between the
10/21

03/03/2021

two organizations, taking into account the contribution
that the Council of Europe had made to the United
Nations, particularly in promoting the rule of law and
the protection of human rights and democratic values.
It is still true that both the United Nations and the
Council of Europe place human rights and dignity at the
core of their missions and mandates. Stronger working
links between them in this area can only help them their
noble cause. For instance, the European Convention on
Human Rights provided for the possibility of recourse to
the European Court of Human Rights, whose judgments
are of a legally binding character. Here we welcome the
Court’s decision dated 14 January 2021, which ruled on
the admissibility of the inter-State claims in Ukraine’s
case against the Russian Federation. It is important to
note that the Court considered as part of the relevant
legal framework the General Assembly resolutions on
the territorial integrity of Ukraine and on the situation
of human rights in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea
and the city of Sevastopol in Ukraine. That decision
clearly demonstrates the relevance of the values and
aims of the two organizations.
At the same time, I would also like to underline
the fact that the Council has also made the abolition of
capital punishment one of its two principal conditions
for membership, striving to make it a universal value.
As was mentioned by the German representative today,
it is therefore regrettable that while that value is fully
accepted by 47 Council of Europe members — countries
that together constitute almost 25 per cent of the
membership of the United Nations — it is still excluded
from the resolution we have just adopted.
The Council of Europe has a significant capacity for
conflict prevention through a combination of standardsetting, cooperation and monitoring at both the legal
and political levels. Yet it is unacceptable when we hear
in the Council of Europe that it is the United Nations
that should deal with armed conflicts while the Council
should continue its work on human rights, as if one
can work on human rights in isolation from conflict
resolution. That is the wrong logic. I reiterate that peace
and security and human rights are interrelated issues.
Gross human rights violations and intolerance lead
only to conflict; indeed, they fuel wars.
Ukraine therefore expects the Council of Europe
to pay due attention to the violations of human rights
committed by the Russian Federation in the Donbas
region and illegally occupied Crimea. We will continue
21-05600

03/03/2021

to demand that the Russian Federation provide the
conventional and institutional monitoring mechanisms
of the Council of Europe and other international
organizations with access to the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine, access that is currently impeded.
We are confident that the Council of Europe has the
necessary expertise and potential to conduct monitoring
there, both on the ground and at a distance. The only
missing component for launching that process is the
necessary political will.
Today we adopted by consensus a framework
resolution on cooperation between the United Nations
and the Council of Europe. Its supporters include some
who continue to blackmail both organizations. Some
consider that it is worth listening to the institutions
of the General Assembly and the Council of Europe
as long they do not attempt to stop criminal actions
against such countries’ own peoples or their peaceful
neighbours. When efforts are made to expose such
illegal actions, claims are made that the authority of
the General Assembly is under attack, as we heard
from the Russian representative during the Assembly’s
consideration of Russian aggression against my
country in this Hall on 23 February (see A/75/PV.54),
and recently from the Russian Ombudsperson, who has
the rank of major general of police, on human rights
defenders and Council of Europe institutions:
“Whether we are in the Council of Europe or not,
the temperature of confrontation will rise. The
stronger Russia is, the more intense this struggle
will be”.
Ukraine remains deeply concerned about the
concession by the Parliamentary Assembly of the
Council of Europe allowing the delegation of the
Russian Federation to return to that Assembly, a
step that was taken while Russia continued its armed
aggression against my country and was deliberately
refusing to comply with the relevant resolutions of
the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe
and of the United Nations adopted in response to
that aggression. I would like to refer to a statement
by Mr. Heiko Maas, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany, who, as Chair of the Committee of Ministers
of the Council of Europe, underlined that “a peaceful
and tolerant Europe cannot be taken for granted.
Democracy, the rule of law and human rights are
under pressure”.

A/75/PV.56

I hope that in two years, when we come back to
the draft resolution on cooperation between the United
Nations and the Council of Europe, we will be able to
open the web pages of the two organizations and find a
rich storehouse of information on practical interaction
and cooperation between them, including in the area of
international peace and security.
Mr. Karem (Iraq): At the outset, I would like to
thank the facilitators for the constructive approach
and the spirit of flexibility shown throughout the
consultations on draft resolution A/75/L.64, and to
express appreciation for the related adoption of resolution
75/264, following an inclusive and consensus approach.
However, with regard to paragraph 3 and the term
“multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination”,
we believe that this terminology is vague and lacks
specific definition. Iraq would therefore like to express
its reservation with respect to that paragraph.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation was not about to
breach the consensus on resolution 75/264, which was
just adopted, as we are governed by the established
practice of reaching unanimous agreement on texts that
pertain to cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations. However, we cannot ignore the
fact that the negotiations on the resolution’s content
have left an unpleasant after-taste. And that is the view
not only of our colleagues in New York but also of those
in Strasbourg who drew up the initial draft. We would
therefore like to dot every I and cross every T.
On 28 February we marked the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Russian Federation’s entry into the
Council of Europe. That event transformed a regional
body into a genuinely pan-European organization that
conducts dialogue on a broad agenda that ranges from
the fight against terrorism to the protection of human
rights, social policies, health care and issues pertaining
to culture, youth and sport. Considering that the subjects
of intergovernmental discussions at the regional level
in Strasbourg and at the global level in New York and
Geneva often coincide, cooperation between the two
organizations on the directions their priorities should
take can prove useful.
It is self-evident that joint priorities can only be
determined together. This means that the relevant
resolutions should be genuinely consensual in nature
and should reflect the approaches of all interested
States. And yet the facilitators of the work of drafting

21-0560011/21

A/75/PV.56

this resolution for some reason decided that they are
entitled to disregard the views of other States, including
members of the Council of Europe. That specifically has
to do with the imposition of controversial approaches on
questions relating to promoting human rights, ensuring
gender equality and preventing violence against women.
We are particularly surprised that the resolution’s
sponsors decided not to consolidate it with the inclusion
of a key principle of international cooperation, which is
that assistance to States can be rendered only with the
consent of the host State. The entire work of the United
Nations is based on that. We are similarly disappointed
that in the context of the global efforts to combat
the pandemic, the resolution does not mention the
Secretary-General’s call on 23 March 2020 for a halt
to unilateral sanctions. That approach says much about
the genuine position of those who proclaim themselves
to be leaders in international humanitarian assistance.
We also believe that the paragraphs on the merits
of the regional organization combating intolerance,
ensuring the rights of ethnic minorities and freedom
of expression of media outlets do not fully correspond
to reality. There is still a great deal of work to be done
in all those areas. In the Baltic countries, Ukraine and
a number of other Eastern European countries, the
situation frankly verges on disastrous. People have
been deprived of their right to speak and be educated
in Russian, which for many is their native language.
The shameful phenomenon of statelessness has not
been eradicated. Television channels considered
objectionable are being shut down, and the work of
news agencies is being blocked. There are numerous
incidents in which undesirable journalists are
persecuted or attacked. People are discriminated
against for their linguistic and national characteristics.
In the absence of condemnation by regional structures,
the aforementioned States are daily rubber-stamping an
increasing number of discriminatory laws. In January,
for example, a 2019 Ukrainian rule regarding the
functioning of Ukrainian as a State language entered
into force, according to which conversation in Russian
in public areas is now a punishable offence.
Clearly the Council of Europe has a long way to go
before it can share its experience on these issues with
12/21

03/03/2021

the United Nations. Nor can we support the intention
to promote the Council of Europe Convention on
Cybercrime, known as the Budapest Convention, which
has a dangerous loophole that enables foreign Powers to
encroach on States’ digital sovereignty through crossborder access to national data. Instead, we would be well
advised to focus efforts on drafting a comprehensive
consensus document on cybersecurity. Russia’s specific
proposals in that regard are well known.
We hope that the tense negotiations that have just
been completed will result in the right conclusions
being drawn and that in future the sponsors of draft
resolutions on this question will seek common
ground and heed the views of all the members of
both organizations, including during the documentpreparation stage in Strasbourg.
Mr. Aldahhak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): My delegation aligned itself with the
consensus on resolution 75/264 because as a general
rule we support cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
areas that serve the objectives laid out in the Charter of
the United Nations, which is the common denominator
among our countries. First, however, Syria’s position
should not be interpreted in any way as an acceptance
of conventions to which we are not party or texts and
initiatives that we have not been consulted on. Secondly,
we refuse in any case to accept the transformation of
resolutions on cooperation between the United Nations
and any regional or subregional organizations into
politicized resolutions that aim to antagonize, target
or isolate certain countries. Considering their titles,
such resolutions should be about cooperation, dialogue
and diplomacy, which is what we do. They must deal
with our solidarity and efforts to achieve the objectives
of the Organization. Once again, they must not aim
to antagonize, isolate or accuse countries or United
Nations Member States. The goal is cooperation, not
increased tension.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position after adoption. May I take it that
it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (l) of agenda item 130?
It was so decided.
21-05600

03/03/2021

Agenda item 130 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(n) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons
Draft resolution A/75/L.56
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.56.
Mr. Zellenrath (Netherlands): On behalf of its
nearly 50 sponsors, I have the honour to introduce
draft resolution A/75/L.56, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons”. At the outset,
as the main sponsor submitting this draft resolution,
the Kingdom of the Netherlands wants to thank all
delegations that have participated so constructively
in the negotiations despite the challenges we have all
faced during this pandemic.
The aim of this biennial resolution is to highlight
the importance of the continued cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). As the
organization that oversees the implementation of the
Chemical Weapons Convention, the OPCW contributes
to international peace and security by verifying the
destruction of chemical-weapon stockpiles, working
through industry inspections to prevent the emergence
of chemical weapons, promoting the peaceful use of
chemistry for activities not prohibited by the Chemical
Weapons Convention and investigating alleged uses of
chemical weapons. As host nation of the OPCW, the
Netherlands has submitted this biennial draft resolution
since 1997. Today’s draft resolution is an update of
resolution 73/258, of 20 December 2018, and reflects
factual developments since then. The final text that the
Netherlands proposed was as balanced an outcome of
the consultations and negotiations that we started in
early December of last year as we could achieve.
Some of the issues were not easy to resolve, and
though differences of opinion remain, the constructive
attitude of many colleagues and their willingness to
seek a final draft in a spirit of compromise were much
appreciated. Furthermore, we have taken special care
to phrase all clauses as factually as possible, avoiding
qualifications that might cause controversy.

A/75/PV.56

In recent years, the international community has
been confronted with recurring allegations of the
use of chemical weapons. Some of those allegations
have already been attributed to various perpetrators,
but many incidents still need to be investigated. The
global community cannot ignore such atrocities and
should bring those responsible to justice. The work of
the OPCW is indispensable as a very important step
towards achieving that goal, and a strong message
of support for United Nations-OPCW cooperation is
therefore now more crucial than ever.
We hope that the draft resolution can be adopted
by consensus, and we invite delegations to support it in
a spirit of compromise and cooperation. However, if a
vote should be called for at the last moment, it is still our
hope that the draft resolution can ultimately be adopted
unanimously. We firmly believe we have struck the
best balance possible in representing the various views
that have been expressed, and we therefore again invite
all delegations to support the draft resolution in the
aforementioned spirit of compromise and cooperation
and in appreciation of the importance of United
Nations-OPCW cooperation.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/75/L.56.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote or position, I would like to remind the Assembly
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Dandy (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, my delegation would like to stress
the Syrian Arab Republic’s commitment to cooperating
with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) and its Technical Secretariat, in line
with its obligations derived from joining the Chemical
Weapons Convention in 2013.
My country accomplished all that was required in
order for it to eliminate its entire chemical stockpile
and destroy the related facilities, as Ms. Sigrid Kaag,
Head of the OPCW-United Nations Joint Mission in
Syria, asserted before the Security Council at the time.
My delegation reiterates its condemnation of the use of
chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere, at any time
and under any circumstances.
My delegation would like to make the following
comments on draft resolution A/75/L.56. First, while
it is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations

21-0560013/21

A/75/PV.56

and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons”, the authors included paragraphs that have
nothing to do with the title and are lacking in objectivity,
professionalism or a technical nature.
Secondly, the draft resolution is entirely politicized.
The text is supposed to be purely technical, addressing
only the cooperation mechanisms between the United
Nations and the OPCW while building on positive
points and working to avoid shortcomings and gaps.
However, the draft resolution focuses on my country,
the Syrian Arab Republic, in a way that is contrary
to its objectives and that targets and antagonizes a
Member State.
Thirdly, while the Syrian Arab Republic is
mentioned by name in a number of paragraphs, an effort
was made to exclude my delegation by not inviting it
to participate in the informal negotiations on the draft
resolution, showing a lack of transparency on the part
of the facilitator, who failed in his responsibilities and
disregarded the required criteria.
Fourthly, the draft resolution is not balanced. It
selectively mentions mechanisms not agreed on by the
Organization and reports that have not been approved
by all Member States.
Fifthly, it is biased, totally ignoring the fact that
terrorist organizations have chemical weapons that
have been used against civilians. That is an issue that
can never be questioned.
Sixthly, the Dutch Government, which is
represented by the facilitator of the draft resolution, has
an antagonistic attitude to my country and is supporting
terrorist organizations in Syria. Prime Minister Mark
Rutte of the Netherlands admitted that he personally
intervened to obstruct parliamentary investigations
into his Government’s provision of millions of dollars
to as many as 22 terrorist organizations, including the
so-called Levant Front, which even Dutch institutions
classify as a terrorist group. Stef Blok, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, also called for
ending the investigations, considering that they will
create major problems, disclose top-secret information
and embarrass the allies that are certainly involved
in the Dutch investigations. In September 2018, the
Netherlands public broadcasting corporation confirmed
that the Dutch Government supported the Levant Front
and that the Government provided it with equipment
and logistical services between 2015 and 2018.
14/21

03/03/2021

Given the objective deficiencies of this draft
resolution, my delegation requests a vote on its
operative paragraphs 5, 6, 7 and 8, and then on the
draft resolution as a whole. I call on all countries that
support international law and the Charter of the United
Nations to raise their voices against the politicization of
the work of the United Nations, reject the use of United
Nations mechanisms to target a founding Member State
and vote against draft resolution A/75/L.56 and four of
its paragraphs.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I regret to say that we are witnessing yet
another attempt to submit for the General Assembly’s
consideration an extremely politicized and unbalanced
draft resolution (A/75/L.56) that is can only deepen
dissension among Member States while in no way
deepening the cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW).
This is the second such attempt we have observed
recently. In early autumn of last year, at the prompting of
our Western colleagues, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 75/55, a biased, anti-Syrian document, on the
implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC). Now we see the exact same motives in the
document before us today. We would like to ask our
Western colleagues where the added value is in a text
90 per cent of which is a ritual reiteration welcoming
its accusatory conclusions about Damascus. Apparently
they would like the General Assembly to literally
rubber-stamp identical anti-Syrian resolutions every
time the OPCW is cited in their titles.
Like many other States, the Russian Federation
views as illegitimate the decision of the fourth special
session of the Conference of States Parties to the CWC
enabling the OPCW Technical Secretariat to overstep
its mandate and to establish the so-called Investigation
and Identification Team. This kind of innovation
contravenes the CWC and undermines the prerogatives
of the Security Council. There is increasing evidence
with each passing day that the United States and its
Euro-Atlantic allies are striving to transform the
OPCW, a specialized international technical body, into
a tool for advancing their own geopolitical interests.
The fruits of these political ventures began with
the first report of the Investigation and Identification
Team, which does not stand up to any criticism either
of the methodology of its drafting or of its collection of
21-05600

03/03/2021

facts. After that came a deliberately unimplementable
decision on Syria at the ninety-fourth session of the
OPCW Executive Council, demanding that Damascus
declare chemical weapons that it does not have. The
Russian Federation does not accept the legitimacy of
the Investigation and Identification Team itself or of its
report and the decisions of the OPCW governing bodies
based on it.
We also have a slew of questions about the work of the
OPCW Fact-finding Mission in Syria, specifically with
regard to the investigations into the incidents in Khan
Shaykhun in 2017 and Douma in 2018. With a view to
discussing the OPCW Technical Secretariat’s numerous
violations in those cases, last year we held an open
Arria-formula meeting for Security Council members
with the participation of independent experts. We urge
all interested delegations to familiarize themselves
with the materials on the meeting’s conclusions, which
were circulated as an official document of the General
Assembly (A/75/649), dated 11 December 2020. It
raises many inconvenient questions for the Technical
Secretariat, none of which have so far been answered.
In its essence — which is a panoramic overview
of all the directions taken in the cooperation between
the United Nations and the OPCW and progress in that
area — the draft resolution prepared by the Netherlands
has been completely gutted. It seems that the only
subject that the OPCW concerns itself with is the Syrian
chemical dossier and, practically speaking, Syria itself.
If we are focusing on country-specific aspects, it would
be logical for the OPCW to also report, for example,
on the progress that the United States has made on the
destruction of its chemical arsenal, which has still not
been completed. But not a word is said about it. Neither
does the draft resolution reflect in any way the vital
importance of the provisions of article XI of the CWC,
on the social and economic cooperation of the States
parties to the Convention.
In our view, it is extremely telling that the sponsors
conducted no genuine negotiations on the text of the
draft resolution. The delegation of the Netherlands
organized only one round of informal consultations,
with effectively no practical result. Not one of the many
substantive comments made by delegations during that
meeting was reflected in the final text.
We firmly believe that a draft resolution on
cooperation between the United Nations and the
OPCW should by definition be adopted by consensus.

A/75/PV.56

Its purpose is to send a political message of the
international community’s unconditional support for
the chemical-weapon non-proliferation regime and
the positive nexus between the United Nations and
the OPCW. And Russia would have been happy to
accept that consensus had the draft met that criterion.
Unfortunately, however, it is now aimed at a single
goal — denigrating the Syrian authorities and promoting
ideas that are damaging to the integrity of the CWC
and the authority of the OPCW. That is something that
we, as a responsible participant in the OPCW, cannot
countenance. For that reason, the Russian Federation
will vote against this politicized document. We also call
on all States to do likewise if they are concerned about
maintaining the OPCW’s authority and ensuring that it
does its real job effectively — that is, strengthening the
chemical-weapon non-proliferation regime.
Mr. Balouji (Islamic Republic of Iran): I am taking
the floor to explain my delegation’s position on draft
resolution A/75/L.56, on cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons. We have already shared our
views with the draft resolution’s main sponsor and
suggested modifying operative paragraph 3 in order
to highlight international cooperation in the areas of
protection and assistance and of the peaceful uses
of chemistry, since they are the two main purposes
of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), and
also in fulfilling the intended task of the Centre for
Chemistry and Technology within the framework of the
Convention. The paragraph should therefore have been
modified to read as follows:
“Commends the continued work of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons in the field of international cooperation,
assistance and protection, as well as to enhance
the capacity of States parties to use chemistry
for peaceful purposes and respond to threats
involving toxic chemicals defined in Article II
of the Chemical Weapons Convention, including
through the development of a Centre for Chemistry
and Technology as a platform where the Technical
Secretariat and States parties can learn, exchange
views and work in common purpose to further
achieve the object and purpose of the Convention”.
We believe that it is essential that this draft
resolution focus on the cooperation between the two
organizations. At the same time, that should be achieved
only by limiting the scope of the draft resolution to

21-0560015/21

A/75/PV.56

03/03/2021

topics that are covered in the agreement between the
two organizations. However, operative paragraphs
5, 6, 7, and 8 of the draft resolution go beyond those
areas and include issues on which OPCW member
States differ. That is an attempt to politicize a purely
procedural draft resolution that should be avoided. It
is worth noting that during the informal consultations
we urged that any contentious issues be excluded. That
concern unfortunately went unheeded. We remain
hopeful that the next version of this draft resolution
will not include contentious issues, thereby enabling us
to adopt it by consensus.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.56, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to the delegations listed in document
A/75/L.56, the following countries have also become
sponsors: Albania, Andorra, Iceland, Liechtenstein,
Montenegro, North Macedonia, the Republic of
Moldova and San Marino.
The President: Separate, recorded votes have been
requested on operative paragraphs 5, 6, 7 and 8 of draft
resolution A/75/L.56. There being no objection to those
requests, I shall first put to the vote operative paragraph
5 of the draft resolution.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahrain, Belgium, Bhutan, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
16/21

North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Togo, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay, Yemen
Against:
Belarus, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, India, Nicaragua, Russian
Federation, Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire,
Egypt, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mali, Mongolia, Nepal, Pakistan, Sudan,
Thailand, Viet Nam
Operative paragraph 5 of draft resolution A/75/L.56
was retained by 85 votes to 10, with 21 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Georgia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour;
the delegation of Senegal informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: I shall next put to the vote operative
paragraph 6 of draft resolution A/75/L.56.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahrain, Belgium, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
21-05600

03/03/2021

A/75/PV.56

Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Yemen

Against:
Belarus, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, India, Nicaragua, Russian
Federation, Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe

Against:
Belarus, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, India, Nicaragua, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe

Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Brunei Darussalam, Côte d’Ivoire, Egypt, Fiji,
Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Lebanon, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mongolia,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, South Africa,
Sudan, Thailand, Togo, Viet Nam

Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Brunei Darussalam, Côte d’Ivoire, Egypt,
Indonesia, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mongolia, Nigeria,
Philippines, Sudan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Viet Nam
Operative paragraph 6 of draft resolution A/75/L.56
was retained by 83 votes to 11, with 22 abstentions.

Operative paragraph 7 of draft resolution A/75/L.56
was retained by 77 votes to 10, with 25 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Georgia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour;
the delegation of Senegal informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to abstain.]

[Subsequently, the delegation of Georgia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour;
the delegation of Senegal informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to abstain.]

The President: I shall next put to the vote operative
paragraph 8 of draft resolution A/75/L.56.

The President: I shall next put to the vote operative
paragraph 7 of draft resolution A/75/L.56.

In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahrain, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kuwait, Latvia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, Togo, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Yemen

In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahrain, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kuwait,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Yemen

A recorded vote was taken.

21-0560017/21

A/75/PV.56

Against:
Belarus, China, Cuba, Nicaragua, Russian
Federation, Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Côte d’Ivoire, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mongolia, Nigeria, Sudan
Operative paragraph 8 of draft resolution A/75/L.56
was retained by 88 votes to 8, with 16 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Georgia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour;
the delegation of Senegal informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote draft
resolution A/75/L.56 as a whole, for which a recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Belgium, Bhutan, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Cabo Verde, Canada, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Yemen
18/21

03/03/2021

Against:
China, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Cambodia, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Madagascar, Nicaragua, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Zimbabwe
Draft resolution A/75/L.56, as a whole, was
adopted by 109 votes to 3, with 11 abstentions
(resolution 75/265).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Georgia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the voting, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Mainero (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation, as it has traditionally done, voted in favour
of resolution 75/265, on cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), which we have just
adopted. The Chemical Weapons Convention is the
main instrument that the international community has
at its disposal in order to fully ban the use of chemical
weapons. Argentina emphasizes the importance of
ensuring full respect for all its provisions, and we
therefore accepted the conclusions reached by the
Investigation and Identification Team on Syria in
its report.
Operative paragraph 7 of the resolution that we
have just adopted refers to the report dated July 2020 of
the Executive Council of the OPCW, of which we are a
member, and that is why we voted to retain it. However,
we also want to state that this is not the appropriate place
for singling out a particular country, which undermines
the goal of the resolution and could be damaging to
the cooperation between the United Nations and the
OPCW in future. Argentina will continue to participate
in discussions with a constructive spirit, seeking to
avoid politicization and to support the work done by the
OPCW and the Investigation and Identification Team.
Mrs. Castro Loredo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The Cuban delegation would like to explain its vote on
resolution 75/265, entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition
21-05600

03/03/2021

of Chemical Weapons”. As a State party to the
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), Cuba supports
the continued cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW).
Unfortunately, however, we were not able to
support the text. This is a generic topic that addresses
the cooperation between both organizations. We do
not support mentioning or singling out a specific
country that is, furthermore, also a State party to
the Convention. Nor do we support the resolution’s
inclusion of references to decisions adopted by the
OPCW without a consensus among its States parties.
It is therefore a priority for the General Assembly
to resume the practice of adopting this resolution by
consensus. We must preserve its goal and character. We
must refrain from introducing controversial elements
that do not enjoy consensus and affect the spirit of
cooperation and of unanimous support for the activities
of the OPCW.
Mr. Nugroho (Indonesia): My delegation wishes to
explain its position on resolution 75/265, on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW),
which was just adopted. Indonesia voted in favour of
the resolution in order to reaffirm its full support for
the cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
We fully support the resolution’s aim of reiterating the
importance of collaboration between the United Nations
and the OPCW in maintaining peace and security
through the total elimination of chemical weapons. It
should therefore concentrate on this matter and refrain
from focusing on the substance discussed within the
OPCW, which is outside the scope of cooperation with
the United Nations. That has also been the General
Assembly’s practice in adopting similar resolutions on
cooperation with other international organizations.
We would also like to stress the importance of
consensus in adopting the resolution, not only to
send a strong message on the importance of the full
implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC), but also to reflect our shared interest and
unity in achieving the end goals of the Convention.
We appreciated the efforts of the penholder to conduct
informal consultations in December and the engagement
of other Member States on the draft resolution. We
listened carefully to all the different views expressed
by the various Member States. We want to underscore

A/75/PV.56

the hope we had that the draft could have been agreed
on in a consensual manner, taking into consideration
the different views expressed.
We abstained in the voting on operative paragraphs
6, 7 and 8 of the resolution while supporting the overall
thrust of promoting compliance by States parties
to the CWC. We are of the view that the question of
compliance has to be settled through the mechanisms
under the Convention, in particular articles IX and
XII. Moreover, any measures taken under those
articles should be carried out in a credible, professional
and impartial manner, according to the technical
arrangements agreed to by the States parties to the
Convention. We are hopeful that the next iteration of
this resolution, in two years’ time, will be adopted by
consensus, focusing on strengthening the cooperation
between the two organizations.
Mr. Hassan (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
supports the cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW), and stresses the need for that
cooperation to reflect the OPCW’s commitment
to discharging its responsibilities in an impartial,
independent and professional manner, while respecting
and implementing United Nations resolutions on issues
within the competence of the Organization and in line
with its founding Convention, in addition to rejecting
any politicized interference in the work of the OPCW
Technical Secretariat. Egypt therefore once again voted
in favour of resolution 75/265, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons”.
Egypt continues to condemn the use of chemical
weapons by any party and under any circumstances.
However, my delegation abstained in the voting on
some of the paragraphs in the draft resolution, since we
do not have enough information or evidence to make
an informed decision, particularly given the increased
controversy between the States members of the OPCW
on certain of its reports. In addition, some countries
that are sponsors of the resolution continue to obstruct
efforts towards the total elimination of chemical
weapons and do not support efforts to establish a zone
free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East, in line with relevant
international resolutions, whose implementation could
have averted the recent unfortunate use of chemical
weapons in the region.

21-0560019/21

A/75/PV.56

Mr. Mohd Nasir (Malaysia): I am taking the
floor to explain Malaysia’s vote on resolution 75/265,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons”. Malaysia voted in favour of the resolution
as a whole while abstaining in the voting on operative
paragraphs 5, 6, 7 and 8 of the text.
Before touching on the resolution’s subject matter,
it is important to look at its process. Recalling the first
informal consultations on the draft text convened in
December 2020, it was obvious that there were different
views and disagreements among Member States. Despite
the gaps, my delegation believes in the importance of
exhausting all possible efforts to try to breach those
gaps. If there had been any follow-up consultation or
engagement after that first round, perhaps we could
have explored ways and means of developing some
convergence of positions or formulations. That is
certainly an important lesson for the future.
Moving on to the substance, there is no doubt about
the importance of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) as the implementing body
of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). Malaysia
is of the view that all relevant organizations and entities
should cooperate with the OPCW to facilitate its global
endeavours. That is at the heart of this resolution,
which is precisely about cooperation between two
very important organizations, the United Nations and
the OPCW. At the same time, certain paragraphs of
the resolution reflect the decisions adopted during the
special session of the Conference of the States Parties,
held on 27 June 2018, which empowered the OPCW
with an attribution mandate. The complex dynamics
and intricacies between Member States surrounding
the attribution mandate of the OPCW are well known.
Reflecting that decision in this resolution would only
trigger similar debates and reveal widening positions
on the part of Member States.
In addition, the issues covered in operative
paragraphs 6 and 7 of the resolution have been duly
covered in the annual First Committee resolution on
the Chemical Weapons Convention (resolution 75/55).
Operative paragraph 8 of resolution 75/265 seems to
further complicate the text by trying to import a whole
dossier from the Security Council into the General
Assembly. For that reason, Malaysia abstained in
the voting on operative paragraphs 5, 6, 7 and 8 of
the resolution.
20/21

03/03/2021

While we strongly support the important
cooperation between the United Nations and the OPCW,
this resolution should have been better crafted so as to
promote that element of cooperation. Though Malaysia
voted in favour of the draft resolution as a whole, we
certainly hope for a refined version of a cooperation
resolution that would facilitate the work and operations
of the two important organizations in future.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (n) of agenda item 130?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 130 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(z) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea
Draft resolution (A/75/L.66)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tajikistan to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.66.
Mr. Lafizov (Tajikistan): Today it is my honour
to introduce, on behalf of Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan,
Uzbekistan and my country, Tajikistan, draft resolution
A/75/L.66, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the International Fund for Saving the
Aral Sea”. We would like to take this opportunity to
thank all delegations for their invaluable support and
cooperation on the draft resolution, which this year has
only technical updates, and to express our gratitude to
its sponsors.
The issue of preserving the Aral Sea has
global significance, and our countries consistently
support the united efforts of the world community in
resolving this ecological crisis. The draft resolution
before us acknowledges the negative humanitarian,
environmental and socioeconomic consequences of
the tragedy of the Aral Sea basin, which goes beyond
the region and represents a global concern. The draft
resolution notes the necessity of further improving
the activities of the International Fund for Saving
the Aral Sea and strengthening regional cooperation,
particularly in areas such as social and economic
development, environmental protection, responding
to natural disasters, water-resource management,
21-05600

03/03/2021

A/75/PV.56

adaptation to climate change and the mitigation of its
consequences, and other related areas.

Draft resolution A/75/L.66 was adopted (resolution
75/266).

One of the main points of the draft resolution
concerns the holding of relevant consultations with
the Executive Committee of the International Fund for
Saving the Aral Sea, Member States and United Nations
agencies. It also emphasizes the importance of the
development and effective implementation of regional
environmental protection programmes for sustainable
development in Central Asia, including assistance
programmes for the countries of the Aral Sea basin.
In that context, the draft resolution invites the United
Nations and its specialized agencies, organizations,
programmes and funds, as well as the international
financial institutions, to improve their cooperation with
the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kyrgyzstan, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted. I
remind him that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.

Mr. Masuku (Eswatini), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
In conclusion, I would like to invite other delegations
to join the sponsors of the draft resolution. It is our
sincere hope that it will be adopted by consensus, as
has always been the case at previous sessions.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.66, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/75/L.66: Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus,
China, Georgia, Italy, Latvia, Poland, Romania, the
Russian Federation, Spain and Ukraine.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.66?

Mr. Utebaev (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian): The
Kyrgyz Republic would like to inform the Assembly
of its position on resolution 75/266, on cooperation
between the United Nations and the International Fund
for Saving the Aral Sea.
In 2016 the Kyrgyz Republic decided to freeze
its participation in the activities of the International
Fund for Saving the Aral Sea and its entities, owing to
the Fund’s ineffectiveness and the lack of progress in
reforming it. In 2010 and 2011 there were negotiations
among experts and States of the region on this topic,
but they yielded no results, due to the unconstructive
positions of various States. Reforming the Fund requires
the concerted efforts of all of its member States, and
should be discussed and advanced by experts from the
countries of the region who are not from the Fund’s
entities, including the Fund’s leadership. Kyrgyzstan
once again emphasizes that it is prepared to discuss
this reform with the participation of all the States of
Central Asia. We hope that in this way the Central
Asian countries will succeed in reforming the Fund,
with the aim of improving the effectiveness of the Fund
and its entities while giving equal consideration to the
interests and essential needs of all Central Asian States.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position after adoption. May
I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly
to conclude its consideration of sub-item (z) of agenda
item 130?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

21-0560021/21
