(a)
To call upon the parties concerned to implement immediately
its resolution 338 (1973) of22 October 1973;

Resolution 804 (1993)
of29 January 1993

(b)
To renew the mandate of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force for another period of six months, that is, until 31 May
1994;

The Security Council,
Reaffinningits resolutions 696 (1991) of30 May 1991, 747 (1992)
of24 March 1992, 785 (1992) of30 October 1992 and 793 (1992) of
30 November 1992,

To request the Secretary-General to submit, at the end of this
period, a report on the development in the situation and the measures
taken to implement Council resolution 338 (1973).
(c)

Having considered the further report of the Secretary-General of 21
and 25 January 1993,1

Adopted unanimously at the 3320th meeting.
Decision

Having considered also the request submitted to the SecretaryGeneral by the Government of Angola in its letter dated 21 January
1993,4

At the same meeting, following the adoption of resolution 887
(1993), the President made the following statement: 19

Gravely disturbed by the recent outbreak of heavy fighting in many
parts of Angola and the further deterioration of the already dangerous
political and military situation in that country,

"In connection with the resolution just adopted on the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force,
I have been authorized to make the following complementary
statement on behalf of the Security Council:

Gravely concerned at the continuing non-implementation of the
major provisions of the Peace Accords for Angola,
Concerned at the recent absence of dialogue between the Government ofAngola and the National Union for the Total Independence of
Angola, and welcoming the meeting between them under United
Nations auspices at Addis Ababa to discuss the cease-tire and political
matters,

'As is known, the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force11 states, in
paragraph 19: ''Despite the present quiet in the Israel-Syria sector,
the situation continues to be potentially dangerous and is likely to
remain so, unless and until a comprehensive settlement covering
all aspects of the Middle East problem can be reached." That
statement of the Secretary-General reflects the view of the
Security Council."'

Also concerned at the outrageous harassment and physical abuse to
which personnel of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission II
have been subjected, and the looting and destruction of United Nations
property, as described in the report of the Secretary-General,
Further concerned at reports of foreign support for and involvement
in military actions in Angola,
Regretting that the deteriorating situation has made it increasingly
difficult for the Mission to carry out its mandate,

THE SITUATION IN ANGOLA 1

Recalling that democratic elections were held on 29 and 30
September 1992, which the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral certified as being generally free and fair, and that steps have
been taken to set up a Government of National Unity which would
reflect the results of the legislative elections, and deeply regretting the
failure of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola to
take part in the political institutions thus established,

Decision

At its 3168th meeting, on29 January 1993, the Council decided to
invite the representatives of Angola, Cuba, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, Portugal, Zaire and Zimbabwe to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled:

Reaffirming its commitment to preserve the unity and territorial
integrity of Angola,

"The situation in Angola:

Recognizing that the Angolans themselves bear ultimate responsibility for the restoration of peace and national reconciliation in their
country,

"Further report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM) (S/25140 and Add.1); 2

"Letter dated 25 January 1993 from the Permanent Representative ofAngola to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/25161 )". 2

19

S/26809.

1

Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted

Reiterating its support for the efforts of the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative aimed at resolving the present crisis and
resuming the political process, in particular through the completion of
the electoral process,

1. Takes note with appreciation of the further report of the
Secretary-General;

by the Council in 1992.

Ibid., documents S/25140 and Add. I.

2

See Official Records ofthe Security Council, Forty-eighth
Year, SupplementforJanuary, February and March 1993.

Ibid., document S/25155.
53

and personnel he deems appropriate to be retained in order to allow the
subsequent expeditious redeployment of the Mission as soon as this
becomes feasible, with a view to the resumption of its functions in
accordance with the Peace Accords and previous resolutions on this
matter,

2. Strongly condemns the persistent violations of the main provisions
of the Peace Accords for Angola, in particular the initial rejection by the
National Union for the Total Independence of Angola of the election
results, its withdrawal from the new Angolan armed forces, its seizure
by force of provincial capitals and municipalities and the resumption of
hostilities;

16.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to it as soon as the
situation warrants, and in any case before 30 April 1993, a report on the
situation in Angola, together with his recommendations for the further
role of the United Nations in the peace process, and in the meantime to
keep the Council regularly informed;

3. Demands that the two parties cease fire immediately, restore
continued and meaningful dialogue at their meeting at Addis Ababa and
agree on a clear timetable for the full implementation of the Peace
Accords, in particular with regard to confinement of their troops and
collection of their weapons, demobilization and formation of the unified
national armed forces, effective restoration of the Government
administration throughout the country, the completion of the electoral
process and the free circulation of people and goods;

17.
Stresses its readiness to take action promptly, at any time
within the period of the mandate authorized by the present resolution,
on the recommendation of the Secretary-General, to expand substantially the United Nations presence in Angola in the event of significant
progress in the peace process;

4. Fully supports the Secretary-General and his Special Representative in their continuing efforts to restore the peace process and to carry
out the mandate of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission II
under extremely difficult conditions;

18.
Reiterates its readiness to consider all appropriate measures
under the Charter of the United Nations to secure implementation of
the Peace Accords;

5. Urges once again the two parties, and in particular the National
Union, to produce early evidence of their adherence to, and fulfilment
without exception of, the Peace Accords;

19.

Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously al the 3168th meeting.

6. Strongly appeals to the Government of Angola and the National
Union to confirm as soon as possible to the Secretary-General that real
progress has been made towards implementation of the Peace Accords;

Decisions

7. Appeals to all Member States to render economic and technical
assistance to the Government of Angola for reconstruction and
development of the country;

In a letter dated 22 February 1993,5 addressed to the President of the
Security Council, the Secretary-General stated that as memben of the
Council were aware from paragraph 35 of his report of21 January
1993 on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission II (UNA VEM
11),6 that the former Chief Military Observer of the Mission returned to
his country's service on 14 December 1992. Having completed the
necessary consultations, he intended to appoint as Chief Military
Observer of UNAVEM II Major-General Chris Abutu Garuba (Nigeria)
who, subject to the Council's approval, would assume his functions in
Luanda as 9000 as it was clear that conditions existed for UNAVEM II
to punue actively the military aspects of its mandate.

8. Calls upon all Member States to support all those concerned in
their efforts for the implementation of the Peace Accords;
9. Urges all Member States to take all necessary steps to stop
immediately and effectively any direct or indirect military or paramilitary interference from their territories and to respect scrupulously the
provisions of the Peace Accords concerning the cessation of supply of
lethal material to any Angolan party;
10.
Strongly condemns violations of international humanitarian
law, in particular the attacks against the civilian population, including
the extensive killings carried out by armed civilians, and calls upon both
parties to abide by their obligations thereunder and the appropriate
provisions of the Peace Accords;
11.
Demands that the National Union immediately release
foreign nationals taken hostage;

In a letter dated 26 February 1993,7 the President of the Security
Council informed the Secretary-General as follows:
"I have the honour to inform you that your letter dated 22
February 1993 concerning your proposal to appoint Major-General
Chris Abutu Garuba of Nigeria as Chief Military Observer of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission 115 has been brought to
the attention of the memben of the Council. They agree with the
proposal contained in your letter."

12.
Strongly condemns attacks in Angola against personnel of
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission II, and demands that
the Government and the National Union take all necessary measures to
ensure their safety and security;

At its 3182nd meeting, on 12 March 1993, the Council decided to
invite the representative of Angola to participate, without vote, in the
discussion of the item entitled "The situation in Angola".

13.
Expresses its co,1dolences to the family of the Mission police
observer who lost his life;
14.
Approves the recommendation of the Secretary-General to
maintain a Special Representative for Angola based in Luanda, with the
necessary civilian, military and police staff with the mandate as
described in paragraph 29 of the report of the Secretary-General;

S/25342.

15.
Decides to extend the mandate of the Mission for a period of
three months, until 30 April 1993, with the proviso that, as a provisional measure based on security considerations, the Secretary-General
is authorized to concentrate Mission deployment in Luanda, and at his
discretion in other provincial locations, with the levels of equipment

6
Official Records of the Security Cou11cil, Forty-eighth
Year, S11pplementfor Ja1111ary, February and March 1993, document
S/25140.

S/25343.
54
