UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL
TWENTY-NINTH

RECORDS
YEAR

OCT 5 1983

NEW YQRK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l802)

.. .. ... .. ... .. .. ... .. ... . ... .. .. ... ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Relationship between the United Nations and South Africa:
(a) Letter dated 30 September 1974 from the President of the General
Assembly to the President of the Security Council (S/11525);
(b) Letter dated 9 October 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1532) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such~~~;symbolindicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

EIGHTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SECOND MEETING

Held in New York on Friday, 25 October 1974, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Michel NJINE
(United Republic of Cameroon).

Mali, Mauritius,
Morocco,
Nigeria,
Qatar, .Saudi
Arabia, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
South Africa, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Uganda, the United
Arab Emirates,
the United Republic of Tanzania,
Upper Volta, Yugoslavia and Zaire to participate,
without the right to vote, in the Council’s discussion
of the question before it.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia,
Austria,
Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist
Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia,
Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania,
Peru, Union of Soviet
Socialist
Republics,
United
Kingdom
of Great
Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of
Cameroon and United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2,

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Rahal
(Algeria), Mr. Karim (Bangladesh),
Mr. WaldronRamsey
(Barbados),
Mr.
Mondjo
(Congo),
Mr. Alarcdn (Cuba), Mr. Smid (Czechoslovakia),
Mr. Adjibade’ (Dahomey), Mr. Abdel Meguid, (Egypt),
Mr.
Florin
(German
Democratic
Republic),
Mr. Boaten (Ghana), Mrs. Jeanne Martin
Cissh,
(Guinea), Mr. Jackson (Guyana), Mr. Jaipal (India),
Mr. Harmon (Liberia),
Mr. Maghur (Libyan Arab
Republic), Mr. Rabetafika (Madagascar),
Mr. Traore’
(Mali),
Mr.
Ramphul
(Mauritius),
Mr.
Slaoui
(Morocco), Mr. Ogbu (Nigeria), Mr. Jamal (Qatar),
Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Palmer (Sierra
Leone), Mr. Hussein (Somalia),
Mr. Botha (South
Africa),
Mr.
Kelani
(Syrian
Arab
Republic),
Mr.
Driss
(Tunisia),
Mr.
Kinene
(Uganda),
Mr. Humaidan
(United Arab Emirates), Mr. Salim
(United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Yaguibou (Upper
Volta), Mr. Petri6 (Yugoslavia)
and Mr. Mutuale
(Zaire) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/l802)

of. the agenda

Relationship
between the United Nations and
South Africa:
(a) Letter dated 30 September
1974 from the
President of the General Assembly to the
President of the Security Council (S/l 1525);
(b) Letter
dated 9 October
1974 from the
Permanent Representative
of Tunisia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/ 11532)
The meeting

was called to order at 11.20 a.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
Furthermore,
I wish to inform members of the
Council
that I have received
letters from the
representatives
of Pakistan and Romania requesting
that their delegations also should be invited, under
-Article 31 of the Charter and the pertinent provisions
of the provisional rules of procedure, to participate,
without the right to vote, in the Council’s discussion.
In accordance with the customary practice, and with
the assent of the Council, I propose to invite these
representatives to participate, without the right to vote,
in the Council’s discussion of the agendaitem before it.

Relationship
between the United Nations and South
Africa:
(a) Letter dated 30 September 1974 from the President
of the General Assembly ‘to the President of the
Security Council (S/11525);
(b) Letter dated 9 .October 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia ‘to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11532)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decisions taken previously
[I 79&h-1798th,
1800th and 1801st meetings] under
Article 31 of the Charter and in accordance with the
pertinent
provisions
of the provisional
rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives
of Algeria,
Bangladesh,
Barbados,
the
Congo,
Cuba,
Czechoslovakia,
Dahomey,
:Egypt,
the German
Democratic Republic, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, India,
Liberia,
the Libyan Arab Republic,
Madagascar,

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Akhund
(Pakistan) and Mr. Datcu (Romania) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to the draft resolution co-sponsored “by
Kenya, Mauritania
and the United
Republic
of
1

Cameroon which has been circulated in document
S/l 1543.

10. As Professor Edgar H. Brookes said, in one of
his books entitled Apartheid: A Documentary Study
of Modern South Africa, ’ on page XVI:

4. Members of the Council will recall that at its
1797th meeting the Council decided to address an
invitation under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Duma Nokwe, Director of Political
Affairs of the African National Congress. Mr. Nokwe
has informed- me that he is ready to address the
Council at this meeting. Accordingly, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite him to
take a place at the Council table ,and to make his
statement.

“While the world as a whole fully understands
that the era of colonisation and imperialism has,
after four centuries, come to an end, South
Africa is still living in the atmosphere of that
era, and cannot readily understand the reasoning
of those who have emerged from it. The dialogue
between South Africa and the rest of the world
in the 1960s is something like the duel between
the whale and the elephant.‘*
There is no meeting point.

5. Mr. NOKWE: The delegation of the African
National Congress of South Africa thanks the Security
Council for having invited it to appear before this
Council. We wish also, as others speakers before us
have done, to pay a tribute to you, Sir, and to
endorse the fact that you and your country have
been correctly charged with the historic task of
presiding over these crucial meetings of the Council.

11. As the representatives of the South African
racist regime have demonstrated over a score of
years in the Organization, and in the Council onIy
yesterday, there is no meeting point between humanity
and this monster which they claim to be divinely
inspired. Their obstinacy persists against the mighty
wave of international law and world opinion. They
continue to pour scorn on the legitimate demands
and appeals of the people of our country, the
Organization of African Unity, Africa and the world
at large.

6. Allow me also, on behalf of our delegation,
to extend the deepest condolences of our organization
and people to the Iraqi delegation and people in
connexion with the untimely death of their Foreign
Minister.

12. The Council was subjected to a lengthy lecture
by Mr. Botha, who in the substance of his address
tried to justify apartheid and to show how misguided
Africa and the world were. It was a very strange
thesis based on the inherent Fascist and Nazi
approach that the overwhelming majority in the
Assembly-represented by the Council-were wrong
and out of step with human aspirations, and that
this illegal megalomaniac regime was right and had
a monopoly of being right.

7. It was our intention to deal as succinctly as
possible with the issues now confronting the Council
but because of the situation created by the
representative of the racist and Fascist regime of
South Africa in his address to the Council, we
are compelled to traverse some of the area which
he covered. We crave your indulgence and hope that
we shall in the end demonstrate the benefits of this
exercise. We will submit in this address that the
statement of Mr. Botha, to which the Council listened
so patiently, is if anything added justification for
the review of the relationship between the United
Nations and the regime he represents and the
penalties which will ultimately be decided upon.

13. Mr. Botha’s address emphasized that the methods
of that regime were right and that the whole world
had been misled. His whole statement was primarily
based on the superiority of the racist practices of
apartheid
over everything that is happening to
humanity. Throughout his whole statement there was
also a constant and veiled threat. Even the epochmaking events in Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique and
Angola, to say nothing of the States of Lesotho,
Botswana and Swaziland, were virtually brushed aside
as a poor example of what South Africa, through its
bantustan policies, has been trying to achieve
peacefully-whatever
“peacefully’* means to the
South African regime.

8. The representative of the South African minority
Fascist regime, though professing respect for you,
Mr. President, and the Council, thereafter immediately
displayed characteristically bombastic, pompous
arrogance towards the Organization, its devoted
Members, its precepts and the conventions and
resolutions which have been adopted against the
obnoxious system which his clique represents.
9. The appeals of this body in its solemn resolutions
were dismissed by Mr. Botha as being based on
bias, vendetta, half-truths and even lies. This
contempt, and the sinister references of this regime
to the independent African States in the Organization
in their condemnation of the racist regime, demonstrate
once more the nature of the regime with which the
Council has to deal.

14. Our submission will be that the whole tenor and
theme of that statement is South African racism
and apartheid iiber alles-ver
the whole world
at any cost. Listen to the racist attitude to the
Organization-and here I shall quote from the text of
Mr. Botha’s statement yesterday. He said:
’ London, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1968.

2

“Let us not beat about the bush. The only
choice we have before us is either to continue
on the present sterile course of confrontation
and recrimination, or”-and
he gives the world
an alternative-“ to make a sincere endeavour
to get together, to listen to the other man’s point
of view with an open mind, and to try to break
through the suspicions, the misunderstandings and
the misconceptions which have so long divided us.
Communication or confrontation? Harmony or the
escalation of strife? That is our choicedur only
choice.” [ZMOth meeting, paru. 511

resolutions against the racist South African regime,
is virtually the supreme body of the United Nations
and all the peoples represented in it. It is a very,
very responsible body. But Mr. Botha had the
audacity to sit in the Council and say that the
information and documentation on which United
Nations resolutions were based was unsubstantiated
and one-sided. Once again, the South African regime
is apparently-the-only one with some sense, the
rest of mankind works on the basis of unsubstanttated;biased and prejudiced information.
20. I shall quote only one more extract from
Mr. Botha’s arrogant, contemptuous statement. He
said:

15. It is our submission that this world body has
been trying to communicate with the racist and
Fascist regime for well over 25 years. And yet they
have been intransigent and Mr. Botha and his racist
regime have the audacity to come to propose the
very thing that this body was doing more than
25 years ago, which they stubbornly opposed. There
is a subtle threat of defiance, we submit, in that
quotation.

“In consequence, the resolutions in question
were based on inadequate, prejudiced and often
grossly distorted information-information
which
was certainly not tested and objectively weighed
in order to separate facts from ignorant or malicious
misrepresentations.*’ [Ibid., paru. 58.)

16. But let us go a little further and quote another
excerpt. Mr. Botha asked the Council:

21. Now if, from those extracts from Mr. Botha’s
statement that I have just cited, the conclusion
cannot be drawn that the South African regime’s
conduct has been completely and constantly
contemptuous and arrogant and that it has complete
disrespect for the United Nations, including the
Security Council, I do not know what further evidence
is required.

“What valid reason can be advanced for singling
out South Africa’s relations with the United Nations
for review by the Security Council?*’ [Ibid.,
para. 54.1

He replied:

22. The racist regime’s bankrupt case is based on
what we shall demonstrate to be a gross distortion
of the history of our country, a deliberate and
fraudulent omission of the facts of colonialist
aggression and plunder and the enslavement of our
people by the white settlers and colonialists. The
racist regime’s case is based also on lies and -a
misleading presentation of the apartheid policy, a
presentation designed to suit that regime‘s aims at
this session. Lies are brazenly resorted to despite the
public pronouncements of the leaders and architects
of this hideous policy, pronouncements that are
well known. Mr. Botha’s statement to the Council
cunningly evaded, we shall submit, the issue of which
the Council is seized. In fact, the whole performance
was typical of the well-known Nazi technique deriving
from the dictum popularized by Geobbels: “If you
tell a lie often enough and if it is big enough, you
end up being believed”.

“There is none. This is really just a political
move in the vendetta being conducted by certain
Members of the United Nations against my
Government.” [Ibid.]
17. The General Assembly resolution which called
for these meetings of the Council was adopted by
125 votes to one, but for Mr. Botha the 125 are
meaningless. That demonstrates the attitude of that
racist regime to the General Assembly and its
members.
18. If that is not sufftcient, let me quote something
else said by Mr. Botha which goes to the root of
the thinking of the South African regime:
“It is said that we have disregarded resolutions
of the United Nations organs. But next to nothing
is said of the nature and quality of the information
and documentation upon which those resolutions
were based. Closer analysis will show that the
material in question is rmbelievably one-sided, that
it is uniformly hostile to South Africa, that it is
often completely unsubstantiated.** [Ibid., paru. 57.1

23. Our delegation is gratified at the fact that at the
current session of the General Assembly the
Credentials Committee recommended to the
Assembly that the credentials of the representatives
of the racist, Fascist regime of South Africa be
rejected. The Assembly indeed did that, by an
overwhelming majority, and it referred the whole
question of the relationship between the racist regime
and the United Nations to the Security Council for
review. That unequivocal action on the part of the

19. The General Assembly is composed of very,
very responsible Members and their representative-s.
The. Security Council, which also has adopted
3

United
Nations
is, in our view, an important’
contribution
to the struggle to combat and eliminate
apartheid
and racism, and expresses in concrete
terms the wrath and disgust of the peoples of the
world, in whose sacred name, let us always remember,
the Organization
was created-their
wrath and their
disgust with a group of racists criminals, disciples
of Adolf Hitler, whose policies and practices are
reminiscent
of Nazi Germany.
It is indeed an
affront, an insult to humanity
that international
criminals
should find shelter, respectability
and
acceptance in the Organization
that they treat with
so much contempt and disrespect and to which
they pay no allegiance whatsoever-criminals
who
fraudulently
claim to be representing the peoples of
South Africa.

27. This so-called Constitution
was adopted by a
white minority in alliance with the United Kingdom,
a colonial Power. In fact, the Constitution
was
passed by the United Kingdom’s
colonial Parliament
in spite of vigorous protests from the African people.
The purpose of that instrument was to impose white
domination,
lordship
and Herrenvolk-ism
on the
Africans in all spheres of life in order to create
and perpetuate the type of colonialism
which exists
today in our country.
The Africans
protested
vigorously against this naked rape of their land and
rights. Deputations
sent to the United Kingdom,
the colonial Power, availed nothing. This so-called
Constitution,
which itself is so grossly illegal and
inhuman, is the instrument
which legalizes all the
atrocities and crimes committed
against our people
by the whites and the white regime.

24. Our peoples have always contested the legitimacy
of the racist white minority regime of South Africa,
from its very inception.
We deem it necessary,
particularly
at this series of Council meetings, to
expose the roots of apartheid and to show that the
racist regime is now acting as an international
Frankenstein.

28. There can be no shadow of doubt that, born
out of illegality,
the South African regime is itself
illegal. No criminal can legislate for himself to legalize
his illegal and criminal acts. That is what the white
minority regime, with the United Kingdom’s assistance
tried to do in 1909 and is still trying to do today
with the United States, France and other collaborators.

25. The fact is that our country--despite
Mr. Botha’s
lie yesterday that there was peace for 150 years-was
the target for over 250 years of the most brutal colonial
invasion and oppression by whites of mainly Dutch
and British descent. Throughout
those 250 years of
plundering,
rapacious, bloody, genocidal wars, our
forefathers throughout the length and breadth of. the
country, against overwhelming
odds, rose up against
the invaders to defend their land, its wealth and
themselves against enslavement. Ultimately,
however,
the savage foreigners defeated them militarily.
To
the extent that the whites disarmed them completely,
our people were conquered-but
they were never
subdued. This colonial aggression, usurpation and
monopoly of political, economic and military power
had its consummation
in the South Africa Act of
1909, which established the all-white Parliament,
the
source of all the vicious, racist and apartheid laws
in the country.

29. The African National Congress ANC, which we
represent here today, was formed in 1912, shortly
after the so-called South Africa Act came into
force; it was formed because of the rejection of the
African people of the domination
and overlordship
imposed on them by an all-white racist regime and
their refusal to pay allegiance
to it. ANC was
created as the mouthpiece of the African people and
their instrument for their national emancipation
and
liberation.
All Africans were called upon to pay
allegiance to ANC and not to the white regime.
Although
the Africans were completely
disarmed,
ANC strove to create a State within a State. It had,
and continues to have, its own anthem, its own flag,
and its own policies and slogans which were, and
continue to be, diametrically
opposed to those of the
white regime, thereby challenging
its sovereignty.
What it lacked then was an army. However, from
its very inception the ANC has continued to challenge
and contest the legitimacy
of the white minority
regime and its laws, both nationally and internationally.

26. The so-called South African Constitution
was
a gross assault on the right to selfdetermination
of
the indigenous
people and the instrument
for
further aggression against our people. The South
African Constitution
was fashioned by the white
minority, for the white minority,. and against the black
majority.
It was and still is inherently
racist and
discriminatory
in character. It is based on white
domination
and white superiority
and it is the
instrument
and machinery
for all the racist and
genocidal laws. It entrenches all political, economic
and military power in the hand of a white minority.
It is an instrument
which purports to legalize the
enrichment, through robbery and brutal exploitation,
of a small white.minority,
and the impoverishment
and oppression of the vast majority of the African
people.

30. Internationally,
at the signing of the Treaty of
Versailles in 1919, ANC sent a delegation to condemn
the white regime and to warn that Namibia-then
South West Africa-should
not be handed over to the
white minority regime of South Africa because the
plight and fate of the people of Namibia would be
no different from that of the people of South Africa.
While the delegation of the white regime sat in the
sheltered comfort of the conference room and had
an audience of delegates, the delegation of ANC had
to be content with lobbying in the corridors. Its protest
fell on deaf ears. Instead of the white regime being
condemned for its atrocities, international
recognition
was given to that illegal, illegitimate
and inhuman
4

regime. And what is even worse, the Namibian
people, their land and their wealth were handed
over on a silver platter to the white racists. Thus
the South African illegal minority white regime became
a respectable member of the League of Nations and
a full member of the exclusive club of colonialists
and imperialists.

the present iandiessness of our people and the
dispossession of their birthright.
Like many others,
the representative of the South African regime well
knows that the first meeting-point
in our country
with the white invaders was at Cape Town-then
called the Cape of Good Hope and sometimes the
Cape of Storms, which indeed it was in those
days-where,
in the seventeenth century, the white
aggressors virtually
exterminated
the Khoisan and
decimated
the Khoi
Khoi.
There is abundant
evidence of that from notable historians. To quote
only one, C. W. de Kiewiet, a white South African
historian, on page 73 of his book A History of South
Africa, * states:

31. What a tragedy that was. And how true it is
today that the fate of the people of Namibia is no
different from that of the people of South Africa.
By a stroke of the pen an international body expanded
the area of foreign domination
in southern Africa by
a brutal, barbarous and ruthless regime. Thus, the
international
Frankenstein was created.

“The great acreages of South Africa were not
unsettled spaces open to the unhindered occupation
of Europeans. That European settlement took place
in a land settled by a relatively numerous native
population is a fact of first-rate importance.”

32. Even assuming that the racist, apartheid regime
is a government-which
we contend it is not; it is
merely a regime-it
is certainly not the government
of the people of South Africa. By its very Constitution,
policies practices and pronouncements,
it is at
most-and
I emphasize, “at most”-a
Government
of some whites, by whites, for whites and voted for
by whites. It has no moral or legal right to claim
to be a government over the majority.
Whatever it
does with respect to that population is fundamentally
illegal. The South African regime imposes its rule on
the overwhelming
majority
of the people of our
country through the baton and the gun. It is a
gangsterish rule of terror and tyranny, nor has it
any sovereignty over the majority of the peoples of
the country. It is for that reason that this Frankenstein
is building an army and accumulating
an arsenal
beyond measure for a white so-called defence force.

35. Perhaps-and
I do not know where Mr. Botha
studied his history-we
might refer him to a quotation
by Jan van Riebeeck,
who landed with the first
settlers in 1652. They were interrogating
some of the
African prisoners at the so-called Cape of GoodHope. Reporting to his company, the Dutch East
India Company, Jan van Riebeeck said:
“The prisoners, having been asked the reasons
why they had caused us this trouble, declared for
no other reason than that they saw that we kept
in possession the best land and grazed our cattle
where they used to do so and that everywhere
with houses and plantations
we endeavoured
to
establish ourselves so permanently as if we intended
never to leave again but take possession of this
Cape land, which had’ belonged to them during
all the centuries, for our sole use.”

33. We said that there is a growing recognition of
the rights of our people in the General Assembly,
and now in the Council, but the development is not
yet complete nor is the pace fast enough. May we
refer to General Assembly resolution 3151 G (XXVIII),
in paragraph 11 of which the Assembly

36. Perhaps I might now turn once more, and as
briefly as possible, to another remarkable statement
made yesterday by the representative
of the racist
regime. He referred to the Great Trek, and said it
was as historic event. Well, it was historic, but we
shall show how it was historic from the point of
view of real history. We would say Mr. Botha must
know what motivated that so-called Great Trek. It
was at a time when the world had decided on the
emancipation of slaves. The Afrikaner people had got
used to having the blacks as slaves. The Great Trek
was a revolt against the decisions of the world
concerning the emancipation of slaves. And Piet Retief,
the leader of one of the groups which trekked north
from the south made it clear, in a long manifesto,
that they were leaving the coastal part of South
Africa because they wanted to go and find some place
where there would be no interference, where they
would be able to establish themselves firmly on a
master-servant basis, where they would establish a

“Declares that the South African regime has no
right to represent the people of South Africa and
that the liberation movements recognized by the
Organization
of African Unity are the authentic
representatives
of the overwhelming
majority
of
the South African people”.
That resolution was adopted on 14 December 1973.
We should like to state that it is a vindication of the
cause for which the organization
has struggled in
international
forums since 1919-more
than half a
century, is it not?
34. Perhaps we should now turn to some aspects
of the statement by Mr. Botha, just to correct the
record on one of his fundamental
lies. The story
presented here by the representative
of the South
African racist regime-that
our country was a noman’s-land until both blacks and whites simultaneously
occupied South Africa-is
a blatant lie to try to justify

2 Oxford University Press, 1946.

5

State “in which there will be no equality between
blacks and whites either in State or in church”.
That was the historic Great Trek, and throughout
it battles were fought by our people in defence of the
land and their wealth throughout the whole of South
Africa.

planted, as we indicated, with the extermination of
part of our people, the Khoisan when van Riebeeck
set foot in our country on 6 April 1652, ostensibly
to establish a vegetable garden to supply the ships of
the Dutch East India Company. Thus our country
and peoples became victims of international trade
and companies, thugs and robbers.

37. Now may we turn to one of the most important
aspects, also referred to in the statement of yesterday
in an attempt to show that South African foreign
policy is peaceful. We contend the opposite, and we
think the facts prove it. We should like to describe
very briefly the imperialist-colonialist aggressive and
expansionist foreign policy of the South African white
racist regime.

43. The history of,our country since 1652 has been
that of expansion and robbery. Indeed, even the
South Africa Act of 1909 envisaged the incorporation
of what is now known as Botswana, Lesotho and
Swaziland. It was a pact between the United Kingdom
and the Boers. Aggression and expansion, as we
said, are the roots of white South African foreign
policy. The South African bantustans as the extension
of the South African colonialist philosophy in practice,
the South African colonialist and imperialist power
policy, has its acid test in Namibia.

38. We have already shown that the white racist
minority regime established a new type of colonialism
in South Africa. We should like to stress that the
illegal colonialist white racist regime of South Africa
creates all the trappings of a colonialist State in South
Africa where not only were the colonially oppressed
and the colonial oppressors, the colony and the
metropolis, within the same area, but also all the
characteristics of a colonialist and imperialist
Power were demonstrated. Expansionism and
aggression have the basic policy of the white racist
regime in South Africa; hence the fact that it is now
arming itself to the teeth and its military budget is
spiralling every year.

44. Our delegation would merely want to state that
the crimes against humanity which have been so
clearly enunciated in the International Convention
on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid [resolution 3068 (XXVZZZ)] are crimes which
have been committed by the South African racist
regime from the very moment that it became the
centre of international capital and the greatest exploiter
of African and international labour. South African
and racist aggression have become, as we said,
blatant in Namibia, more brazen in the military
activities of the South African regime in Mozambique,
Angola and Zimbabwe, which the racist representative hardly referred to yesterday, in a subversive and
violent action against Zambia and Tanzania. This
monster, it will be our submission, must be curbed
and controlled; that depends, as it did with Adolf
Hitler and nazism, on the might and collective
concerted effort of the peoples of the world.

39. We should not forget Cecil Rhodes, who dreamt
of having a railroad’ for British imperialism from the
Cape to Cairo. Nor should we underrestimate
Harry Oppenheimer’s exuberance in building an
Oppenheimer gold and diamond empire in Africa and
the world.
40. South Africa and the racist settlers became
international exploiters and oppressors from the very
time they landed at the Cape of Good Hope. And
that is how the so-called wealth, so boasted about
by the South African whites, came into being-through
ruthless exploitation and oppression, through slavery,
slaves coming from many parts of the world, and
through the exploitation of migrant labour from
many parts of Africa.

45. Our delegation wishes to draw the attention of
the Council to the fact that the policies of apartheid
are being discussed in the year when the General
Assembly has adopted a Programme for the Decade
for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination [resofurion 3057 (XXVZZZ)]. We should like to
emphasize that the programme is one of action.
Further, in an unprecedented resolution, the United
Nations last year adopted the International Convention
on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid.
It is not necessary for our delegation to
elaborate on the implications of that Convention,
save to say that some who claim to be o posed
to apartheid have as yet not signed or rat’%led the
Convention. The urgent appeal of our people is for
the immediate signature and ratification Ofi and
action on, this important international Convention,
in order that the appropriate tribunals be set up to
try and convict international criminals.

41. Yesterdav. Mr. Botha. in his statement had the
audacity to say that South Africa is confronted by
the fact that there were thousands and thousands
of Africans coming from outside South Africa. Now
that process was deliberately engineered by South
Africa and its allies many years ago. It is no creation
of the African States. As a matter of fact the African
States are beginning, since their independence, to try
and curb it.
The Cape of Good Hope was of good hope
for international pirates but badhope for themdigenous
peoples of the country. It had as its development,
its roots in slavery and genocide; and there this was

42.

46. There were boasts about Bantueducation. We do
not want to deal with that extensively save to say
6

,

49. May I also refer to the so-called “laws” which
are passed by the Cape Town Parliament. Among the
worst laws passed by that Parliament, regarded by
our people as fixing upon them the badge of slavery,
are the Pass Laws. They are a vicious form of
enslavement and exploitation. The figures for arrests
under those laws have now risen to-nearly 2,000 a
day. The prisons of South Africa are virtually
bursting with so-called offenders against the Pass
Laws. Those laws are equivalent only to the Nazi
law whereby Jews were supposed to wear a certain
type of badge to identify them. They are no less
vicious.

that when that Bantu education was established, it
was established with the clear purpose of the
enslavement of our people. As a matter of fact, the
author of the Bantu education, Mr. Verwoerd,
stated quite bluntly and clearly that it was intended
to train the African not to look to the green pastures
of the European whites.
47. Let us now turn to- the substance of what our
delegation wanted really to raise before the
intervention of the South African racist representative.
We should like at this stage to characterize upnrrheid
and its laws which permitted the lawlessness that
now exists in South Africa. There are many
oppressive regimes perhaps in the world, but where
South Africa is unique is the way in which the law
is openly used to maintain racial domination.
Apartheid
is not simply a relic from the past; it is a
highly systematic method of control which allies racist
ideology to the sophisticated machinery of a modem
industrialized State. The law in South Africa has
become the major instrument for dividing the
population and securing the privileges of the white
minority. Far from ‘being the means for protecting
the people from abuse by the authorities, the law has
been converted into the principal mechanism for
tyranny over the people. The law and the courts
are used to harass individuals and dispossess whole
communities. It is through the so-called law that
people are deprived of their land and that wives
and husbands are prohibited from living together. It
is the same law which sanctions the placing of
segregation signs on all public facilities in the country
and which prevents people from moving about freely
in their own land, from being seen on the streets
at night.

SO. If we were to go into the details and examine
the laws of South Africa we would find that every
one of them was an infringement of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. However, we do not
seek at this stage to go through all the laws, or
indeed any one of them. It is only the South African
racist Government which does not seem to understand
-or perhaps it does understand-that the laws it
passes every year in its Parliament against our people
are infringements of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. I say, perhaps it does understand--and
it does not care.
51. May I refer quite briefly to the bantustau
scheme. It is our submission, and I have no doubt
that this is supported by resolutions of the General
Assembly, that the bantustans are a complete
assault on the right of our people to self-determination.
52. We should like in conclusion to make one or
two further observations.
53. We are aware, and indeed the past 25 years
in the lif’e of the United Nations have made us very
much aware, that South Africa has very powerful
allies in this body. Some big Powers are supposed to
have the power to veto. But may I say that, in our
view, those big Powers should be very careful, for
perhaps not now but in the future the indictment
may be brought against them very forcefully that they
were-.&complices of a regime which has committed
atrocities and crimes against humanity. As a matter of
fact, with all due respect to their very membership
and rights even in the Council, it might one day be
necessary to challenge them directly if they continue
to associate themselves with international criminals.
If they exercise their veto today, we should like to
say very clearly that they are vetoing human rights.
However, we should like to emphasize that we do not
fear that veto, because we believe, as time and
history have shown, that time is still on our side.
We would hope that they will refrain today from
using their veto, and will side with those who are
for human rights and against those who are criminals
against humanity.

48. As we stated, South Africa has no written
constitution or bill of rights. In constitutional terms the
Parliament that sits in Cape Town is supposed to be
sovereign and may pass any legislation it likes on
auy subject. The Constitution Act of l%l expressly
provides that the Parliament shall consist of white
persons only, elected by white persons. Thus the
law states clearly that all power resides in the hands
of the white minority, who constitute a mere 4 million
people out of a total population of over 20 million.
The position today is that the black majority have
lost even the limited representation that they had in
Parliament 60 years ago, when in part of South Africa
some blacks were able to vote even though they
were not permitted to stand as candidates. The
dispossession of the laud through this law is a wellknown fact. We were told yesterday that the Laud
Act of 1931.was passed in order to secure land for
the Africans. It was a startling assertion-startling,
because in fact it is well known that the Land Act
was passed for no other reason than to dispossess
our people of their land and to ensure that they
would become mere reservoirs of cheap labour for
the white farms and mines.

54. Our delegation would urge the Council forthwith
to expel the racist, criminal regime of South Africa.
7

That, to us, is still the lower level. It would be a mild
act. And we would hope that the United Nations, the
General Assembly and the Council would soon find it
possible to bring an indictment against these intemational criminals, to begin a “Niimburg Trial” before
the disaster and not to wait until afterwards.

It is not without reason that the General Assembly
has pronounced apartheid to be an international crime.
59. However, it would be inadequate to consider
the situation in South Africa only in the context of
racial discrimination and racial segregation. What is
involved is the much more fundamental question of
the right of self-determination of the peoples of South
Africa. Elimination of racial discrimination and
segregation, although it is, important in itself, will
not solve the problem in South Africa if it is not
accompanied by democratic rule of the majority.

55. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Pakistan.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
56. Mr. AKHUND (Pakistan): Mr. President, I thank
you and the other members of the Council for giving
me the opportunity to participate in this debate on
behalf of Pakistan. Allow me also, Sir, to offer you
my respectful congratulations on your assuming the
Presidency of the Council while it is considering a
matter of such great importance to the continent of
Africa. Of course, it is not a matter which is of
interest to Africa alone; indeed, it concerns the
universal problem of ensuring respect for the Charter
of the United Nations and observance of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. I must speak here on
behalf of my country in order, above all, to demonstrate
its solidarity with the universal cause for which the
people of South Africa have been struggling for long
years.

60. We find, unfortunately, that these outrageous
doctrines of racial superiority are no longer confined
to South Africa alone. The South African regime
itself is progressijjely extending these policies to
Namibia, a Territory it continues to occupy illegally.
It is, furthermore, helping and encouraging the minority
regime in Southern Rhodesia to defy world opinion
and to adopt the same pernicious racial policies
over there. That has resulted in a situation which
threatens the peace of the region. The Special
Committee on Apartheid,
in its report to the
twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly, very
aptly sums up the position of the South African regime
in the following words:
“It is the perpetrator of racism in South Africa,
and of aggression in Namibia. It is the protector of
racism and colonialism in Southern Rhodesia.
Action against this regime is imperative in order to
avert the threat to the peace in southern Africa
which can have the gravest international
consequences.“4

57. Pakistan’s own concern with the problem is not
recent but goes back to the time when Pakistan
became a Member of the Organization, and indeed
even earlier. People of Asian origin who have made
South Africa their home are, like their African brothers,
equally the victims of the grotesque hierarchy of
disabilities and inequities, of petty indignities and
humiliations and all sorts of stupidities and barbarities
which pass under the name of apartheid. Those
policies are the embodiment of the worst form of
racial discrimination and racial segregation. Their
characteristic features are repugnant to the elementary
decencies in human relations. The system, built on
the myth of racial superiority, is in truth aimed at
perpetuating the political domination and economic
exploitation of the population of the country by a
small minority.

61. The United Nations took cognizance of the
situation in South Africa from the very beginning.
Since 1946, and particularly since the Sharpeville
massacre of 1960, the Security Council has addressed
to the South African Government numerous requests,
appeals, calls and demands asking it to abandon
its policies of apartheid. The response of the racist
regime has been one of complete defiance and contempt
for the United Nations.
62. The idea that association in the Organization
with other countries would, have the effect of
moderating those policies has not .been borne out by
facts. The Times of London of last 19 October
reports that, in 1972, 20,000 people of African origin
were arrested and sentenced to various terms in
prison for the offence of leaving their employment and
seeking better jobs. That law, which is officially
known, with a not unsurprising lack of sense of irony,
as the Masters and Servants Law, is now to be
replaced. That the expected repeal of that law, which
has remained in force into practically the fourth
quarter of this century is considered a great step
forward in the liberalization of the South African

58. The South African regime implements and
sustains that system through ruthless oppression.
The Special Committee on Apartheid in its report
entitled “Artibrary ‘laws and regulations enacted and
applied by the .South African regime to repress the
legitimate struggle for freedom” says the following:
“The Government of South Africa has enacted
an armoury of racial laws and regulations, which,
jurists have noted, often parallel those of Nazi
Germany.“3
3 Oflcial Records of the General Assembly.
Session, Supplement No. 22 A, part two, para.2.

Twenty-ninth

4 Ibid.. Supplement No. 22, para.206.

8

regime shows only what an abyss there is between
South Africa and the rest of the world.

the racist policies under which the people of South
Africa continue to suffer.

63. The truth.is that, instead of bringing its policies
and conduct into conformity with the tenets of the
Charter of the United Nations, the racist regime
has chosen to disregard world opinion as expressed
at the United Nations and other international
forums.

69. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Frenclz):
The next speaker is the representative of India, whom’
I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make a statement.
70. Mr. JAIPAL (India): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity given to my
delegation to participate in these historic discussions,
which are of considerable interest to my country.

64. The report of the Special Committee on Apartheid
on the “violations of the Charter of the United
Nations and resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council by the South African
regime”5 makes dismal reading. It provides adequate
material for indictment of the South African regime.

71. The question of ‘racial discrimination in South
Africa was brought before the General Assembly
at its first session in 1946 by my country even
before it regained its independence. India’s involvement in this matter goes back even further in history,
to 1913, when the ‘late Mr. Gandhi organized the
movement for passive resistance. against the
discriminatory’ laws. of the white rulers of South
Africa.

65. The General Assembly has already given its
.verdict, since in 1970, and subsequently, it rejected
the credentials of the South African’.regime to represent
South Africa in the United Nations. That is as far
as the Assembly can go acting ,on its own.

72. The issue has always been whether Western
civilization in South Africa is to be based on the
theory of racial .supremacy; whether the barriers
between man and man on grounds of race and colour
should be broken down, and justice and .equality be
considered the legitimate entitlement of ,-all. India
broke off relations with South Africa in 1946 when
it became clear that the ghetto law had come to stay
and that South Africa would remain impervious to
protestation and persuasion.

66. The South African regime ignored that vehement
expression of the world’s indignation at and
condemnation of its policies. Having exhausted .all its
efforts to ‘bring about a change in the attitude of
South Africa, the General Assembly glas now taken
the step of asking the Security Council to review the
relationship of South Africa with the United Nations.
67. With the present review by the Council of this
question, the international campaign to bring about
a change in South Africa’s policies can be said to
have reached a decisive stage. The argument that
the presence of South Africa in the United Nations
is capable of reforming its policies, and attitudes has,
alas, received no confirmation in practice. In my
delegation’s view, the issues, before, the Council are
clear. For the last three decades j a Member State
has persistently violated the principles of the Charter
and has held the Organization’s resolutions and
decisions in contempt.

73. Twenty-eight years have gone by since then and
the question now before us remains essentially the
same: how long should the United Nations tolerate
the doctrine of a master race practised by one of its
Member States? The last world war was fought to
reject that doctrine. It is to the everlasting .credit ;of j
the United Kingdom that,. having fought that war,
its people at their first post-war elections returned to
power the party which, in deference to public opinion,
decided to terminate its colonial rule over India.
There has been no similar reaction in’ South Africa.
On the contrary, the white regime in South Africa
has progressively withdrawn into its own racial.
shell and pursued its policy of racial discrimination
and apartheid--a
policy which has been roundly
condemned by ‘the enlightened world community;
But that regime has remained frozen in its self-.
righteous conceit and has treated, with cynicism and
contempt all the’,attempts of the United Nations to
reason with ,it or to persuade it to abandon its
racist policies., South Africa, which was once a member
of the Commonwealth, ,is no longer a member of that
curious community of equal nations. Is there .any
valid reason why -South Africa, which has been
excluded from the Commonwealth, should not now be
excluded also from the.United Nations?

68. The continuance of the present situation in South
Africa poses, furthermore, a threat to the peace in
Africa and cannot leave the peace of the rest of the
world unaffected. What is needed now is such
meaningful action by the Council as will leave no
doubt in the mind of the racist regime that it cannot
‘continue its present policies with impunity. This is
what Africa and the world expect of the Council: this
is what we urge upon it. The Charter undoubtedly
provides for measures to be taken in such cases,
including expulsion from the Organization. We are
confident that the Council in discharge of its
responsibilities will .explore all possibilities and will
not hesitate to take the course of action which will
ensure and assert the supremacy of the principles
of the Charter and contribute to the eradication of
s Ibid.,

Supplement

74. Several speakers before me have already
enumerated the long and dismal catalogue of South

No. 22 A, part one.

9

Africa’s violations. of the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. It is therefore sufficient for me to
say that the United Nations should no longer tolerate
a situation in which 86 per cent of the territory in
South Africa is a white zone reserved for the white
minority of 18 per cent, and in which the African
majority of 8 million, constituting 82 per cent ,of the
population, is condemned to live in only 13 per cent
of the territory and is, furthermore, subjected to
discriminatory laws, denying them fundamental
human rights. This monstrous injustice surely deserves
some form of punitive action, because it seems that
the ‘perpetrator does not know right from wrong.

some confusion as to the implication-of the rejection
of its credentials by the General Assembly.
78. The opinion of the Legal Counsel submitted
in 19706was, in our judgment, essentially a legalistic
interpretation based on the inadequacies of the present
rules of procedure. Clearly, when the rules were
formulated, no one anticipated a situation where a
Member State would occupy its seat even after its
credentials had been rejected for good and proper
reason. Surely the United Nations may take a decision
in accordance with its conscience. The argument that
the representatives of the white regime in South
Africa may continue to sit among us simply because
there is no rival claimant is too superficial to merit
serious consideration. It is a specious argument based
on inadequate law.

75. Since 1946 the Gene&l Assembly has adopted
countless resolutions in the hope that the white regime
in South Africa might abandon its policy of apartheid.
What has been the ‘reaction of the South African
Government to those resolutions? The only virtue, if
it can be called that, is that the South ‘African
Government has displayed a certain stubborn
consistency in maintaining that the policy of apartheid
is essentially a matter within its domestic jurisdiction
in terms of Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter
and therefore outside the competence of the United
Nations. Yesterday the representative of the white
regime of South Africa not only reiterated this basic
position but went further and claimed that South
Africa was a country flowing, as it were, with
milk and honey, where the whites are really terribly
kind to the blacks; that South Africa does not pose
a threat to international peace; that South Africa is
more sinned against than sinning; that it is the United
Nations that is out of step with South Africa and not
the other way around; that apartheid is an inevitable
historical necessity; that contact between the different
races would bring disaster, and hence the races have
to be separated from each other in their own interests.

79. We are not dealing only with the question of
representation or its adequacy here. The-issues are
far more profound. We are concerned with the
continued presence among us of a Member State
which justifies its violation of human rights in the
name of the sanctity of domestic jurisdiction. If the
Charter has not foreseen such a contingency, surely
it is because the framers of the Charter did not
anticipate that any Member would wilfully violate
human rights and the principles of the Charter and
continue to take refuge in this Organization.
80. It is because of that unsatisfactory legal opinion
that the General Assembly has found itself unable
to evict the representatives of South Africa. That is.
why it. has called upon the Security Council to
review the relationship between the United Nations
and South Africa, thereby placing upon the Council
a truly tremendous responsibility.
81t What should be the relations between the United
Nations and a Member State which is in constant
violation of the principles of the Charter and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights? I suggest to
the Council that the answer to this question is quite
clear, and that is that the United Nations should
have norelations with such a Member.

76. This South African response is a piece of
egotistical whitewash reminiscent of paternalistic
colonialism. Evidently, the white regime in South
Africa does not know yet that tlie Coloured man
cannot live by bread alone. .-.
77. Does not the presence of South Africa in the
United Nations detract from the dignity of the
Organization? How long will the United Nations
shelter a Member which continues to flout with
impunity all its resolutions, which does not believe
in the dignity and equality of the human person and
which violates the very moral basis on which the
United Nations was founded? The credentials of the
South African regime have been rejected by the
General Assembly for four consecutive years. South
Africa has been ..expelled from the United Nations
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the
World Health Organization and the International
Labour Organisation, but here South Africa has
continued to participate, evidently because there is

82. I should like to pose this question a little
differently. Would the United Nations admit a State
which as a matter of policy violates fundamental
human rights in order to keep under subjection the
vast majority of its Coloured population? We cannot
imagine that the United Nations would admit such
a Member. Why, then, should the United Nations
not expel such a Member, which has remained
immune to all good and healthy influences and which.
indulges in the folly of regarding persons. of a.
.different race and colour as belonging to a lesser
breed?
6 Ibid., Twenty-fifth Session, Annexes, agendaitem3, document
AIS160.

10

.

83. -There are some among us who may believe that
the expulsion of the white South African regime
would create a bad precedent because it would place
South Africa outside the influence of the United
Nations. My delegation would regard the expulsion
of South Africa as a go~od precedent. It is a good
precedent and it should prove to be a warning to
potential transgressors. Furthermore, my delegation
believes that since South Africa ‘has chosen to ignore
for years the appeals of this Organization it is clearly
beyond our capacity to influence it and, therefore,
there is no sense in allowing it to continue to enjoy
the respectability of the Organization’s membership.
84. There are some who think; or who may think,
that the principle of universality of the Organization
would be violated if the South ‘African regime
were to be expelled. On the contrary, my delegation
would say that the principle of-universality would be
safeguarded, would be respected, if the South
African regime were to be expelled. Surely the
presence of South Africa among us signifies the
presence of a Member which has no respect for
the Organization or for the principles on which it
was founded. Universality of respect for human rights
is the very basis of the universality of the
Organization and is a necessary precondition for its
membership.

Council are not being called upon to vote against
war, nor indeed on their own relations with South
Africa, which are not under review.
89. What is under review is the nature of the
relationship between the United Nations and a Member
State that is in continual default, The’ Security
Council is being called upon ,to vote virtually on the
integrity and dignity of the Organization. In the
present situation it seems to us that it would be
better indeed for South Africa to remain unrepresented
in this Organization than to be represented by the
white regime. The expulsion of that regime may not
improve the situation in South Africa but I think it will
certainly improve the situation in the Organization.
90. My delegation would therefore suggest that in
these unusual circumstances members of the Council
might consider showing greater deference to the
views of the overwhelming majority of the Members
than to the views of the regime that has been proved
guilty of continued .violation of the principles of the
United Nations. ‘,
91. It is unfortunate, but it seems unavoidable, that
it should be necessary ‘to expel the Member State
in order to terminate the relations of the United
Nations with the objectionable regime claiming to
represent that State. There will be time enough to
admit Azania when its people have won their freed,om
and dignity.

85. At the United Nations Conference on Intemational Organization, at San Francisco, those Members
which were in favour of Article 6 of the Charter
were of the opinion that the primary purposes of
the United Nations were peace and security and not
universality. They were in favour of expelling States
that were admittedly incorrigible and that violated
the principles of the Charter in a persistent manner.

92. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Barbados.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
93. Mr. WALDRON-RAMSEY
(Barbados):
Mr. President, you have distinguished yourself in the
struggle for the freedom of the people of Cameroon
at home, and you have extended that service beyond
the territorial borders of Cameroon into the field of
international diplomacy, where you represent and
protect the interests of the great continent of Africa;
Your illustrious President, Mr. Ahmadou Ahidjo,
stands in the forefront of the battle which the gallant
sons of Africa wage to ‘achieve the stated goals of
the Organization of African Unity; namely, the
unification of the African continent, the redemption
of the dignity and manhood of Africa’s sons, and the
liquidation of the last vestiges of the hateful colonial
experience. I crave your indulgence to extend my
sincere salutations to you and to the great people of
the United Republic of .Cameroon.

86. I put it ,to the Council that no Member State
has violated the principles of the Charter with’
greater persistence or ,with greater conviction than
South Africa. It is our view that South Africa has
earned its expulsion by its own incorrigible conduct.
We believe that the time has now come for the
Organization to invoke the power given to it under
Article 6 of the Charter in order to expel the white
South African regime-unless, of course, that regime
has the good sense to withdraw from it voluntarily.
87. I suggest to the Council that the loss of this
Member will be a gain to the dignity of the Organization
and, furthermore, it will also be a reaffirmation
of its faith in the principles on which it was founded.
Of course, South Africa’s expulsion would.not be an
obstacle to its readmittance later’ on if justified. by
circumstances.

94. That I am happy to see you preside over this
particular debate in the Security Council is understandable. But it is both happy and fortunate that a
distinguished African diplomat like your good self
should guide the deliberations of the ‘Council at a
time when it conducts a review of the relationship

88. My delegation would hope that no member of
the Council would seriously consider voting against
a recommendation for the expulsion of the South
African regime. I would suggest that this is not a
fit case for the use of the veto. Members of the
11

between the United Nations and South
the behest of the General Assembly.

Africa

at

the Charter under its feet and has spat contemptuously
in the face of each of its principles.

95. A review of the history of the relationship of a
Member
State with the United
Nations
must
necessarily contain an analytical evaluation of that
relationship against a background of certain established
norms and principles If it is established that the
relationship
is defective or tainted in some manner,
then there is an onus of responsibility
devolving
upon this Council-the
reviewing body-to
offer a
prognosis or remedial action. 1 think it would be a
reasonable presumption
that the General Assembly,
in its cautious wisdom, weighed the relationship with
South Africa in the balance and found it wanting.
I find it fair to state that the General Assembly,
after reviewing the performance
of South Africa
annually for the last 26 years and making innumerable
recommendations
to South Africa itself and the
international
community
as a whole for a return by
that State to international
standards of decency and
rectitude, has utilized all its options and in desperation
and anguish, perhaps, has now turned to the Council
for relief. Happily,
the constitutional
framework
which underpins the jurisprudence
of the Charter
allows for this platform of appeal from the General
Assembly to a higher and more executive instance.

99. That is the charge against South Africa. It is
against the background of the weight of evidence
supporting that charge that the Security Council will
have to consider the activation of the provisions of
Article 6 of the Charter.
100. The judgement of the General Assembly today
is that the Republic of South Africa is not willing
to accept and carry out the obligations of the Charter.
What today, is the judgement of the Security Council?
101. Admission to the United Nations is effected by
a decision of the General Assembly upon a recommendation of the Security Council. The suspension
of the exercise of the rights and privileges
of
membership may be effected by the Assembly upon
the recommendation
of the Council.
But such
suspension can be taken only against a Member
State .-against which the Council has already taken
preventive or enforcement action.
102. The difficult question of interpretation
arises as
to whether, in respect of any or all of its earlier and
current resolutions
on South Africa, the Security
Council can be considered
ever to have taken
preventive action against South Africa. It is manifestly
clear, of course, that the. Council has never taken
enforcement action under Articles 41 and 42 of the
Charter against South Africa.

%. It is my respectful submission that the General
Assembly,
having
exhausted
every conceivable
expedient at its disposal in dealing with the noxious
and recalcitrant behaviour of South Africa, has acted
soundly and judiciously in inviting the Security Council
to review South Africa’s
relationship
with the
Organization.
For the Council has special responsibilities
under the Charter
in determining
the
admission, conditions and status of Member States in
the United Nations.

103. After the slaughter at Sharpeville
in March
1960, the Security Council, in resolution 134 (1960),
found that the situation in South Africa was one that
led to international
friction,
and could endanger
international
peace and security. But the Council
was careful not to determine
that the notorious
apartheid. policies which led to mass murder at high
noon on a sunny day in Sharpeville
iu 1960
constituted
a threat to international
peace and
security under Article 39 of the Charter. Therefore,
there was no necessity to take action to prevent an
aggravation of the situation by calling upon the party
concerned to comply with such provisional measures
as the Council
deemed necessary or desirable,
consistent with Article 40 of the Charter. Yet, in
fairness to objective scholarship, the Council, in that
resolution
134 (1960), did call upon the apartheid
regime to bring about “racial harmony based on
equality”
and to “abandon its policies of apartheid
and racial discrimination”.

97. The behaviour of South Africa and its relationship with the United Nations must, it seems to me,
be assessed and judged-at
this level of appellate
jurisdiction-essentially
against a background of the
strict and relevant provisions of the Charter and the
constitutional
practice which has evolved over the
years of the Organization’s
existence.
98. Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Charter asserts
that membership in the United Nations is open to all
peace-loving
States which accept the obligations
contained in the Charter and, in the judgement
of
the Organization,
are willing to carry out those
obligations. South Africa is an original Member of the
Organization.
At the time of its signature and
ratification of the Charter, consistent with Article 110,
the General Assembly, as it then was, felt that South
Africa was willing and able to carry out the
obligations contained in the present Charter. Since
1948-three
years after the entry into force of the
Charter-South
Africa has proceeded in a systematic
manner to violate every conceivable obligation and
principle contained in the Charter. It has trampled

104. So, in a certain sense, it could be argued that
the Council took preventive
action against South
Africa under the provisions of Article 40 of the Charter,
since in the resolution it called upon South Africa to
comply with certain provisional
measures in order
to prevent an aggravation
of the situation or its
recurrence. And that call was made before the Council
made recommendations
or decided upon measures
12

provided for in Article 39. The only element missing
-perhaps
deliberately-was
a determination
of the
existence of a threat to the peace in resolution 134
(1960).

discoveren, the great African peoples of the Swazis,
the Sothos, the Zulus, the Tsonga, the Venda, the
Xhosa, the Ovambos and many others, lived an
ordered and definable life as nation States in that
great and massive kingdom. These great people lived
a planned life inherited from their forefathers several
centuries before the European
evolved from his
antedeluvian
circumstance
of living in caves and
painting his body with bright colours to frighten off
his enemy.

105. This is the unclear nature of the interpretation
of preventive
action already taken against South
Africa by the Security Council, in order to justify
suspension of its rights and privileges under Article 5
of the Charter.
106. It is true that the General Assembly
has
determined
that apartheid
constitutes
a threat to
international
peace and security. It is true that the
General Assembly has decided that apartheid, both as
a social experiment and as a system of government,
is repugnant to every universal norm of civilized
human conduct. It is true too that the General
Assembly
has considered
that South Africa has
persistently violated the principles contained in the
Charter, and, consistent with Article 6 of the Charter;
should be expelled from the Organization
by the
Assembly upon the recommendatiori
of the Security
Council.
All of these things are true. But the
constitutional
imperatives of the fundamental law of
the Organization
remove both the initial and final
word touching
and concerning
the question
of
membership and relationship with the United Nations
from the mouth of the General Assembly and places
the words
“admission”,
“suspension”
and
“expulsion”
within the grave and God-like voice of
the Security Council--especially
its five permanent
members, who bestride the Council like a Colossus
of Rhodes. That is the law of the Charter. That is
the political reality of the South African queition.

109. Yet in some European history books we find
the illogical and unintelligible
phenomenon
of socalled discoverers such as Rhodes and Kruger going
to’ southern Africa to discover Africa. Africa always
existed. It needed no discovery. It needed no discovery
by the white self-seeking adventurers of the United
Kingdom and those of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. The mighty Kingdom of Azania existed several
hundred years before any of those European kingdoms.
The rapacious plunder of Azania, which resulted
from the rivalries of those two groups of traders
from foreign kingdoms in Europe, led to the famous
Boer War. In that war, it will be recalled, the
Zulus and the British defeated the Boers. The Boers
and the nationalist governments they have formed have
never forgiven or forgotten that defeat by the British
and African warriors. The neurosis of fear which has
subsequently
characterized
their actions vis&vis
Africans and English-speaking
South Africans is
accounted for by the psychology of defeat of the
Afrikaners in the Boer War of 1899-1902.
110. Ever since, the Afrikaners have tried to establish
a Boer republic south of the Limpopo River. The
South Africa Act of 1909, which gave them independence , also provided
the Afrikaners
with the
opportunity
of seeking revenge against the Africans
and the English-speaking
South Africans, so that with
the installation
of the Nationalist
Government
in
1948 under Malan and through Strijdom,
Verwoerd
and now Vorster, came a panoply of racist and
discriminatory
legislation which robbed the African
peoples of their lands, subjected them to pass laws
and deprived them of a voice in the government and
normal participation
in the process of democracy.
All avenues of peaceful process and change have been
denied to the Africans. Their leaders have been killed,
tortured and jailed because they dared to speak up
for ordinary human rights and fundamental freedoms.

107. In my humble submission,
in its relationship
with the United Nations South Africa stands indicted
on two principal counts in the bill of indictment
sent up by the General Assembly to the Council.
First, that by practising the evil and pernicious
doctrine of apartheid South Africa has violated Fvery
principle of the Charter, in particular those principles
contained in paragraphs 2 and 4 of Article 2; said
evil doctrine of apartheid,
as a system of govemment, constituting a threat to international
peace and
security, within the terms of Article 39 of the
Charter. Secondly, that the Republic of South Africa
illegally occupies the Territory
of Namibia,
which,
since 1967, has been a Territory
under the direct
responsibility
of the United Nations, and a Territory
in which the Republic of South Africa has .no locus
standi.

111. Our colleague the South African representative
must do more than admit that there are a few problems
of racial discrimination
in the Republic which his
Government is seeking to overcome. Nor is it sufficient
to say that there are discriminatory
laws still on he
statute books. His Government must take immediate
action to remove those laws from the statute books
now. He has a clear majority
in Parliament.
His
Government
must
immediately
release Nelson
Mandela from imprisonment
on Robben Island, which
is so grim a prison that even the notorious United

108. A careful analysis of the history of the Empire
of Azania would indicate that since time immemorial
this southern tip of the African continent was inhabited
by great African tribal States, most permanent in
nature and some of a nomadic disposition.
Long
before the white invaders came from the United
Kingdom and the Kingdom of the Netherlands, in the
disguise
of traders,
adventurers
and so-called
13

States prison of Alcatraz would look like heaven
compared with it. Robert Sobukwe must be released
from detention. So must Mrs. Winnie Mandela,
the wife of Nelson, be spared the Government’s
harrassment and constant persecution. If South Africa
disputes and challenges the reports of the various
United Nations bodies about its system, then let that
Government permit an investigating body from the
United Nations to enter its so-called open society.
But, most of all, let South Africa do something in
real and practical terms to demonstrate its good
faith. Let it release Walter Sisulu and all the other
political prisoners it has imprisoned and mistreated.

an affront to civilized society. That is why we say
to the South African Government: abandon aparrheid
and seek a new foundation of social order, based
on respect for the dignity and worth of the human
person; based on justice and based, too, upon a fair
and equitable distribution of the economic largesse
of the State to all .the citizens of the State. That
is, why, too, the international community has never.
felt that it was in violation of the provisions of
Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter whenever the
United Nations discussed the apartheid system of
government in South Africa. Apartheid is a singuiar
phenomenon that has brought singular distress and
pain to all civilized men, everywhere. Apartheid
stands indicted and condemned.

112. The Africans in South Africa have never
sought to build a cathedral for tears in their part
of the continent. They have never sought to liquidate
or to expel the white man from the continent. On
the contrary, they have always sought to build a just
society in which the process of democracy. would
work for the benefit of all men, black and white
alike, on the African continent. African leaders of
South Africa have always tried to construct a
tabernacle for peaceful and profitable mutual
collaboration in the Republic of South Africa. I
speak from a pinnacle of authority in these matters
for, although I now dwell in the African Diaspora,
like my ancestors before me we are all men of
sorrow and acquainted with grief. I entreat you to
hear the words of Nelson Mandela on this selfsame question. In his defence at the notorious
Rivonia Trial in 1964, he said:

115. South Africa has attempted to export this
hateful doctrine to Namibia, a Territory under the
direct control of the United Nations. South Africa
had failed to discharge its mandate over that Territory
in good faith. As a consequence it forfeited the
status of a mandatory Power. The General Assembly
in 1%7, formally relieved South Africa of its
responsibilities in Namibia, brought the Territory
directly under the control of the United Nations,
and called upon South Africa to desist from exercising
any acts of authority in Namibia. South Africa has
refused to recognize the authority of the United
Nations with respect to Namibia and has refused
to withdraw its presence from that Territory. Now
we hear the South African representative declaring
that this Government is proposing to hold a
constitutional conference amongst the interested
groups in the Territory, with a view to changing that
Territory’s status, in a time-span, according to him,
of considerably less than 10 years.
116. South Africa has had no locus standi in
Namibia since 1967. South Africa has no right to call
any conference there, or to set a time-frame within
which South Africa thinks the Territory might be
liberated. The only role South Africa has in Namibia
is to tell the United Nations formally when it is
prepared to withdraw its presence completely.
117. Perhaps one of the positive courses the Security
Council might take in this debate is to give the
South African Government a final deadline by which
it must report to the Council its complete withdrawal
from Namibia. Consistent with Article 40 of the
Charter, the Council may, before making recommendations or deciding upon measures provided for
in Article 39, call upon South Africa to comply
with certain provisional measures with respect to
withdrawal from Namibia, in order to prevent an
aggravation of an already grave situation which
threatens international peace and security. It would
be for the Council to decide upon the nature of the
provisional measures. In any case, it would be clear,
once and for all, that the Security Council- would,
by this act, have taken preventive action, within
the meaning of Article 5 of the Charter, against
South Africa.

“During my lifetime, I have dedicated myself to
this struggle of the African people. I have fought
against white domination, and I have fought against
black domination. I have cherished the ideal of a
democratic and free society in which all persons
live together in harmony and with equal
opportunities. It is an ideal which I hope to live
for and achieve. But, if need be, it is an ideal
for which I am prepared to die.”
113. That represents the quintessence of African
philosophy regarding the cohabitation of black and
white communities on the African continent. But the
Mandela declaration also represents the antithesis of
the bankrupt postulates of the apartheid doctrine.
For, despite the denials of our colleague the
representative of South Africa yesterday, apartheid
is predicated upon what I have chosen to describe
as an inarticulate major premise: the major premise
that white men are by definition superior as human
beings to black men. It remains inarticulate because
so specious and tendentious is its character that those
who espouse it are afraid to say it too loudly,
and even deny its postulation as an incontestable
premise when challenged.
114. Because apartheid is repugnant to all canons
of civilized conduct and human decency, it stands
condemned at the bar of international justice. It is
14

118. There is no question that South Africa is
illegally exercising authority in Namibia, a Territory
under the direct responsibility of the United Nations.
In my humble submission, South Africa stands guilty
of wilfully refusing to accept and carry out its
obligations under the Charter, with respect to the
recommendations and decisions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council in relation to the
Territory of Namibia. In my considered opinion,
South Africa stands guilty as charged in the twocount indictment I recited earlier.
-

of the Security Council-which the Council might
direct to South Africa, as provisional measures which
the Council deems necessary and desirable in order
to prevent an aggravation of the situation.
120. The General Assembly has formed its own
judgements on these matters, as is to be seen from
the ventilation of the views of my colleagues who
have preceded me in this.debate. They have referred
the matter to you, Sir, and the Security Counci!,
exercising an appellate jurisdiction.

119. I have attempted to indicate some of the legal
considerations, as X understand them, surrounding
the-expedients of one, suspension of rights and
privileges, and two, expulsion from membership.
I have attempted, too, to indicate some measures
of a practical and realistic nature--given the politics

121. I deoart with the conviction that I have stated
the case for the prosecution. The Council has a clear
duty. What is its judgement?
The meeting

15

rose at I .40 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

or

from
bookstores
and distributors
write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sent en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
d&ositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
sup&
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
A : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
BAE

HOJIYPHTb

H3~amia

If3AAHHII

Oprami3annn

SHRaX

A

*ameM
HaqxR,

KXEWC~OX

BreHTCTBaX

COMO

CONSEGUIB

Cerqsix

BO

OPPAHH3AHHH

G6-beJmHemibrx

HasriB

BCeX

BtHpa.

~araamie
no npo,ltazxe

PafiOHaX

OB-LEAHHEHHbIX
10xc~o

xynmb

a xwixmb~x

HaBOJIHTe

CSpaBKH

sum nnnurre
no anpecy:
nsxanxR,
Hbxo-Fiopx
HJI~

Oprarin3aqna

PUBLICACIONBS

DE LAS

HAHHH
06

rara-

H3AaHHRX

B

06~exnaennbrx

xemesa.

NACIONBS

UNIDAS

I.as publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
esMn en venta en Iibrerfas
y casas diitribuidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo.
ConsuIte
a su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Se&&i
de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00300

74-82001-May

1983-2300
