A/RES/69/85

United Nations

Distr.: General
16 December 2014

General Assembly
Sixty-ninth session
Agenda item 49

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 5 December 2014
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/69/452)]

69/85.

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of
outer space

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/122 of 13 December 1996, 54/68 of 6 December
1999, 59/2 of 20 October 2004, 61/110 and 61/111 of 14 December 2006, 62/101 of
17 December 2007, 62/217 of 22 December 2007, 65/97 of 10 December 2010,
65/271 of 7 April 2011, 66/71 of 9 December 2011, 67/113 of 18 December 2012,
68/50 of 5 December 2013 and 68/74 and 68/75 of 11 December 2013,
Emphasizing the significant progress in the development of space science and
technology and their applications that has enabled humans to explore the universe,
and the extraordinary achievements made over the past 50 years in space
exploration efforts, including deepening the understanding of the planetary system
and the Sun and the Earth itself, in the use of space science and technology for the
benefit of all humankind and in the development of the international legal regime
governing space activities, and recognizing in that regard the unique platform at the
global level for international cooperation in space activities represented by the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and its subsidiary bodies and
assisted by the Office for Outer Space Affairs of the Secretariat,
Deeply convinced of the common interest of all humankind in promoting and
expanding the exploration and use of outer space, as the province of all humankind,
for peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend to all States the benefits
derived therefrom, and also of the importance of international cooperation in this
field, for which the United Nations should continue to provide a focal point,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in developing the rule
of law, including the relevant norms of space law and their important role in
international cooperation for the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful
purposes, and of the widest possible adherence to international treaties that promote
the peaceful uses of outer space in order to meet emerging new challenges,
especially for developing countries,

14-66532 (E)

*1466532*

Please recycle

A/RES/69/85

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

Seriously concerned about the possibility of an arms race in outer space, and
bearing in mind the importance of article IV of the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the
Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,1
Recognizing that all States, in particular those with major space capabilities,
should contribute actively to the prevention of an arms race in outer space with a
view to promoting and strengthening international cooperation in the exploration
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Deeply concerned about the fragility of the space environment and the
challenges to the long-term sustainability of outer space activities, in particular the
impact of space debris which is an issue of concern to all nations,
Noting the progress achieved in the development of peaceful space exploration
and applications as well as in various national and cooperative space projects, and
the importance of further developing the legal framework to strengthen international
cooperation in space,
Convinced that space science and technology and their applications, such as
satellite communications, Earth observation systems and satellite navigation
technologies, provide indispensable tools for viable long-term solutions for
sustainable development and can contribute more effectively to efforts to promote
the development of all countries and regions of the world, and stressing in that
regard the need to harness the benefits of space technology towards implementing
and monitoring the United Nations Millennium Declaration2 and contributing to the
post-2015 development agenda process,
Seriously concerned about the devastating impact of disasters,3 and desirous of
enhancing international coordination and cooperation at the global level in disaster
management and emergency response through greater access to and use of spacebased services and geospatial information for all countries and facilitating capacitybuilding and institutional strengthening for disaster management, in particular in
developing countries,
Firmly convinced that the use of space science and technology and their
applications in areas such as tele-health, tele-education, disaster management,
environmental protection, natural resources management and climate monitoring
contribute to achieving the objectives of the global conferences of the United
Nations that address various aspects of economic, social and cultural development,
particularly poverty eradication,
Deeply concerned about the devastating effects of infectious diseases, in
particular Ebola virus disease, to the detriment of human life, society and
development, and urging the international community, in particular scientific and
academic institutions, to undertake studies on the role of tele-epidemiology in
monitoring, preparedness and response activities,
Recalling, in that regard, the fact that the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012,
recognized the important role that space science and technology play in promoting
sustainable development,4

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843.
Resolution 55/2.
3
The term “disasters” refers to natural or technological disasters.
4
Resolution 66/288, annex, para. 274.
2

2/7

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

A/RES/69/85

Having considered the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space on the work of its fifty-seventh session,5
1.
Endorses the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space on the work of its fifty-seventh session;5
2.
Agrees that the Committee, at its fifty-eighth session, should consider the
substantive items recommended at its fifty-seventh session,6 taking into account the
concerns of all countries, in particular those of developing countries;
3.
Notes that, at its fifty-third session, the Legal Subcommittee of the
Committee continued its work, 7 as mandated by the General Assembly in its
resolution 68/75;
4.
Agrees that the Legal Subcommittee, at its fifty-fourth session, should
consider the substantive items and reconvene the working groups recommended by
the Committee,8 taking into account the concerns of all countries, in particular those
of developing countries;
5.
Urges States that have not yet become parties to the international treaties
governing the uses of outer space9 to give consideration to ratifying or acceding to
those treaties in accordance with their national law, as well as incorporating them
into their national legislation;
6.
Notes with satisfaction the conclusion by the Office for Outer Space
Affairs of a space law curriculum, which could encourage further studies within
States;
7.
Notes that, at its fifty-first session, the Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee of the Committee continued its work,10 as mandated by the General
Assembly in its resolution 68/75;
8.
Agrees that the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its fifty-second
session, should consider the substantive items and reconvene the working groups
recommended by the Committee,11 taking into account the concerns of all countries,
in particular those of developing countries;
9.
Notes the importance of information-sharing in discovering, monitoring
and physically characterizing potentially hazardous near-Earth objects to ensure that
all countries, in particular developing countries with limited capacity in predicting
and mitigating a near-Earth object impact, are aware of potential threats, emphasizes
the need for capacity-building for effective emergency response and disaster
management in the event of a near-Earth object impact, and recalls in that regard the
_______________
5

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/69/20).
Ibid., para. 393.
7
Ibid., chap. II.C; and A/AC.105/1067.
8
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/69/20), paras. 283–285.
9
Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843);
Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into
Outer Space (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 672, No. 9574); Convention on International Liability for
Damage Caused by Space Objects (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 961, No. 13810); Convention on
Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1023, No. 15020);
and Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (United
Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1363, No. 23002).
10
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/69/20), chap. II.B;
and A/AC.105/1065.
11
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/69/20), paras. 209–211.
6

3/7

A/RES/69/85

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

recommendations for an international response to the near-Earth object impact
threat, endorsed by the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee at its fiftieth session
and by the Committee at its fifty-sixth session;12
10. Notes with satisfaction that progress on establishing an international
asteroid warning network and a space mission planning advisory group to
implement the recommendations for an international response to the near-Earth
object impact threat would be reported to the Subcommittee at its fifty-second
session;
11. Notes with appreciation that some States are already implementing space
debris mitigation measures on a voluntary basis, through national mechanisms and
consistent with the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of the Inter-Agency Space
Debris Coordination Committee and with the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, 13 endorsed by the General
Assembly in its resolution 62/217, and invites other States to implement, through
relevant national mechanisms, the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
12. Considers that it is essential that States pay more attention to the problem
of collisions of space objects, especially those with nuclear power sources, with
space debris, and other aspects of space debris, calls for the continuation of national
research on this question, for the development of improved technology for the
monitoring of space debris and for the compilation and dissemination of data on
space debris, also considers that, to the extent possible, information thereon should
be provided to the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, and agrees that
international cooperation is needed to expand appropriate and affordable strategies
to minimize the impact of space debris on future space missions;
13. Urges all States, in particular those with major space capabilities, to
contribute actively to the goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as an
essential condition for the promotion of international cooperation in the exploration
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes;
14. Requests the Committee to continue to consider, as a matter of priority,
ways and means of maintaining outer space for peaceful purposes and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its seventieth session, and agrees that during its
consideration of the matter the Committee could continue to consider ways to
promote regional and interregional cooperation and the role that space technology
could play in the implementation of recommendations of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development;
15. Welcomes the fact that the Committee, at its fifty-seventh session, agreed
to consider, under the item entitled “Ways and means of maintaining outer space for
peaceful purposes”, the broader perspective of space security and associated matters
that would be instrumental in ensuring the safe and responsible conduct of space
activities, and to identify effective tools that could potentially provide the
Committee with new guidance, in a pragmatic manner and without prejudice to the
mandate of other intergovernmental forums, and notes with satisfaction that, in that
regard, and in line with resolution 68/50, the Committee agreed to consider at its
fifty-eighth session, in 2015, the recommendations contained in the report of the
Group of Governmental Experts on Transparency and Confidence-Building

_______________
12
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/68/20), para. 144; and A/AC.105/1038, para. 198, and
annex III.
13
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/62/20), annex.

4/7

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

A/RES/69/85

Measures in Outer Space Activities, 14 with a view to identifying those
recommendations that could, to the extent practicable, be adapted to and
instrumental in ensuring the safety of space operations and the long-term
sustainability of outer space activities in general;15
16. Recognizes the central role of the Office for Outer Space Affairs in
fostering capacity-building in the use of space science and technology and their
applications for the benefit of all countries, in particular developing countries, and
urges all Member States to contribute to the Trust Fund in Support of the United
Nations Programme on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in order to enhance the
capacity of the Office to provide technical and legal advisory services in its priority
thematic areas;
17. Endorses the United Nations Programme on Space Applications for 2015,
as proposed to the Committee by the Expert on Space Applications and endorsed by
the Committee;16
18. Notes with satisfaction the significant achievements made and the
advisory support provided to more than 30 Member States within the framework of
the United Nations Platform for Space-based Information for Disaster Management
and Emergency Response (UN-SPIDER), with the valuable contributions of its
network of regional support offices, and encourages Member States, on a voluntary
basis, to provide the programme with the additional resources necessary to address
the increasing demand for support successfully and in a timely manner;
19. Also notes with satisfaction the continuous progress made by the
International Committee on Global Navigation Satellite Systems with the support of
the Office for Outer Space Affairs, in its capacity as executive secretariat of the
International Committee, towards achieving compatibility and interoperability
among global and regional space-based positioning, navigation and timing systems
and in the promotion of the use of global navigation satellite systems and their
integration into national infrastructure, particularly in developing countries, and
notes with appreciation that the International Committee held its ninth meeting in
Prague from 10 to 14 November 2014;
20. Notes with appreciation that the regional centres for space science and
technology education, affiliated to the United Nations, namely, the African regional
centres for space science and technology education in the French and English
languages, located in Morocco and Nigeria, respectively, the Centre for Space
Science and Technology Education in Asia and the Pacific, located in India, the
Regional Centre for Space Science and Technology Education for Latin America
and the Caribbean, with campuses located in Brazil and Mexico, and the Centre for
Space Science and Technology Education for Western Asia, located in Jordan, have
continued their education programmes in 2014, encourages the regional centres to
continue to promote greater participation of women in their education programmes,
and agrees that the regional centres should continue to report to the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on their activities;
21. Notes with satisfaction the progress on the establishment of a new
regional centre for space science and technology education in Asia and the Pacific
located at Beihang University in Beijing;

_______________
14

A/68/189.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/69/20), paras. 372
and 373.
16
Ibid., para. 81; and A/AC.105/1062.
15

5/7

A/RES/69/85

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

22. Emphasizes that regional and interregional cooperation in the field of
space activities is essential to strengthen the peaceful uses of outer space, assist
States in the development of their space capabilities and contribute to the
achievement of the goals of the United Nations Millennium Declaration,2 to that end
requests relevant regional organizations and their groups of experts to offer the
assistance necessary so that countries can carry out the recommendations of regional
conferences, and in that regard notes the importance of the equal participation of
women in all fields of science and technology;
23. Recognizes, in that regard, the important role played by conferences and
other mechanisms in strengthening regional and international cooperation among
States, such as the African Leadership Conference on Space Science and Technology
for Sustainable Development, the Asia-Pacific Regional Space Agency Forum, the
Space Conference of the Americas, a process that should not be interrupted, and the
Asia-Pacific Space Cooperation Organization;
24. Emphasizes the need to increase the benefits of space technology and its
applications and to contribute to an orderly growth of space activities favourable to
sustained economic growth and sustainable development in all countries, including
strengthening sustainable spatial data infrastructure at the regional and national
levels and building resilience to reduce the consequences of disasters, in particular
in developing countries;
25. Reiterates the need to promote the benefits of space technology and its
applications in the major United Nations conferences and summits for economic,
social and cultural development and related fields, and recognizes that the
fundamental significance of space science and technology and their applications for
global, regional, national and local sustainable development processes should be
promoted in the formulation of policies and programmes of action and their
implementation, including through efforts towards achieving the objectives of those
conferences and summits, including implementing the Millennium Declaration and
contributing to the post-2015 development agenda process;
26. Encourages Member States, to that end, to promote the inclusion in those
conferences, summits and processes of the relevance of space science and
technology applications and the use of space-derived geospatial data;
27. Encourages the Office for Outer Space Affairs to take active part in those
conferences, summits and processes, including the Third World Conference on
Disaster Risk Reduction and the summit on the post-2015 development agenda, both
to be held in 2015, as appropriate and within existing resources;
28. Urges the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities (UN-Space),
under the leadership of the Office for Outer Space Affairs, to continue to examine
how space science and technology and their applications could contribute to
implementing the Millennium Declaration and to the post-2015 development agenda
process, and encourages entities of the United Nations system to participate, as
appropriate, in UN-Space coordination efforts;
29. Notes that, in accordance with the agreement reached by the Committee
at its forty-sixth session on the measures relating to the future composition of the
bureaux of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies,17 on the basis of the measures
relating to the working methods of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies,18 the
_______________
17
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20), annex II,
paras. 5–9.
18
Ibid., Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/52/20), annex I; and ibid., Fifty-eighth Session,
Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20), annex II, appendix III.

6/7

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

A/RES/69/85

Asia-Pacific States, the Eastern European States, the Latin American and Caribbean
States and the Western European and other States have nominated their candidates
for the offices of Chair of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, First ViceChair of the Committee, Chair of the Legal Subcommittee and Chair of the
Committee, respectively, for the period 2016–2017;19
30. Urges the African States to nominate their candidate for the office of
Second Vice-Chair/Rapporteur of the Committee for the period 2016–2017 before
the next session of the Committee;
31. Agrees that, upon the nomination of the candidate of the African States,
the Committee and its subsidiary bodies, at their respective sessions in 2016, should
elect their officers nominated for the period 2016–2017;
32.

Decides that Luxembourg shall become a member of the Committee;20

33. Endorses the decision of the Committee to grant permanent observer
status to the African Association of Remote Sensing of the Environment;21
34. Encourages the regional groups to promote active participation in the
work of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies by the States members of the
Committee that are also members of the respective regional groups.
64th plenary meeting
5 December 2014

_______________
19
Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/69/20), paras. 381 and 382; and official
communications from the Office for Outer Space Affairs to States members of the Committee dated
15 September and 7 October 2014.
20
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/69/20), para. 385.
21
Ibid., para. 387.

7/7
