United Nations

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6180th meeting
Friday, 7 August 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Parham . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Heissel
Mr. Somdah
Mr. Pan Jingyu
Mr. Guillermet
Ms. Čačić
Ms. Gasri
Mr. Teruuchi
Mr. Belkheir
Mr. Ochoa
Mr. Chernenko
Mrs. Bademli Angel
Mr. Mugoya
Ms. Phipps
Ms. Hoang Thi Thanh Nga

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council resolution 1820
(2008) (S/2009/362)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-44986 (E)

*0944986*

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers, as
my colleague Ambassador Sawers did this morning, to
limit their statements to no more than five minutes in
order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Finland.
Mrs. Schroderus-Fox (Finland): Finland fully
aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union. Given the importance of our topic today, I want
to add some further remarks on the Secretary-General’s
first-ever report on sexual violence (S/2009/362).
It is our firm conviction that we must all endorse
the application of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008) to their fullest extent. Conflict situations remain
a severe threat to the lives of women and children as
conflicts develop without front lines and violence
erupts suddenly. Women and children, and sometimes
men, are raped and sexually abused during and in the
aftermath of armed conflicts.
A year ago, this Council took a major step
forward by condemning the use of rape and other forms
of sexual violence as a tactic of war in armed conflicts.
The Council highlighted the link between safeguarding
international peace and security and the struggle
against sexual violence. The international community
has begun to recognize the seriousness of this grave
challenge to peace and security. The real test lies in
translating resolution 1820 (2008) into working
practices on the ground.
Systematic rape in conflict leaves devastating
wounds on society for decades. It should be considered
a weapon of war and, as such, an integral part of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process.
Reintegration compensation should not be processed if
this tactic of war continues. This was one of the issues
stressed at the women’s leadership conference
convened in Monrovia in March 2009 by the Presidents
of the Republics of Liberia and Finland.
It is of the utmost importance that the victims of
rape and sexual abuse have access to legal process and

2

that perpetrators be prosecuted and convicted. We must
end the impunity of perpetrators. As noted by the
Secretary-General in his report, the strict enforcement
of a policy of zero tolerance, both by national
authorities and by all international actors engaged in
humanitarian, crisis management and peacebuilding
activities, is essential. The international community
and the individual States concerned need to pursue
ways to ensure adequate protection, health care and
counselling for the victims.
We must also remember that women are not
merely victims in conflicts; they are active agents in
solving and ending conflicts and leading society
through the healing process. We cannot afford to ignore
their
leadership,
knowledge,
capacities
and
commitment.
Women should be involved in decision-making
processes at all levels. To make this a reality, more
women must be in high-level positions in decisionmaking,
both
nationally
and
internationally.
Involvement in negotiation processes must be based on
true participation and the possibility of influencing
negotiations.
Opportunities for women’s participation should
be a part of the earliest stages of planning and
preparing a peacekeeping mission. Furthermore, the
number of female civilian and military personnel in
United Nations peacekeeping and political missions
should be increased, especially in leadership positions.
Women’s
engagement
in
peacebuilding
and
reconstruction through non-governmental organizations
should receive greater support.
We must urgently put into practice the
commitments of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008). The Secretary-General’s report gives valuable
recommendations for action. We must give hope to all
victims who suffer from these horrific crimes of war
and make sure that we efficiently prevent violence and
deliver justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): Mr. President, we
would like to thank you for organizing today’s debate
on women and peace and security, an important topic
on which we have seen significant institutional
progress in recent years. Nevertheless, the relevant
country-specific reports of the Secretary-General draw

09-44986

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

a grim picture of the realities on the ground. We
continue to witness the increasing victimization of
civilians in armed conflicts and sexual violence since
the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008). The number of
such incidents has increased in countries such as the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Sudan, Chad
and the Central African Republic.
We are therefore engaged in a timely debate, and
we
welcome
the
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2009/362) and the recommendations contained
therein. We hope that this debate will take us a step
further towards the implementation of resolution 1820
(2008) within the United Nations system. We would
also like to take this opportunity to emphasize that the
use of sexual violence as a method of warfare to
achieve military ends must be considered a matter of
international peace and security.
The implementation of resolutions 1820 (2008)
and 1325 (2000) is a complex and multisectoral
undertaking. We must build on the lessons learned in
connection with resolution 1325 (2000), with regard to
both the participation and the protection agendas.
Consequently, we support the creation of a specific
capacity within the Secretariat to effectively contribute
to the implementation of resolution 1820 (2008) by
coordinating the respective activities of the various
actors in the United Nations system.
It is clear that acts of sexual violence cannot
effectively be prevented without obtaining and
analyzing the relevant data. Given the complex nature
and sensitivity of data collection, we strongly support
the Secretary-General’s call for all United Nations
actors to respect the ethical and safety standards of the
World Health Organization for researching, measuring
and collecting data on sexual violence. Such data
should be systematically collected and analysed by
highly qualified and trained United Nations staff.
United Nations experts should work in close
cooperation with other relevant bodies to develop
better prevention strategies and support services for
survivors.
Resolution 1820 (2008) also requires the
Secretary-General to present proposals for the effective
collection of information pertaining to the use of
sexual violence in situations of armed conflict. We also
support the Secretary-General’s recommendation on
the immediate establishment of a commission of
inquiry to investigate violations of international

09-44986

humanitarian and human rights law in certain ongoing
conflicts. The proposed commission would report to
the Security Council and be supported by the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights.
The goal would be to ensure accountability, bring
the perpetrators of such crimes to justice and prevent
the commission of similar crimes. The primary
responsibility in this respect must lie with the State
concerned, and the involvement of international
mechanisms and institutions must occur only where
national judiciaries are not available or unable to
effectively combat impunity.
In this respect, the central role of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) must also be taken
into account. The ICC, which has already proven to
have a preventive effect on the ground, plays a key role
in the fight against impunity, in particular where States
are unable or unwilling to prosecute acts of sexual
violence that can also qualify as war crimes or as
crimes against humanity.
Finally, we would like to add that we support the
idea of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
initiating a pilot project, based on its successful child
protection adviser system, to improve the United
Nations response to sexual violence. Such advisers
have proven to be extremely productive and effective.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
could consider deploying women protection advisers
who would document sexual violence and help
survivors get better access to assistance and follow-up
support and protection. These advisers would report
back to the Department, as well as to other relevant
United Nations and non-United Nations partners on the
ground, and they would serve as focal points for
information-sharing and coordination among all
sectors. We believe that such a mechanism would be an
important step towards implementation of resolution
1820 (2008).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Normandin (Canada) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Government of Canada, I wish to thank
the United Kingdom presidency for having convened
this open debate on Security Council resolution 1820
(2008), on sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict. This debate is indeed timely at a time when

3

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

we are calling for further concerted action to combat
and prevent sexual violence.

mandates, the monitoring of resolutions
enforcement measures and sanctions.

Canada, through the Pearson Peacekeeping
Centre, is pleased to support the presence of women
officers from the United Nations police at this open
debate. Their experiences and advice are invaluable as
we advance our collective understanding of how
interventions against sexual violence can be more
effective. Their presence also highlights the critical
importance of increasing the number of women officers
in the field. This can empower women to come forward
to report sexual violence, while at the same time
presenting women in positions of authority and power,
a key element in breaking the cycle of sexual violence.

We would like to express our strong interest in
two additional proposals contained in the report: the
proposal to establish a commission of inquiry to
investigate and report on sexual violence and the
proposal that all data on sexual violence be reviewed
by an existing working group or groups. We would
submit, however, that the creation of a dedicated
working group may be a more effective response, and
we urge the Council to consider that option. At a
minimum, we must ensure that sexual violence
perpetrated against adults as well as children is
included in the Council’s considerations. Ultimately,
we would like to see the Council adopt structural and
lasting initiatives that will make a real difference to
those targeted by sexual violence.

I would like to draw attention to the round table
held yesterday with those United Nations police
officers. The round table usefully complemented
today’s open debate and sparked an enriching
discussion about challenges and best practices in
investigating sexual violence in conflict. It also
highlighted the need for capacity-building for women
police officers and the importance of their role in
national police services.
Canada welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2009/362) and his commitment to ensure
increased attention to sexual violence. The report
provides important contributions towards improving
our collective understanding of the issue. We would
therefore like subsequent reports to contain more
information from the field, including the response to
the issue by the United Nations system and its
missions.
Canada would very much welcome an annual
report on the implementation of resolution 1820
(2008). We also urge the Council to request that the
next report include a proposal for a Security Council
mechanism to consider and act on information
concerning sexual violence. Monitoring and reporting
mechanisms can provide the international community
with the data it needs to effectively monitor and
strengthen the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).
(spoke in English)
Canada would also like to encourage the Security
Council to give priority attention to the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report which address the establishment and renewal of

4

and

We would also like to raise the issue of bringing
violators to justice. An important step forward in that
direction was taken by the Special Court for Sierra
Leone. The Special Court, as members may remember,
was the first to pronounce convictions on the charge of
sexual slavery and on the crime of forced marriage as a
crime against humanity.
In that regard, Canada would like to stress the
following. Amnesty clauses within peace accords
which can be interpreted as exempting perpetrators of
sexual violence from being held accountable directly
contravene resolution 1820 (2008) as well as many
other previous international commitments. We are
deeply dismayed by the failure to implement fully this
essential element of 1820 (2008) during the year since
its adoption.
We also emphasize the importance of the
establishment by States of vetting mechanisms to
exclude perpetrators of sexual violence from armed
forces, where credible allegations supported by
evidence have been brought against those perpetrators.
In conclusion, the Secretary-General’s report
contains a number of important recommendations that
would strengthen the international response to sexual
violence
in
conflict
situations,
and
those
recommendations warrant serious consideration.
Security Council members may rest assured that
Canada remains committed to actively supporting the
Council in its efforts to combat sexual violence in
conflict-affected situations.

09-44986

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Papua New Guinea.
Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Pacific small island
developing States represented at the United Nations,
namely the Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji,
Kiribati, Palau, the Republic of the Marshall Islands,
Nauru, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Tonga,
Vanuatu and my own country, Papua New Guinea.
I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the United Kingdom on its assumption of
the presidency and on presiding over this debate on the
subject of women and peace and security. I would also
like acknowledge the Secretary-General’s recent report
(S/2009/362) on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1820 (2008).
Resolution 1820 (2008) builds on resolution 1325
(2000). It has compelled the international community
to finally recognize sexual violence committed during
conflict situations as a crime punishable by law. Sexual
and gender-based violence is no longer a by-product of
war and conflict. It can no longer be seen as collateral
damage of war. We, the international community, have
decided that enough is enough, that sexual violence in
war and conflicts is intolerable and that the practice
must be prevented at all costs.
We commend the Security Council and the
Secretary-General for engaging in high-level
diplomacy and advocacy. The recent developments in
integrating the issue of sexual and gender-based
violence into the peace process in countries such as, for
example, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, are a
strong step forward for the Security Council. The
Council has communicated to the leaders of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to the global
community at large that sexual and gender-based
violence in times of conflict is intolerable. We
commend the Council for providing assistance to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in monitoring
incidents of gender-based violence.
Furthermore, we are also encouraged that the
issue of sexual and gender-based violence has now
become an integral element of the Council’s
assessment and evaluation of peacekeeping missions,
increasing the legitimacy and accountability of
peacekeeping troops.

We commend the Secretary-General’s concerted
effort to promote a more coordinated and systematic
approach towards gender-based violence. We also
commend the work implemented by the recent United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict
initiative. United Nations Action unites the work of
12 United Nations entities with the goal of ending
sexual and gender-based violence in conflicts. It takes
a holistic approach to sexual violence in conflict by
coordinating the efforts and work carried out by
individual United Nations agencies on the matter. Such
systemic coordination and cooperation improve
accountability, amplify programming and advocacy,
and increase support for national efforts in the
prevention of sexual gender-based violence.
United Nations Action takes the following actions
to attain the objectives of resolution 1820 (2008),
which we recommend to the global community. At the
country level, it supports joint strategy development
and programming by United Nations country teams and
peacekeeping
operations,
including
building
operational and technical capacity. In the area of
advocacy among the public at large, it takes action to
raise public awareness and generate the political will to
address sexual violence as part of a broader campaign
to stop rape now. Through learning by doing, which is
important to many of us, it creates a hub of knowledge
on the scale of sexual violence in conflict and on
effective responses by the United Nations and its
partners.
We believe that more can be done to fully attain
the objectives outlined in resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008). Currently, there are a few outstanding
issues that should be further addressed. They include
the need to strengthen and coordinate a systematic
approach by international organizations, including the
need to strengthen the coordination of regional
organizations and mechanisms in dealing with sexualbased violence in conflict situations. We also believe
that there is a need to strengthen national priorities,
legal frameworks, personnel training and public
advocacy to exterminate the practice of sexual-based
violence. Finally, we believe that there is a need to
increase the participation of women in conflict
resolution, peace negotiation, peacekeeping troops and
the rebuilding and reintegration of soldiers and
communities.
Recently, Deputy Secretary-General Asha-Rose
Migiro, in her address to the Security Council in April

09-44986

5

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

this year on United Nations support for advancing the
national implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), put
forth a practical framework involving the “three Ps”:
protection, participation and prevention in developing
national action plans. We believe that the three Ps
provide a broad and practical framework that can also
be applied to Security Council resolution 1820 (2008).
Allow me to briefly highlight some of the relevant
aspects of the three Ps.
In the area of protection, we recognize the need
to strengthen our collective determination to treat rape
and sexual assault in conflict situations with the same
determination as that with which we address any other
factors of war. One of the obstacles preventing the full
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008) is the
tendency of Governments and military personnel to
treat gender-based violence as a by-product of war, not
as a crime.
We believe that there is an ad hoc approach to
women’s security in times of conflict. Until recently,
gender-based violence was often an afterthought
following the occurrence of conflict. There is a need to
protect women and children by building protection
policies into national security strategies, legislation and
peace negotiations.
Secondly, with regard to protection, we believe
that there is a need to establish a firm and clear
international norm when it comes to the prosecution of
crimes involving gender-based violence in times of
conflict. Perpetrators cannot go unpunished. The
United Nations system and the Security Council must
strengthen their resolve to collect evidence-based data
to support accounts of sexual gender-based violence.
Deployed soldiers and peacekeepers need to be
properly trained and debriefed.
As far as participation is concerned, we believe
that we need to encourage women’s engagement in
conflict resolution and prevention and in the
negotiation of peace agreements, as their participation
greatly increases the prospects for sustaining peace
during times of conflict. Engaging women in postconflict dialogue and policies will ensure their
participation in creating a system-wide effort that
includes
results-based
monitoring
and
social
provisions.
We believe that there is a direct link between
poverty and security. In countries with high rates of
sexual gender-based violence, the economic capacities

6

of women are often diminished. In many developing
nations, the traditional role of women and their
relationship to land make them important contributors
to food production and economic growth. And it has
been recognized that the economic empowerment of
women is an effective way to combat sexual genderbased violence. However, we find that the current
United Nations programmes are unsustainable and
often being cut short when funding is depleted. We in
the Pacific in particular would therefore like to
encourage the United Nations to invest more resources
and to strengthen existing agencies in order to promote
the link between women’s economic empowerment and
security.
Pacific leaders are committed to the eradication
of sexual gender-based violence. In June this year, the
Pacific Islands Forum Regional Security Committee
discussed the issue of gender-based violence and
reaffirmed that sexual gender-based violence is a
growing and serious concern and requires concerted
national and regional response. Just this week, at the
fortieth Pacific Islands Forum group meeting held in
Australia, our leaders, together with those of Australia
and New Zealand, reaffirmed their commitment to
eliminating sexual gender-based violence. The Forum
communiqué acknowledged sexual gender-based
violence as a threat to human security in the region.
The leaders welcome collaborative efforts at the local,
national and regional levels to address the issue and
would like to increase their engagement with global
initiatives to address the issue.
Following are some examples of the initiatives
taken in our region. In Vanuatu, a Family protection act
has been enacted; in my own country, there have been
many advances in the legal arena, such as through the
establishment of a family sexual violence unit; and in
Solomon Islands, a sexual assault unit and a family
violence unit have been established.
Finally, Pacific Islands such as Fiji, Vanuatu,
Samoa and Palau have volunteered their soldiers and
police in support of Security Council peacekeeping
missions. We would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate our support for the Council’s initiative in
making the elimination of sexual gender-based
violence an integral part of peacekeeping.
The President: I now all on the representative of
Bangladesh.

09-44986

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Allow me at the
outset to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important debate. My delegation also thanks the
Secretary-General for his briefing this morning.
It is superfluous to say that women suffer most as
victims of conflict. Even in peace processes, they are
deprived of their due dividends. Women and girls are
often viewed as bearers of cultural identities. Thus,
they become prime targets. It is therefore essential that
the Security Council devote serious attention to the
issue of women and peace and security. We recall that
Bangladesh, when it was a member of the Council, was
closely associated with the adoption of the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000). It is a document that applies
not only to States, but to all actors involved in postconflict peace processes.
Unfortunately, even nine years after the
resolution’s adoption, an increasing and alarming
number of women and girls are becoming victims of
violence. We are aware that poverty, the struggle for
resources and socio-economic injustice lie at the heart
of conflicts. The impact of this situation not only
affects the safety and security of women, but also
impairs the political, economic and overall security
conditions of the relevant nations.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/362)
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1820 (2008)
provides us with disturbing information on violence
against women. The adoption of resolution 1820
(2008) no doubt helped to draw global attention to the
issue, but an effective plan of action involving the
United Nations system, national and international
actors, civil society, non-governmental organizations
and other stakeholders should follow in order to curb
such violence. My delegation finds merit in the
conclusions and recommendations set out in the report,
and we look forward to engaging with other Member
States in working on them. My delegation also stresses
the need for appropriate training programmes for the
peacekeeping personnel deployed by the United
Nations.
On a number of occasions, my delegation has
underlined the importance of availability of relevant
data in analysing the plight of women and girls who
are victims of conflicts. Focused examination of such
data is important to the formulation of policy
guidelines and to undertaking preventive measures.
The sharing of experiences and lessons learned on a

09-44986

regular basis is useful in guiding policy measures. We
note with appreciation that this point has been reflected
in the Secretary-General’s report.
While we stress the need for concrete actions to
protect women from violence, we believe that
substantial progress should be made in the area of
prosecution. Precedent shows that perpetrators get
away with crimes because of lengthy and complicated
judicial processes. We feel that all concerned should
facilitate the establishment of effective judicial
systems. Moreover, measures should be taken to
address the psychosocial needs of the victims.
As one of the major troop- and policecontributing countries, Bangladesh emphasizes the
importance of the effective implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), as well as all
relevant General Assembly resolutions, particularly
61/143 and 63/155. We wish to reiterate that there
should be adequate representation of women at all
levels of decision-making in conflict prevention and
post-conflict rehabilitation.
It
is
reassuring
that
multidimensional
peacekeeping operations have such great potential to
address the security of women. Troop- and policecontributing countries should continue to increase the
number of uniformed and civilian female personnel. At
present, only 8 per cent of all United Nations police
officers are female; this number was 4 per cent in
2006. The number of women from Bangladesh in
peacekeeping is set to increase in the coming days in
order to ensure gender balance in our share of the
deployment.
It is essential to make women’s voices heard.
Women’s participation is necessary in the decisionmaking process in any post-conflict country. Emphasis
should be placed on the electoral process in postconflict environments in order to increase the
participation of women as voters, candidates and
electoral officials.
A critical factor in the successful implementation
of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) is highlevel commitment and accountability in administration,
without which policy guidelines are of little use. We
believe that the protection of women and girls from
gender-based violence is a primary responsibility.
There should be zero tolerance with respect to the
perpetrators, and impunity must be ended. It is
therefore crucial to mobilize leadership, ensure

7

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

accountability, provide adequate resources, identify
challenges and address the root causes in protecting
women and girls.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Ney (Germany): Germany welcomes this
open thematic debate on women and peace and
security. I would like to express Germany’s
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for this important
initiative.
Germany aligns itself with the declaration made
by the representative of Sweden on behalf of the
European Union, and would like to add the following
remarks.
We congratulate the Secretary-General on his
report (S/2009/362) pursuant to resolution 1820
(2008), which we are discussing today and which
Germany is pleased to have supported. The report
contains compelling evidence that sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict is indeed not only a serious
human rights and humanitarian concern, but also a
security problem requiring a systematic security
response, including through attention by the Security
Council and the International Criminal Court. As the
report rightly states, in bringing together available
data, no matter how incomplete, the report shows a
disturbing picture of the use of sexual violence against
civilians in armed conflicts and their aftermath.
Much still needs to be done by Member States in
order to ensure a more timely and efficient response to
these challenges. In this regard, Germany supports the
proposal for the establishment of a commission of
inquiry. We also reiterate our support for an
appropriate follow-up mechanism of the Security
Council. Both proposals would allow the Council to
better fulfil its mandate. We welcome the efforts made
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
United Nations membership to integrate the
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008) into the
ongoing New Horizon debate on the reform of
peacekeeping missions.
The report also contains a wealth of information
on what the United Nations is already doing in order to
combat sexual violence. We commend all United
Nations entities on their extremely important work and
encourage them to further intensify their efforts. Given
the fact that the issue of conflict-related sexual

8

violence is already being addressed by so many actors
in the United Nations system, it could provide an
excellent test case for a more structured and integrated
approach by the United Nations to a specific problem.
However, as in other areas relating to the field of
gender equality and the empowerment of women, a
strong driver is currently missing.
Germany hopes that the negotiations on the
establishment of a new United Nations gender entity
will soon create those necessary structures. In this
context, we would like to point out that any new
gender architecture must also be responsive to the
special mandates under resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia very much
values this opportunity to reaffirm its commitment to
tackling sexual violence in conflict. As a sponsor of
resolution 1820 (2008), we very strongly support the
Council’s focus on this compelling challenge.
Australia recognizes the important links between
sexual violence, social violence and the role of
peacebuilding activities in preventing violence. We
have been a strong supporter of resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security since its adoption
nine years ago. That resolution, of course, provided the
basis for women to play a greater role in all peace
processes and peacebuilding activities, and urged all of
us to undertake proactive strategies to promote,
cultivate, develop, encourage and sustain individuals,
communities and nations to integrally practice peace.
Resolution 1820 (2008), of course, grew out of the
decisive resolution 1325 (2000), and we would urge all
nations to undertake all actions to implement it and to
ensure that it is carried out within that broader context.
Specifically in regard to the Secretary-General’s
report, we welcome his recommendations on
operationalizing resolution 1820 (2008) within the
United Nations in a systematic, structural and lasting
way, including by ensuring appropriate references in
mandate creation and renewal processes. Utilizing
effectively this Council’s most recent aide memoire on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, which
includes provisions on sexual violence, will also be
crucial.

09-44986

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

Now is the time to get things done. One good
example of practical United Nations action is in TimorLeste, where the National Vulnerable Persons Unit of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
is successfully training local police on gender-based
violence and policing responsibilities.

includes in Solomon Islands, where Australia, with
many others, is involved with partners in a regional
peacekeeping mission. In Solomon Islands, Australian
federal police officers are working alongside local
police to develop their capacity to respond to sexual
violence.

We welcome the Secretary-General’s advice that
he is considering the appointment of a senior person to
address the prevention of and response to sexual
violence across the United Nations system. We would
support such an appointment. Australia considers an
appointment with an operational mandate to be an
appropriate way to build on the current work of the
United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict.

As the representative of Papua New Guinea has
just observed, the communiqué issued yesterday in
Cairns, Australia, by the 16 leaders of the Pacific
Islands Forum took an important step towards
addressing sexual and gender-based violence, which is
endemic throughout the Pacific. Leaders acknowledged
the potential destabilizing effects of that significant
issue on communities and societies, undertook to
firmly establish it on domestic political agendas and
committed to its eradication and to ensuring that all
individuals have equal access to justice. Those steps
reaffirm the commitment of all Pacific leaders to
combat sexual and gender-based violence.

We note the Secretary-General’s recommendation
that a commission of inquiry on sexual violence in
Chad, the Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo be established. Any such process must result in
tangible outcomes. Impunity for sexual violence cannot
be tolerated. We think that the Council must be
prepared to act on any evidence collected by such a
process to ensure accountability.
We are concerned — not exclusively, but
particularly — about the high level of reported sexual
violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
are also concerned about the reported discrimination
against the minority Muslim population in Myanmar
and its vulnerability to sexual violence, as well as the
high level of sexual violence perpetrated by the armed
forces against rural women from other ethnic groups.
We call on Myanmar to ensure that its agents cease
perpetrating sexual violence against civilians.
Australia itself is actively pursuing a range of
practical initiatives to combat the prevalence of sexual
violence in conflict. We are pleased to support the
efforts of United Nations action on its Analytical
Inventory of Responses by Peacekeeping Personnel to
War-Related Violence against Women, which will be
launched this year. That very practical tool will provide
valuable guidance to peacekeeping personnel on the
ground. We are pleased to support the United Nations
Development Fund for Women and the United Nations
Development Programme in their initiative in
conducting a joint research project to provide guidance
on how this Council’s resolutions on women and peace
and security can be implemented to reduce the high
levels of sexual violence throughout the Pacific. That

09-44986

There is a range of other activities, of course, that
we and others in our region are involved with, which
we list in our distributed statement.
To conclude, in 2008, this Council, through its
adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), finally recognized
that sexual violence was a calculated aspect of
conflicts threatening regional and international peace
and security that had to be addressed, and had to be
addressed very specifically. One year on, the
commitment of all Member States is still required —
very much required — to translate that understanding
into practice. We must all, Australia included, remain
firmly dedicated to that goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Cornado (Italy): Italy fully aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of
Sweden as President of the European Union. I will
therefore limit myself to a few additional remarks.
I would like first to commend you, Mr. President,
for having convened this important debate. The
adoption of resolution 1820 (2008) a little more than
year ago was a historic achievement of this Council,
clearly stating that sexual violence, when used as a
weapon of war, not only is a heinous violation of
human rights, and possibly a war crime or a crime
against humanity, but also endangers international
peace and security.

9

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

Italy is proud of having been one of the sponsors
of resolution 1820 (2008) and of having substantially
contributed to its drafting. For us, its implementation,
as well as that of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security, is a key priority in the foreign and
security policies of my country. For that reason, my
Government has started the process of drafting a
national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and is constantly and actively
engaged in all United Nations forums that deal with the
advancement of women.
Italy is also organizing, in the framework of its
G-8 presidency, an international conference on
violence against women that will take place in Rome
on 9 and 10 September 2009. The conference will
tackle all aspects of gender-based violence, including
sexual violence in armed conflict, with the aim of
focusing the attention of the international community
on a global issue that affects all countries of the world.
The event will see the participation of representatives
of several Governments from all over the world,
international organizations and civil society, and
intellectuals and global advocates.
Today’s debate shows once again the commitment
of the international community and the Security
Council to putting an end to those unspeakable crimes.
We are on the right track. The adoption last Tuesday of
resolution 1882 (2009), extending to rape and sexual
violence the criteria for the inclusion of parties to
armed conflict in the annexes of the reports of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict, is
yet another concrete step in the right direction. Italy
co-sponsored that resolution, and commends Mexico
and the other Council members for that important
achievement, which will allow the Council to protect
children affected by armed conflict.
Yet, it is clear to all of us that more needs to be
done and that the measure of our success will be the
difference that we can make on the ground by
effectively protecting women and girls from sexual
violence, holding accountable those responsible for
those crimes, putting an end to impunity, helping the
victims and empowering women within their societies.
In that framework, we read with attention the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/362) pursuant
to resolution 1820 (2008), which is a useful first step to
increase the capacities of Member States and of the

10

United Nations to respond to sexual violence in armed
conflicts.
We
support
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendations. We believe that our first priority
must be to ensure accountability. The establishment of
a commission of inquiry to investigate and report on
human rights and humanitarian violations leading to
sexual violence in Chad, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Sudan and to recommend to the
Council the most effective mechanisms to fight
impunity in those situations is undoubtedly a proposal
that could lead to tangible progress on the ground.
Still, as resolution 1820 (2008) points out and as
clearly emerged from today’s debate, the challenge
before us is global in scope and not limited to certain
situations. We must provide ourselves with the
appropriate tools to face the challenge both in singlepriority situations and at the general, more global level.
We therefore support the proposal that the
Secretary-General issue an annual report on this topic,
and we hope that future reports will include detailed
and verified information, publicly listing those parties
to armed conflicts responsible for acts of rape and
sexual violence in violation of international law.
The progress obtained through the annual report
on children and armed conflict shows that information
is the first step towards real accountability within the
international community. We realize that it will not be
an easy task and that the United Nations system, and
particularly its missions on the ground, will need more
resources, stronger capacities and better coordination.
Still, we are convinced that this is something that needs
to be done without delay and, equally, that the Council
will then need to act upon the information that it
receives with all its instruments, including sanctions
committees.
Finally, we are convinced that it is now time to
have a global advocate for the implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), acting as a
focal point both of the United Nations system and of
Member States. We would therefore favour the
appointment of a special representative of the
Secretary-General for women and peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Park In-kook (Republic of Korea): I
appreciate your special effort, Mr. President, to

09-44986

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

convene this open debate on women and peace and
security, focusing on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1820 (2008), which was adopted
unanimously and enjoyed a large number of sponsors,
including the Republic of Korea.
My delegation appreciates the comprehensive
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/362) pursuant
to Security Council resolution 1820 (2008). We concur
with the analysis contained in the Secretary-General’s
report and support its recommendations.
The Republic of Korea welcomes some progress
made by the States and parties concerned in their
efforts to prevent and respond to sexual violence,
especially in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Burundi, the Sudan, Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire.
Despite that progress, the overall situation with
regard to sexual violence in armed conflict remains of
serious concern. In many parts of the world, State and
non-State actors alike continue to commit violations
with impunity. As the Secretary-General’s report points
out, mainly three factors, among others, have
contributed to and exacerbated sexual violence.
My delegation would like to lend a strong voice
to urging civilian and military leaders to demonstrate
the commitment and political willingness to combat
sexual violence. All commitments and pledges must be
matched by action. In most situations of armed
conflict, access to key medical, psychological and
socio-economic reintegration services is inadequate
and limited. Parties to conflict have a legal obligation
under international humanitarian law to protect and
meet the basic needs of persons within their control. In
situations where they are unwilling or unable to do so,
they must allow and facilitate the work of
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
in providing critical life-saving humanitarian
assistance, including to victims of sexual violence.
The United Nations has a critical role to play in
assisting States in preventing sexual violence,
protecting individuals from such violence, and
punishing perpetrators while providing remedy to
victims. Currently, the United Nations system is taking
action across its main areas of work. Among these
various activities, my delegation particularly
appreciates and supports the strong advocacy campaign
and deliver-as-one efforts made under the robust
leadership of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. We also
recognize that many efforts have been made at

09-44986

Headquarters and the field level, such as the adoption
by the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence
in Conflict of its strategic framework for the period
2009-2010; the cluster approach to humanitarian
assistance led by the United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA) and UNICEF; and the Peacebuilding
Commission’s support to States in responding to sexual
violence.
My delegation would like to highlight some areas
in which the United Nations system should redouble its
efforts in order to adequately address sexual violence
in armed conflict.
First, there should be more coherence between
peacekeeping missions and United Nations country
teams to ensure joint priorities in preventing and
responding
to
sexual
violence.
Furthermore,
peacekeeping
missions,
country
teams
and
Governments should actively explore developing a
joint Government-United Nations programme on
sexual violence, as has been done in Liberia.
Secondly, in the humanitarian field, further
coordinated action is required. The cluster approach on
a cross-sectoral basis is the right approach. Under
protection clusters, UNFPA and UNICEF are
co-leading the gender-based violence area of
responsibility. The key is the capacity of each
sub-cluster and whether it has enough expertise and
capacity to deal with sexual violence and coordinate
within the sub-cluster, as well as with other clusters. As
such, the strengthening and consolidation of cluster
capacity are urgently needed.
Thirdly, the importance of the determined role of
peacekeeping missions in addressing sexual violence
cannot be overstated. In this regard, we encourage
special envoys and representatives to pay greater
attention to the issue of sexual violence. Gender
guidelines should be provided as soon as possible to
military personnel in peacekeeping operations in order
to effectively implement resolution 1820 (2008).
Fourthly, there is gross underreporting of cases
due to fear, shame or stigma, while gathering
comprehensive information is complex in and of itself.
In order to improve data collection, clear guidance and
support should be given to peacekeeping missions and
United Nations country teams. In fact, United Nations
agencies and organizations providing services to
survivors could be an effective tool for gathering data.
United Nations actors engaged in data collection

11

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

should be familiar with and respect the ethical and
safety standards of the World Health Organization for
data collection on sexual violence. An additional
contribution to data collection could be made by the
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflicts, who has benefited from the recently
strengthened mechanism of resolution 1612 (2005) on
children and armed conflict. This type of close
cooperation is to be encouraged in order to ensure that
resolutions 1612 (2005) and 1820 (2008) are
implemented in a mutually reinforcing manner.
Fifthly, the United Nations system needs a driver
dedicated to the issue of women in armed conflict,
taking responsibility across the United Nations system
to reinforce, support and help drive existing United
Nations efforts forward to address the needs and
interests of women in conflict-affected situations. This
is particularly necessary to prevent and respond to the
use of sexual violence, as well as to streamline
organizational initiatives. Of course, we will have a
strong driver on women’s issues that can play such a
role once we establish a stronger gender architecture,
such as the composite entity. We sincerely hope that
such an agreement is made at the current session in
order to honour our commitment to women throughout
the world. However, even if we successfully reach a
consensus on this issue, it will take time to move the
agreement into full operational mode. We simply
cannot wait until then to have a senior figure who can
attend, with authority and focus across the United
Nations system, to the urgent issue of sexual violence.
Finally, we support the suggestion that the
Secretary-General request a follow-up report with a
proposal for a mechanism to act against parties to
armed conflict who do not comply with their
obligations under international law and against the
perpetrators of sexual violence.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to urge
the General Assembly to take a substantive decision on
the establishment of a new, strong composite entity on
gender that can guide and assist the United Nations
system and Member States in effectively implementing
their commitment to women, including their
obligations under Security Council resolutions on
women, peace and security.
The Republic of Korea looks forward to a
concrete outcome based on our discussion today and in
the future with a view to ending grave sexual violence

12

in armed conflict. We are fully committed to ensuring
the realization of the United Nations promise to women
in armed conflict.
The President: I
representative of Ecuador.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Morejón (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to thank you, Sir, for convening
this important meeting to address a critical item on the
international agenda.
Ecuador believes that the United Nations has a
fundamental role to play in combating all forms of
discrimination and violence against women. My
country is therefore firmly resolved to continue to
support and strengthen that work, and calls on the
international community to pool its efforts to that end.
Ecuador has demonstrated its commitment by ratifying
all relevant international treaties and by co-sponsoring
various resolutions of the General Assembly on this
important and sensitive question.
The Security Council has made a significant
contribution in its own area of competence by adopting
a number of resolutions on the protection of civilians,
in particular children and women, in armed conflict,
including resolution 1325 (2000), which refers to
sexual violence in situations of armed conflict. On 19
June 2008, the Council also adopted resolution 1820
(2008) stressing the important role of women in
conflict prevention and resolution and peacekeeping, as
well as the need to include the gender perspective in
peacekeeping operations, and condemning all forms of
gender-based violence, in particular rape and sexual
violence.
Ecuador has taken due note of the first report of
the Secretary-General (S/2009/362) pursuant to
resolution 1820 (2008). The report highlights the
numerous efforts of States to eradicate that scourge.
My country believes that, notwithstanding the
strenuous efforts of the Secretary-General and the
Security Council, it is urgent to establish greater
cooperation among the main organs of the United
Nations, taking into account the fact that the General
Assembly is the universal entity responsible for
establishing the normative framework that guides the
decisions of all States. Moreover, my delegation
believes that the General Assembly should consider the
subject of sexual violence, including when it is
perpetrated during armed conflict, systematically and
regularly, as it has done during previous sessions with

09-44986

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

the consensus adoption of a number of resolutions on
working to eliminate rape and other forms of sexual
violence in all their manifestations.
Ecuador believes that a financially and
operationally strengthened gender entity would help
eradicate the scourge. We call upon States to continue
to pursue the goals of United Nations system-wide
coherence, which would enhance the Organization’s
effectiveness and efficiency in the field.
A topic as sensitive as the one we are discussing
today, which should be a matter of concern for all
countries, deserves broad and systematic consideration
by the entire membership. The international
community should join its forces to establish
mechanisms that would provide comprehensive
assistance to victims of this scourge and coordinate
efforts to punish perpetrators.
I wish in conclusion to reaffirm the determination
of the Government and the people of Ecuador to
continue to work together with the rest of the
international community to eradicate all forms of
violence against women and girls, in particular sexual
violence, in every country and every region of our
planet.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I extend the gratitude of
the Nigerian delegation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this crucial meeting on women and peace
and security. I thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, for his lucid and concise introductory
statement on his report (S/2009/362), which sets out
several thought-provoking ideas, assessments and
recommendations.
Today’s deliberations reaffirm our sense of
urgency on the issue of sexual violence against women
and girls. My delegation is concerned that in spite of
Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008), which provided hope for millions of women
and young girls, the crime of rape and sexual violence
has not only increased but has become a tactic and
weapon of war. Indeed, it has become systematic and
widespread, and it remains largely unpunished.
Nonetheless, I share the optimism and hope that,
with our collective will and support, we can bring an
end to that impunity and to these crimes against
humanity. It is in this regard that my delegation

09-44986

appreciates the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral, particularly on establishing mechanisms of
accountability, ensuring that peacekeeping mandates
address sexual violence and providing regular annual
reporting on gender-based violence. Those concrete
proposals would complement and strengthen the
implementation of the largely unfulfilled commitments
made by Member States in resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008). With respect to fulfilling those
commitments, I would like to make the following
observations.
First, there is need to tenaciously uphold the
zero-tolerance policy, which calls for an end to
impunity in post-conflict situations. This can be
achieved through promoting efforts and programmes
for transitional gender justice, provided through
mechanisms such as the International Criminal Court,
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda and the Special Courts. Member States should
support the work of those mechanisms in order to
promote justice for women survivors. Seeking justice
for survivors and punishing the perpetrators conveys an
unequivocal message about our commitment to
accountability and responsibility.
Secondly, it is crucial that support programmes
for survivors emphasize income generating, food
security and protection schemes that would enable
them to restart their lives.
Thirdly, the Secretary-General’s request for more
women troops deployed to conflict zones should elicit
a renewed response from Member States. It is common
knowledge that the Indian all-female police unit has
recorded some positive results in Liberia, restoring
confidence and self-esteem in Liberian women, some
of who are now enlisting in the armed forces.
Fourthly, it is imperative to provide adequate and
appropriate training to peacekeepers on dealing with
human rights violations and on strategies to address
gender-based violence. Such specialized training
should encompass members of the military, police,
judiciary, civil society, women and gender advocates. It
will provide the skill set required to identify and
address issues relating to sexual violence and other
crimes against humanity.
Fifthly, we invite the Secretary-General to utilize
existing regional and subregional resources, such as the
African Peace and Security Architecture and the early

13

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

warning system of the Economic Community of West
African States, to strengthen efforts to protect women
in situations of conflict on the continent.
As one of the largest troop- and policecontributing countries, Nigeria remains ready to
contribute to peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction. The Government of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria, with support from the United
States Government and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, has established a model
peacekeeping training centre in Jaji, Kaduna, early this
year. The centre, which is headed by a senior military
officer with extensive peacekeeping and training
experience, is designed to improve and enhance the
skills of Nigerian troops in relation to managing postconflict reconstruction, human rights violations and
gender awareness in peacekeeping environments. We
will continue to provide the Council with updates on
best practices and progress.
Once again, we thank the United Kingdom
delegation for initiating this dialogue and for
introducing a very useful draft resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Let
me begin by thanking the United Kingdom presidency
for having convened this open debate, which reflects
the Security Council’s commitment to effectively
follow up and implement resolution 1820 (2008) nearly
a year after its adoption.
There must be a firm response to the continued
use of sexual violence in its various forms against
civilians, in particular women and girls, in conflict and
post-conflict situations. We must put an end to
impunity and protect the victims in all situations where
the United Nations is present.
Consonant with my country’s firm commitment to
combat gender-based violence, the Argentine national
congress, in March, adopted a comprehensive
protection law to prevent, punish and eliminate
violence against women wherever they interact with
others. This encompasses sexual violence, including
rape, in all contexts, such as marriage, other
relationships and family situations — both with and
without cohabitation — as well as forced prostitution,
exploitation, slavery, harassment, sexual abuse or
trafficking.

14

With respect to the training of Argentine troops,
including those participating in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, I wish to emphasize that
throughout the process of selecting personnel for
deployment consideration is given to the Code of
Conduct for peacekeepers, including the provisions
related to gender and sexual exploitation and abuse,
which encompass the provisions and concepts set out
in resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).
Similarly, those two resolutions underpin the
work of the Argentine centre for joint peacekeeping
training, which for four years has been training troops
for United Nations deployment. I stress that the
national training centre is firmly committed to
international standards of human rights protection, in
particular gender issues in peacekeeping operations, as
well as to the Code of Conduct and measures to
prevent sexual exploitation and abuse. We also stress
full and equal participation of men and women in all
initiatives for peace during all stages of armed conflict,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Implementation of
the two resolutions, the content of United Nations
reports and our own lessons learned are systematically
incorporated into the centre’s gender curriculum.
It is part of our training mission to make these
documents and resolutions known; moreover, all staff
know the applicable law and the conduct that the
United Nations expects from its peacekeepers in this
sphere. Specific courses are offered following the
United Nations Standardized Generic Training
Modules. And at present the training institute is
completely updating its entire curriculum in
accordance with the new United Nations training
module, the Core Pre-Deployment Training Materials.
Furthermore, a follow-up system is in place
through interviews and surveys that serve as guide and
support for national policies, and we are planning an
auditing system for monitoring the progress of gender
mainstreaming.
As to the punishment contemplated in the
eventuality of an Argentine military personnel member
deployed in a peacekeeping operation being involved
in a case of sexual violence, disciplinary measures are
applied immediately within the unit deployed in the
theatre of operations. This results in the return to our
country of the person in question and the continuation
of disciplinary action in Argentina. This can involve
very severe punishment, including discharge. We

09-44986

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

should also note that as of today, after 51 years of an
uninterrupted Argentine military presence in many
United Nations peacekeeping operations, there has
been no recorded case of sexual violence or abuse in
connection
with Argentina’s
participation
in
peacekeeping missions.
We continue to receive reports from the field on
the use of sexual violence as a political or military
weapon in some current conflicts. Sexual violence is
categorically prohibited as a method of war. The
widespread and systematic use of sexual violence is a
grave violation of international law, as enshrined in the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and
in the Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols. This was prominent in the context of the
first case to be tried before the Court, which leads us to
reflect not only on how widespread this aberrant
practice is in conflict, but also on the importance of
effective penalties in putting an end to impunity and
preventing such situations from recurring in the future.
Bearing in mind these realities, Argentina is
convinced that effective measures must be adopted as a
matter of urgency to prevent and respond to acts of
sexual violence against the civilian population. This
would make a significant contribution to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Argentina hopes that the decisions that the
Council will adopt in this area will strongly incorporate
two lines of thought: protection for the full human
rights of victims and an end to impunity for the
perpetrators. In that connection, we are grateful for the
conclusions and recommendations of the report of the
Secretary-General, which we support. We hope that the
Council will take specific measures in a future
resolution to ensure that in the renewal of every
peacekeeping mandate these situations be considered
and that effective mechanisms will be put in place to
provide leadership and coherence in the response and
ensure a solid basis for future Council action at all
levels, including information gathering, awareness,
technical analysis of options and best practices.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. De Klerk (Netherlands): Let me express our
sincere appreciation to the United Kingdom for
marking this first anniversary of the adoption by the
Council of resolution 1820 (2008), on sexual violence
in conflict, by holding an open debate in which the

09-44986

United Nations membership has the opportunity to
address a subject which deserves the full attention of
all States Members of the United Nations.
I would first like to align myself with the
statement made earlier by the representative of Sweden
on behalf of the European Union.
The Netherlands applauded the unanimous
adoption of resolution 1820 (2008) by the Council last
year. During that open debate (see S/PV.5916), I
expressed our hope that a report of the SecretaryGeneral would initiate a process to ensure adequate
follow-up by the Council and would address ways to
improve coordination of United Nations activities on
the ground. I also emphasized the importance of
finding ways to monitor the actions taken by parties to
a conflict to fulfil their responsibilities.
One year after the adoption of resolution 1820
(2008) and almost nine years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we have to conclude that we
need to intensify our efforts to end sexual violence by
ensuring real, concrete follow-up to these resolutions.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/362)
rightly states that it is up to Member States, the United
Nations system and civil society to rise to the
challenge. After finalizing a national action plan on
resolution 1325 (2000) one and a half years ago, the
Dutch Ministries for Foreign Affairs, Defence and the
Interior and 15 civil society organizations are working,
nationally and internationally, to achieve our common
goals, such as ensuring that a gender perspective is
well integrated in the work of the armed forces,
improving access to justice for victims of sexual
violence, creating zero-tolerance communities and
increasing the active role of women in State-building
in countries such as Afghanistan, Burundi, the Sudan
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We commend the important work of United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict in
the field and recognize the ongoing efforts of the
United Nations system as a whole to improve
coordination of activities on the ground. However,
there is a need to enhance coordination, whether it be
in the field of the rule of law, the provision of
assistance to survivors of sexual violence or the
collection of accurate data. While we are fully aware of
the challenges to data collection and reporting in the
midst of fragile and often volatile post-conflict and
conflict situations, we consider the collection of

15

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

accurate information in a safe, confidential
environment very important, in order to ensure an
adequate and coherent response of States and the
United Nations system. In this respect, I also would
like to underline the important role that civil society
organizations play in the field and the need to involve
them in the work of States and the United Nations
system.
Let me highlight some concrete steps which we
consider crucial to ensuring follow-up to the
commitments of Security Council resolution 1820
(2008). First, the Netherlands would like to underline
the responsibility of all parties to a conflict, including
State agents, to protect civilians in accordance with
international, humanitarian and human rights law. This
implies commitment and action from civilian and
military leaders to use their authority to prevent sexual
crimes and to report and punish all perpetrators who
commit these crimes. In this context, we consider the
vetting of armed and security forces, joint patrols to
protect civilians, a duty to investigate for commanders,
and enforceable codes of conducts to be measures that
could significantly strengthen prevention policies.
Secondly, we welcome the efforts of the United
Nations system to ensure that peace negotiations and
agreements contribute to preventing and responding to
sexual violence. We would strongly encourage
increasing efforts in this regard. We also would like to
stress the role the Council and the Secretariat can play
in ensuring the explicit integration of commitments
made in resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) into
the mandates of United Nations appointed mediators,
special envoys and special representatives, and in
monitoring the implementation of these commitments.
Let me now briefly address some of the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report.
We welcome the recommendation that the
Council establish a commission of inquiry to
investigate and report on violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. We also welcome
the recommendation to ensure that the Security
Council Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians
and the sanctions Committees be duly mandated to
address sexual violence.
In this respect, we consider the recent adoption of
resolution 1882 (2009) to be a crucial step forward, as
it ensures that the killing and maiming of children and

16

rape and other sexual violence perpetrated against
children in situations of armed conflict, are integrated
into the monitoring activities of the Councils’ Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
In addition, we look forward to receiving the
Secretary-General’s proposal for an appropriate
mechanism or procedure to consider and act on
information concerning measures taken by parties to
armed conflict to comply with their obligations and to
prosecute perpetrators of sexual violence.
Finally, we take note of the Secretary-General’s
consideration of the advisability of the appointment of
a senior person with responsibility to attend to the
prevention of and response to sexual violence across
the United Nations system. Indeed, there is a need for
structural attention on this issue. The prevention of and
response to sexual violence should be an integral part
of peacekeeping and peacebuilding. In this respect, we
would like to underline the importance of a positive
decision by Member States in September to establish a
strong, coordinated and coherent United Nations
gender entity headed by an under-secretary-general.
Let me conclude by calling upon all Security
Council members to adopt a strong, action-oriented
resolution that will contribute to a coordinated,
systematic and coherent international response to these
heinous crimes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Leroy (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
fully associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union and thanks the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/362) on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1820 (2008).
A year ago, the Security Council took an
important step in fighting sexual violence by adopting
resolution 1820 (2008). Belgium believes that, today, it
is urgent to take our efforts to the next level. The
situation on the ground seems to be far from
improving, and the international community’s
interventions are still too few and far between.
Our goal should be to act proactively rather than
to react after the fact, when it is already too late for the
tens of thousands of women and children victims of
these crimes. To that end, we must, as a matter of
priority, put in place a comprehensive plan of action

09-44986

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

that aims not only at ending this intolerable violence
when it takes place, but also and above all at
strengthening once and for all the capacity of States to
prevent such violence in the future. Only the
strengthening of national capacities can enable States
to shoulder their own responsibility to prevent such
crimes.
In this respect, the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should serve as a warning and
an example. While today we can talk about a genuine
human disaster in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and in particular in the region of the Kivus, the
recent adoption by the United Nations of a
comprehensive strategy to combat sexual violence in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo represents a
glimmer of hope for the future. Belgium will do its
utmost to ensure that the international community
musters the resolve necessary for the strategy to bear
fruit.
The Secretary-General’s report offers many
interesting options for the future, and Belgium would
like to address several of these in particular.
We cannot emphasize strongly enough the
importance of combating impunity for sexual crimes.
Impunity is not only fertile ground upon which
violence develops and recurs, but it also undermines
the
foundation
of
any
reconstruction
and
redevelopment effort. As the jurisprudence of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone and the tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda have shown,
international criminal courts have an important role to
play in combating sexual crimes. Belgium warmly
welcomes the appointment of a special adviser for
gender issues by the International Criminal Court.
International prosecution, however, is not
enough. On the contrary, we must increase initiatives
to strengthen the rule of law, judicial institutions and
penal systems in countries that have the greatest need
of such in order to enable them to dispense justice at
the local level. These countries must be in a position to
dispense impartial justice and to prosecute all
perpetrators, even when they are agents of the State.
Last week, we learned of the conviction by the
North Kivu military court of three officers of the armed
forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo for
crimes against humanity, including the rape of several
young girls. Such examples should be encouraged and
become the rule.

09-44986

Punishing the perpetrators of sexual crimes is one
thing, but assisting victims is another. Fighting
impunity should be accompanied by programmes to
address the individual and societal consequences of
these crimes over the short, medium and long terms.
The work done by the Peacebuilding Commission in its
country-specific configuration for the Central African
Republic is a good example of the integration of
gender and sexual violence issues into a reconstruction
programme. Such efforts should become widespread.
In that respect, Belgium appreciates the
Secretary-General’s idea of appointing a senior person
responsible for the United Nations response to the
issue of sexual violence. However, we believe that
more should be done, and we call for the appointment
of a female mediator for women, peace and security.
The role of this mediator would be to ensure that
women are systematically involved in peace
negotiation processes and that a gender-based
approach, including the issue of sexual violence, is
taken into account in all United Nations peacekeeping
and reconstruction activities.
In order to fight the scourge of sexual violence in
the most effective way possible, our Organization also
needs to guarantee the quality of the information at its
disposal. Belgium supports the Secretary-General’s
proposal to improve the collection and coordination of
data by involving all actors not only in the field, but
also in Geneva and New York. Belgium also supports
the creation of a follow-up mechanism within the
Security Council so as to make the most of this
information.
This week’s adoption of resolution 1882 (2009),
whereby sexual violence will be considered as a trigger
for the Council’s follow-up mechanism on children and
armed conflict, is a step in that direction, and Belgium
welcomes it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Touray (Sierra Leone): Let me start by
expressing my satisfaction and gratitude for the
opportunity to participate in this open debate on the
use of sexual violence in armed conflict and its
aftermath
I also wish to sincerely congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August and to wish you a

17

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

successful tenure. I extend my thanks and appreciation
to the members of the Council for having unanimously
adopted resolution 1820 (2008), which mandated the
submission of the report we are discussing today, as
well as its precursor, resolution 1325 (2000).
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his very informative and enlightened report
(S/2009/362) and to express my delegation’s full
support for it and its consequential recommendations to
the Council. In addition, I would be remiss if I failed to
commend the Department of Peacekeeping Operations;
United Nations special agencies, funds and
programmes, including United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict; and all other stakeholders
whose concerted efforts contributed to the production
of the report.
The Secretary-General, in the report under
review, emphasizes the need for the implementation of
resolution 1820 (2008) in the context of situations that
are on the agenda of the Council, including the
situation in Sierra Leone. He also describes key
challenges that remain and the need to address them as
a matter of urgency if progress is to be made in
containing sexual violence. He also outlines the
responsibilities of States and other parties in relation to
sexual violence in conflict and its aftermath, as well as
the efforts of the United Nations to prevent and
respond to sexual violence.
Sierra Leone experienced one of the fiercest and
bloodiest conflicts of the 1990s, involving mass
killings; the maiming, hacking and amputation of
limbs; the targeting and terrorizing of civilians as a
tactic and instrument of war; the plundering and
pillaging of their property; and the subjection of our
women to horrendous and despicable violations of their
human rights, including but not limited to rape,
abduction, gang rape, sexual slavery, forced marriage
and even forced labour and conscription.
However, with the help of the international
community, our bilateral partners and regional and
subregional organizations, the country is moving
comparatively swiftly towards stability and peace. That
is not to say, however, that the relics of the past are
gone and done with, for traces of the past — although
not many — remain with us in the aftermath of the war,
and gender-based violence within domestic settings is
not uncommon.

18

Much has been accomplished in my country
through measures taken to prevent sexual violence and
protect civilians, to combat impunity for sexual
violence, to address discrimination against our women
and girls, and to provide assistance, remedies and
reparation for victims of sexual violence.
As a State party to relevant international human
rights instruments, we are quite conscious of our
obligations, under international law, international
humanitarian law and pertinent resolutions of this
body, to protect our women and girls from all forms of
violence, to punish the perpetrators and to provide
reparation for the victims. In that regard, Sierra Leone
has shown genuine political will and commitment
towards meeting the needs and interests of women and
girls and has taken appropriate measures to address
gender-based violence, including the following.
First, the Lomé Peace Agreement, which brought
an end to the hostilities and paved the way for peace,
was a major effort to ensure that the negotiations and
their outcome would contribute to preventing or
responding to sexual violence. It emphasized special
attention to the needs of women and the importance of
their inclusion in strategic decision-making positions
so that they can play a central role in the country’s
reconstruction process.
Second, the report of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission highlighted the pathetic
plight of women during the conflict. It recommended
30 per cent representation for women in the decisionmaking process, as well as reparations for victims of
sexual violence.
Third, the Special Court for Sierra Leone was
established to demonstrate that there can be no
impunity for those who have committed acts against
women and to address the heinous crimes — especially
sexual violence against women — committed during
the war, irrespective of assurances of amnesty for the
perpetrators.
Fourth, three gender acts, aimed at reinforcing
women’s rights and clamping down on sexual and
domestic violence, were adopted. The gender acts
modernized the law against rape, including marital
rape; criminalized domestic violence; and provided
protection for victims, especially women in rural areas.
Wife-beating is now a criminal offence, women can
now own property, and the idea of forcing young girls
into marriage is gradually becoming a thing of the past.

09-44986

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

Fifth, the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, a core
international
human
rights
instrument
on
discrimination against women, and the Convention on
the Rights of the Child have been ratified.
Sixth, we have endorsed and implemented
relevant resolutions such as resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008), including through the establishment,
in all our district police headquarters, of family support
units mandated specifically to deal with gender-based
violence. Although poorly resourced and understaffed,
they are in high demand.
Seventh, a national policy on the enhancement of
women through gender mainstreaming was adopted in
2001.
Eighth, a Gender Ministry — although also
poorly resourced — has been established.
Ninth, a national committee was established in
2008 by the Ministry of Social Welfare, Gender and
Children’s Affairs, bringing together all agencies
working on gender-based violence, including UNICEF;
the Rainbow Clinic Centre, a counselling and treatment
clinic for raped and battered women; and other
non-governmental organizations to ensure proper
coordination. Since its establishment, the committee
has been very effective in facilitating referrals to
police, legal and medical practitioners, counsellors and
trained health workers for the assessment and
prosecution of cases of sexual violence.
Tenth, structures have been put in place for the
provision of remedies and reparation for victims of
sexual violence. The process of identification, enlisting
and registration is currently ongoing.
Eleventh, an affirmative action programme has
been adopted for the education of girls. It seeks to
empower our women and girls so as to transform them
into effective partners in addressing discriminatory
practices; to increase their participation in decisionmaking, conflict prevention and peacebuilding
processes; and to improve their status in society.
Twelfth, the Human Rights Commission has been
established to report on, monitor and address human
rights issues and violations.
Thirteenth,
the
Constitutional
Review
Commission of Sierra Leone has been established and
tasked to consider discriminatory provisions in the

09-44986

Constitution, particularly those discriminating against
women and on the basis of gender.
Finally, gender-sensitive enlistment for the
security sector, police, army and prison staff has been
made a matter of Government policy.
Laudable though these achievements may sound,
there is a need for more political space to articulate the
aspirations of women and to contain sexual violence in
all its ramifications, particularly within the context of
the cultural dimensions of issues affecting women and
changing culturally ingrained practices.
Barely seven years after the end of the civil war
in Sierra Leone and almost 10 years after the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), there is still a need for more
action to improve our performance on matters of
gender-based violence. Adequate performance is
constrained largely by a lack of much-needed resources
rather than a lack of political will. We still need the
continued support and assistance of the international
community to help us fully implement the provisions
of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).
More is still needed in the sphere of international
assistance and support to States, particularly fragile
ones like ours that are emerging from conflict, to
enable them to fulfil all of the obligations imposed by
these resolutions in terms of the prevention of and
response to gender-based violence.
Furthermore, from an international point of view,
it is important that the prevention of and response to
sexual violence be clearly and specifically reflected in
peacekeeping mandates and mission directives and that
personnel selected for peacekeeping operations and
units be skilled in dealing with sexual violence. There
is also a paramount need to improve the collection of
data on sexual violence and to ensure accountability.
There are many hands on deck. The United
Nations Development Programme, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), UNICEF and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs are all involved
in the process in their own special way, and there are
also senior-level mission focal points made up of
Deputy Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral, humanitarian coordinators and resident
coordinators. As the saying goes, too many cooks spoil

19

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

the broth, and the need for effective coordination is
ever present.
The Sierra Leone delegation accordingly supports
the call for the appointment of a special representative
of the Secretary-General for women and peace and
security, a call that was made most recently during the
March 2009 International Colloquium for Women’s
Empowerment, Leadership Development, Peace and
Security, organized by the Presidents of our sister
Republic of Liberia and Finland. This would drive the
coordination of the system-wide response to sexual
violence in armed conflict, especially in the areas of
humanitarian assistance, data collection and reporting
on sexual violence and information management. This,
in the view of my delegation, would not only reinforce
the United Nations multisectoral response to genderbased violence, but would immensely help to address
the existing gaps in it. It could further assist and give
direction to the understanding of the problem and the
adoption of effective strategies in strengthening the
United Nations role on gender-based violence, data
collection and other related matters.
I cannot conclude my statement without taking
this opportunity to thank the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone, a creation of
both the Security Council and the General Assembly
that was introduced in our peacebuilding architecture,
for its leadership role in ensuring that the incidents that
took place in Freetown on 13 and 16 March did not
escalate to the point of disrupting the hard-earned
peace that we have all tirelessly worked to sustain. I
must also commend the recent intervention by
UNIFEM to facilitate the provision of victim- and
witness-protection services for the ongoing Justice
Bankole Thompson Commission of Inquiry, established
by His Excellency President Ernest Bai Koroma to
investigate the allegations of rape and sexual violence
that occurred during the political clashes in March this
year.
The Secretary-General states in his report that
“when it comes to sexual violence, we cannot
expect peace without justice, reparation without
recognition, and sustainable development without
the full empowerment of those who have suffered
sexual violence or are at risk”. (S/2009/362,
para. 58)
That could not be truer of the situation in Sierra Leone.

20

Finally, the Security Council’s leadership in
controlling sexual violence has been invaluable and
praiseworthy. Its continual leadership is a must if
significant progress is to be sustained in this venture.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.
Mr. Jónasson (Iceland): Allow me at the outset
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate and to thank the Secretary-General for his
thorough report (S/2009/362). Iceland subscribes to the
recommendations put forward by the Secretary-General
in his report as to how to better implement resolution
1820 (2008).
The international community has a responsibility
to protect civilians from the widespread and systematic
use of sexual violence as a tactic of war. While States
bear the primary responsibility, the international
community also has an obligation to assist those States
that are not able to fulfil that responsibility.
To tackle the deliberate use of sexual violence, it
is essential to understand the nature and scope of the
problem. An effective monitoring and reporting
mechanism is pivotal to ensuring the successful
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008). Useful
synergies could be established between the monitoring
and accountability mechanisms established under
resolutions 1612 (2005) and 1820 (2008).
Furthermore, efforts to address sexual violence,
as set out in resolution 1820 (2008), would benefit
from increased cooperation among the United Nations
actors involved in peacekeeping, development and
human rights, including gender equality and the status
of women. By promoting gender equality and women’s
empowerment
in
national
and
international
development policies, as well as in peace processes as
set out in resolution 1325 (2000), the international
community can effectively reduce the use of sexual
violence as a tactic of war.
The United Nations must lead by example.
United Nations peacekeepers must receive proper
training. They must not betray the trust we have placed
in them by perpetrating acts of wanton violence.
Troop-contributing countries must adopt appropriate
measures.
Finally, as long as impunity for sexual violence
continues, these crimes will be difficult to suppress. To
effectively end impunity, a broad range of actions is

09-44986

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

needed. At the national level, urgent legal and judicial
system reforms are required to punish perpetrators.
This will require active cooperation and assistance
from the international community. Moreover, the
Security Council should use all the measures at its
disposal, especially when it comes to persistent
violators. We encourage the Council to ensure that
sexual violence offences are addressed in the work of
its sanctions committees and to use its most effective
tools, including targeted sanctions, as appropriate, for
such crimes.
In conclusion, my delegation would welcome
annual reports by the Secretary-General on the
progress and implementation of resolution 1820
(2008).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): First, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of August
and to thank you for convening the debate on this
crucial topic. I would also like to welcome the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2009/362) on sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict, which reflects
both the appalling scope and the devastating effects of
this issue.
Afghanistan remains fully dedicated to the
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008) on the rights of women in conflict situations. It
has become clear that the lack of a stable, secure State
often leads to persistent violations of human rights,
particularly women’s rights. Insecurity allows
extremism to flourish and makes it extremely difficult
for Governments and international organizations to
provide even basic services to their citizens. The lack
of resources and capacity limits the ability of
Governments to effectively enforce protective
legislative and judicial mechanisms. Without the equal
involvement of half of our populations in our civil
societies, economies and political systems, our nations
are deeply incapacitated and our children, economies
and even the stability of our countries suffer.
Only eight years ago, under the brutal Taliban
regime, Afghanistan had no provisions for the
protection of women and human rights, but, despite
ongoing difficulties, we have made significant
progress, particularly in education and health care.
Women’s issues are taken into account at each stage of

09-44986

the national stabilization process and in national
strategies, such as the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy. Afghanistan has the legal and
judicial mechanisms in place to achieve success. We
are also party to the relevant international mechanisms,
including the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women. However, the
ongoing support of the international community for
Afghan efforts is absolutely necessary, both to
encourage our citizens’ bottom-up efforts towards
success and to sustain the Government’s top-down
labours. We have emerged from the darkness of a long
national nightmare, but we still have more work to do.
Over the past 30 years, Afghans have experienced
violence on an almost unprecedented scale. Persistent
poverty and other symptoms of conflict have
disproportionately affected women, and for the first
time in the 1990s, during a bloody internecine war,
physical and psychological violence was accompanied
by horrendous acts of sexual abuse.
The scars of those abuses continue to be seen and
felt today. Women in Afghanistan still face not just
sexual violence, but sexual discrimination and
oppression, caused and exacerbated by enduring
insecurity and the terrorist activities of the Taliban and
Al-Qaida. In some particularly unstable parts of the
country where the Taliban is still active or where the
rule of a law is not yet strong, women attempting to
work or hold office face abuse, threats and physical
attacks. Other women have their rights curtailed and
are forced into marriage and other exploitative
situations. Even in areas free of the Taliban threat, a
creeping Talibanization promotes an un-Islamic,
un-Afghan culture that denies women’s basic rights.
Afghanistan supports the Secretary-General’s
analysis that a central step towards preventing violence
against women is to combat gender discrimination and
to give women a larger role in political and decisionmaking processes. Afghanistan’s experience shows that
there are no better advocates for women’s rights than
women themselves, and so we must do everything we
can to help them be heard.
In the upcoming presidential and provincial
elections, the participation of women will be crucial to
success in Afghanistan. We have had some
praiseworthy victories. Millions of women have
registered to vote, and educational programmes run by
the Government, the United Nations Population Fund

21

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

and the United Nations Mission of Assistance in
Afghanistan educate women about the voting process
and their rights and opportunities as citizens. Our
Constitution guarantees women at least 25 per cent of
the seats in provincial councils and 27 per cent of the
seats in Parliament, and women have served as
governors and in the Cabinet. A growing number of
women have registered as candidates; a recordbreaking 328 women are running for provincial
councils and two women are among the presidential
candidates.
Nonetheless, even if governmental mechanisms
are in place to ensure equality, women are silenced
within a culture of shame and, worse still, do not
demand their rights owing to a lack of awareness or
support. My Government will continue to enlist
cultural, political and religious leaders in encouraging
a proper understanding of women’s Islamic and
political rights, and to explicitly and publicly condemn
all violence against women and girls. Impunity only
reinforces patterns of violence.
Afghan women need the support and protection
of the United Nations, the international community and
the Government of Afghanistan as they work to
transform society. The role of the United Nations and
the international community in that struggle should be
to support the Government of Afghanistan with
resources, knowledge and capacity-building. Led by
this Council, we should also encourage a moral and
legal awareness of women’s rights, both locally and in
multilateral forums, and keep the issue of violence
against women at the top of the international agenda.
With that support, we can work to strengthen judicial
mechanisms and decrease reliance on local, ad hoc
justice systems that frequently disadvantage women.
We can increase the number of women in the Afghan
National Police and have more units dedicated to
domestic violence. We can also do more to combat
extremism and educate the public about the rights of
women by publicizing and enforcing international and
Islamic human rights norms.
The women of Afghanistan continue to suffer
from violence. However, social transformation, like
political stabilization and economic development, is a
gradual process that requires security and continuity.
We have learned that the surest way to improve the
situation of women is to provide them with education,
protection and support and to give them a platform

22

from which to speak for themselves. My Government
remains fully committed to that cause.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Chávez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I welcome
the initiative to hold an open debate on resolution 1820
(2008) and the role of women and peace and security. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
presenting his report (S/2009/362), and welcome the
statements made this morning.
As the Secretary-General points out, sexual
violence is deeply dehumanizing, inflicts serious
physical and psychological wounds, is accompanied by
fear, shame and stigmatization, and is often a method
of torture. Women and girls have been particularly
vulnerable to such violence in the armed conflicts that
have occurred throughout history, although they are not
the only victims. That is why resolution 1820 (2008)
represents an important step forward at the normative
and operational levels in firmly condemning all forms
of sexual violence against civilians in armed conflict
and in adopting measures aimed at its elimination.
Moreover, this debate is particularly relevant as it
is taking place a few days after the Security Council
took a step forward in protecting children in armed
conflict by adopting resolution 1882 (2009),
co-sponsored by my country, which extends the criteria
whereby parties to a conflict may be included in the
reports that the Secretary-General must periodically
submit to the Security Council on that matter.
Resolution 1882 (2009) includes sexual violence
among those criteria. My delegation therefore believes
that it is important that Security Council resolutions
1820 (2008) and 1882 (2009) be mutually reinforcing
in preventing and combating sexual violence against
women and children in conflict situations.
Due implementation of resolution 1820 (2008)
undoubtedly calls for prevention measures and resolute
actions to combat impunity, effective mechanisms of
assistance to victims and the greater empowerment of
women, making them part of conflict resolution and
peacebuilding processes. It also continues to be a
priority to include gender perspective in issues related
to peace and security. There we see the
complementarity of implementation of resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).

09-44986

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

Peru also believes that, as the Secretary-General
stresses in his report, it is fundamentally important that
resolutions adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations, whether to establish or renew
mandates or to impose sanctions, contain provisions to
prevent and respond to acts of sexual violence.
Furthermore, peacekeeping operations should have
clear mandates for attaining this objective.

protection of civilians, especially women and children
in armed conflict and in post-conflict situations.
Resolution 1820 (2008) and other resolutions reflect
shared values and the unanimous condemnation of
sexual violence against civilians in armed conflict. It is
only through concerted efforts and political will that it
will be possible to create a safe and sustainable
environment for peacebuilding processes.

I welcome the progress made by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) in formulating
guidelines to facilitate implementation of resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). Also valuable are studies
of peacekeeping best practices to combat sexual
violence that the DPKO is carrying out together with
the United Nations Development Fund for Women and
the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict. It is important that during the early recovery
and peacebuilding phases efforts continue in this area.
It is critical to continue support for the endeavours of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the work of the
United Nations Development Programme in the field.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Timor-Leste.

Without socio-economic opportunity for victims
of sexual violence, we cannot hope for lasting peace.
Nor is lasting peace possible without the rule of law or
access to justice. For that reason, the fight against
impunity is fundamental to the eradication of sexual
violence.
One key element in addressing this question is
the availability of complete information on instances of
sexual violence in armed conflict. As indicated by the
Secretary-General, many cases are known through ad
hoc tribunals, transitional justice mechanisms and other
special
mechanisms,
although
only
scattered
information exists on this topic. Thus, it is necessary to
look into mechanisms to enable the United Nations
agencies, the various committees of the Security
Council and the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict to exchange reliable information on
acts of sexual violence, with a view to taking measures
to reduce and combat this scourge. My delegation also
believes that it is important to consider the SecretaryGeneral’s request to establish a Security Council
follow-up mechanism regarding measures taken by
parties involved in conflict so as to comply with their
international obligations to prevent and combat sexual
violence.
We note with satisfaction that the international
community is making efforts to move forward on the

09-44986

Mr. Santos (Timor-Leste): Let me begin,
Mr. President,
by
expressing
Timor-Leste’s
appreciation to you for convening this open debate on
the report of Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 1820 (2008) (S/2009/362).
My country, Timor-Leste, believes it has a moral
obligation to speak out on this issue. Timorese women
lived through the worst and went through extreme
violence during our conflict. Our women have seen it
all. We hope we can honour them by helping to make
the lives of all women in all conflict settings more
secure and dignified.
Timor-Leste is of opinion that the SecretaryGeneral’s in-depth report on the implementation of
resolution 1820 (2008) is a good and comprehensive
report and an important tool for reducing the use of
sexual violence against women. It provides critical
information on conflict situations in which sexual
violence is widely or systematically employed against
civilians
and
offers
a
number
of
good
recommendations
aimed
at
minimizing
the
susceptibility of women and girls to such violence.
Unfortunately,
and
despite
repeated
condemnation, as noted in the Secretary-General’s
report, violence and sexual abuse of women and
children trapped in war zones is not only continuing,
but, in some cases, has become so widespread and
systematic as to reach appalling levels of brutality and
inhumanity. More than ever, we need to move from
words to action. We need to make sure that
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008) results in
real change on the ground for women and girls at risk
of sexual violence.
The report should be seen as a landmark
opportunity and a basis on which to build
implementation. In this regard, Timor-Leste calls on
the Security Council to consider full and effective

23

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

implementation of the report’s recommendations and to
consistently and substantively address the particular
concerns of women in conflict-affected situations.
Timor-Leste hopes that the Council will
specifically consider the appointment of a special
representative or special envoy for women and peace
and security. Such a person would drive coordination
of the system-wide efforts to respond to and prevent
sexual violence in armed conflict, promote action and
enhance effectiveness on the ground, and would
reinforce, support and help drive existing United
Nations efforts.
The Council should also establish a commission
of inquiry, supported by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, with
the task of investigating and reporting sexual violence
in Chad, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Sudan, and of making recommendations to the Council
on the most effective mechanisms for ensuring
accountability. In addition, we also recommend that the
Council establish such commissions in future conflicts
where sexual violence is prevalent.
The Council should request analysis of sexual
violence issues in all country-specific reports and
ensure that resolutions that establish or renew
peacekeeping mandates or political missions contain
provisions on the prevention of, and response to,
sexual violence, as well as corresponding reporting
requirements.
The Security Council should emphasize the need
for more systematic and effective data collection and
reporting on sexual violence. Prevention, protection
and prosecution cannot occur without information and
analysis.
The Council should request that the Department
of Political Affairs ensure that sexual violence
dimensions are considered in all mediation processes in
which the United Nations is involved.
The Council should call on troop contributors to
strengthen pre-deployment training on ways to address
sexual violence and request that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations include this subject matter in
training advice to troop-contributing countries.
The international community has a special
responsibility to advance efforts to deal with sexual
violence in conflict settings. However, Timor-Leste
would like to highlight that Member States are

24

individually responsible for dealing with this issue. A
number of States have inadequate internal measures to
prevent sexual violence and protect civilians, combat
impunity for sexual violence, address continuing
discrimination against women and girls in law and in
practice, and provide proper and dignified assistance to
victims.
Let me conclude by saying that my country is
well aware that a number of these recommendations
involve important budgetary implications. However, let
me recall that women and girls are suffering. We have
the responsibility to protect them and to take real and
effective measures to put an end to their suffering, as
the Secretary-General stated early this morning, to set
our world on a course for a better future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Republic of Tanzania.
Mr. Mahiga (Tanzania): Mr. President, we thank
you for organizing this important Security Council
debate on the implementation of resolution 1820
(2008), on sexual violence against women, during the
presidency of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland. We commend the SecretaryGeneral’s report on this matter (S/2009/362), which
advances our understanding of the subject of sexual
violence against women, especially in situations of
armed conflict and post-armed conflict situations, and
the measures which need to be taken to preventing and
address violence against girls and women.
We appreciate and encourage the leadership of
the Secretary-General and the Security Council on this
subject, which needs to be linked normatively and
operationally to resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
armed conflict. Both resolutions are central to
international peace and security. They have generated
significant positive responses from States and regional
and international organizations, which have become
engaged in addressing gender-based violence in
conflict and non-conflict situations alike.
In Tanzania, we are working with the United
Nations system — especially the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) — on
advocacy initiatives, as well as promoting legislative
and policy measures to address and mainstream
national initiatives against gender-based violence.
Tanzania has agreed with UNIFEM to lead a regional
initiative related to the campaign against gender-based

09-44986

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

violence, including sexual violence against girls and
women.
I also take this opportunity to draw the attention
of the Council and the United Nations system to the
newly launched African Union gender policy, which is
related to, among other issues, the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008). We encourage the Council and the United
Nations system as a whole to cooperate and coordinate
with the African Union on initiatives in these areas, as
appropriate. This could be a subject of future
discussions in the evolving partnership and cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union.
There are many challenges in the implementation
of resolution 1820 (2008) at all levels. Among those
that stand out and require urgent responses at all levels
is the collection of adequate and reliable information
on sexual violence. That can best be done through the
provision of assured access to humanitarian assistance
for survivors of violence. Information would not only
give us a better understanding of the problem, but also
allow us to devise appropriate strategies to address the
problem and help the victims of sexual violence. In
peacekeeping missions and other humanitarian
operations, access to survivors of sexual violence must
be given due priority.
Coordinated action within the United Nations
through a focal point in the Secretariat needs to be part
of the wider initiative of the gender entity in the United
Nations system-wide coherence exercise. This ought to
go hand in hand with developing expertise on genderbased violence within United Nations agencies in the
humanitarian sector. We commend the individual
agencies, funds and programmes that already have
dedicated units to deal with gender-based violence, but
their mandates would be greatly enhanced through a
system-wide focal point.
While the Security Council, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs continue to
improve the protection of civilians in peacekeeping
missions, preventing and protecting against sexual
violence remain a relatively new and still evolving
undertaking.
We
therefore
encourage
troopcontributing countries, in partnership with DPKO, to
develop specific training for peacekeepers in the
protection of women and girls against sexual violence
before their deployment to peacekeeping missions.

09-44986

That would entail increasing the numbers of female
military and police officers, as well as of trained
civilian female staff, to be deployed in the field.
We look forward to participating in a wider
debate in the Council later this year on the protection
of civilians in peacekeeping operations.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Kenya.
Mrs. Cerere (Kenya): I should like at the outset
to join other delegations in thanking you,
Mr. President, for organizing this very timely debate on
women and peace and security. My delegation
welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/362) pursuant to resolution 1820 (2008).
Today’s debate is timely, as it comes at a time when we
are being confronted with persistent, widespread and
systematic cases of sexual violence perpetrated against
civilians in conflict and non-conflict situations.
My delegation concurs with the SecretaryGeneral’s report that sexual violence constitutes one of
the most serious violations of international
humanitarian, human rights and criminal law. Women
and girls make up a disproportionate percentage of the
victims of sexual violence. We must find the means to
hold accountable all perpetrators of this atrocity and to
provide justice to the victims. To that end, States
should endeavour to strengthen their domestic
capacities to protect vulnerable groups and to
investigate, prosecute and punish the perpetrators.
The effective implementation of resolution 1820
(2008) will require Governments, the private sector,
civil society and the United Nations system to reaffirm
their commitments and address the most urgent
challenges and obstacles to mainstreaming a gender
perspective into the area of international peace and
security. There is a need for States to ratify and
implement core international human rights instruments,
including the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women.
The appalling situation regarding sexual violence
perpetrated against women and girls in conflict
situations, especially in the Great Lakes region and the
Horn of Africa, has to be looked at seriously. As a
community of States, we must rigorously implement
the United Nations policy of zero tolerance with regard
to the sexual abuse and exploitation of women and
girls by staff and related personnel.

25

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

We must also provide protection to women and
ensure that putting a stop to war-related sexual
violence is prioritized at the international level. We
laud the crucial work being carried out by United
Nations agencies such as the United Nations
Population Fund, UNICEF and others in dealing with
these issues. Similarly, we need to galvanize support
for putting in place the infrastructure necessary to
ensure that victims of sexual violence receive quality
medical assistance.
In
addition,
during
the
post-conflict
reconstruction and healing process, decisions should
not be made for women; women must be part and
parcel of the process that affects them.
Kenya appreciates the great strides made by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) in
promoting gender balance among peacekeeping
personnel. The incorporation of full-time gender
advisers into peacekeeping missions has been very
useful in that regard. Although gender balance is far
from having been attained, we have taken steps in the
right direction. DPKO needs to redouble its efforts to
achieve that goal. It must develop and disseminate to
States — especially troop-contributing countries —
effective guidelines to ensure sustained efforts in
gender mainstreaming at all levels of peacekeeping
operations.
Kenya has embarked on a vigorous process aimed
at improving its institutional capacity to hold to
account all perpetrators of crimes against human rights,
including sexual violence, by initiating reforms of its
law enforcement and justice administration agencies.
In addition, Kenya has made deliberate efforts to
increase the participation of women in peacekeeping
operations. Currently, we have women in uniform in all
missions in which we are engaged. The adoption of the
Sexual Offences Act has facilitated a more effective
means of dealing with sexual offences, including rape.
This has been augmented through the establishment of
gender desks at police stations to deal specifically with
violations relating to violence against women.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate our
condemnation of sexual violence against women and to
urge all Member States, civil society and the United
Nations system, particularly the Security Council and
the International Criminal Court, to put an end to
impunity in that regard. We support more concrete and
substantive measures to stem this vice. Perpetrators

26

must be held accountable for their nefarious deeds
through the actualization of a zero-tolerance policy
concerning sexual abuse and exploitation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency for the month of August. My delegation
welcomes this opportunity to participate in this open
debate on women and peace and security, and wishes to
express our sincere appreciation to the delegation of
the United Kingdom for convening this debate. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2009/362) on the implementation of
resolution 1820 (2008) and for its presentation this
morning.
The genocide in Rwanda in 1994 witnessed some
of the most inhumane acts of violence targeted against
women and girls. As the Secretary-General’s report
correctly points out,
“for the first time in 1994, in the
circumstances of the case, the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) qualified
the crime of rape as a form of genocide”
(S/2009/362, para. 6).
The survivors of the genocide continue to live
with the consequences of these crimes 15 years on,
with very little or no specific assistance from the
international community. The perpetrators of these
heinous crimes, the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda (FDLR), have been central to regional
insecurity in the Great Lakes region since 1994 and
continue to pose a threat to ongoing peace efforts. I
would urge the international community to complement
the efforts of the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda to eliminate the
threat posed by the FDLR and to assist the survivors.
It is imperative that the culture of impunity that
has allowed for the continued perpetration of
systematic sexual violence in the Great Lakes region
and elsewhere be uprooted once and for all. My
Government, in collaboration with our Parliament, has
continued to strengthen the capacity of both the police
and the judiciary to effectively respond to any incident
of sexual violence. In this respect, we welcome the
recommendations set out in the Secretary-General’s
report to tackle impunity, and particularly concerning

09-44986

S/PV.6180 (Resumption 1)

the need for the United Nations system to deliver as
one to address sexual violence in all its forms.
The equal participation of women and men in the
promotion of peace and security in conflict and postconflict situations alike is integral to any
peacekeeping, peacemaking or peacebuilding process.
It is within this context that my Government has set out
to ensure that women are central to the political,
economic and social governance of our nation. Equally,
the participation of women in the maintenance of and
promotion of peace is essential, and Rwanda has
placed the prevention of sexual violence in situations
of armed conflict at the core of its peacekeeping
commitments. Sexual violence against women and girls
is considered by the Rwandan Defence Forces (RDF)
as a key component of the security threat in all its
deployments. In this respect, the Gender Desk at
Rwandan Defence Headquarters devises training
programmes with the support of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women and other United
Nations agencies to raise awareness of gender-based
violence and violence against women in the armed
forces.
Awareness and training on responding to genderbased violence and violence against women have now
been mainstreamed into the curriculum of all Rwanda’s
military schools and training institutions, and is

09-44986

integral to the preparation of all RDF battalions for
peacekeeping missions abroad. The participation of
Rwandan policewomen in peacekeeping missions in
the Sudan has further ensured that they raise awareness
among the population in support of their missions. We
would urge the United Nations system to strengthen
and maintain its support to Member States in this
respect.
My Government remains firmly committed to the
joint implementation of Security Council resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) and will continue to play
its role at the national, subregional, regional and global
levels to ensure that the scourge of sexual violence is
eliminated.
The President: I would like to say that we have
heard today many valuable and thought-provoking
views and suggestions on this subject of very grave
concern. All of these helpful contributions will inform
the work of the Council as it prepares a formal
response to the Secretary-General’s report over the
next few weeks.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

27
