S/2009/281

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 June 2009
Original: English

Letter dated 26 May 2009 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to write to you regarding the support to my Special Envoy
for the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA)-affected areas, Joaquim Alberto Chissano,
former President of Mozambique. As you will recall, in my letter to the President of
the Security Council dated 23 December 2008 (S/2008/826), I proposed, and
Members of the Security Council subsequently agreed, that the mandate of the
Office of my Special Envoy be extended for an additional year, until 31 December
2009, to allow my Special Envoy to continue his facilitation efforts aimed at
achieving durable peace in northern Uganda.
My Special Envoy has achieved the main objectives of the mandate I gave him
in December 2006. Under his facilitation and the mediation of the Government of
Southern Sudan, the delegation of the Government of Uganda and the
representatives of LRA to the Juba peace talks have successfully concluded their
negotiations with the signing of agreements on all substantive agenda items by
March 2008.
These included: (a) the agreement and annex on accountability and
reconciliation, which establishes the legal framework for accountability and
reconciliation mechanisms in the promotion of peace with justice in Uganda; (b) the
agreement and implementation protocol on comprehensive solutions, which covers
the strategic issues of rehabilitation, recovery and development of northern Uganda;
(c) the agreement on a permanent ceasefire; (d) the agreement on disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration; and (e) the agreement on a
monitoring mechanism and addendum to the cessation of hostilities agreement. The
delegation of the Government of Uganda and the representatives of LRA also
initialled the final peace agreement and agreed on an implementation schedule for it.
However, due to the failure of LRA leader Joseph Kony to honour his
commitments, the delegation of the Government of Uganda and the LRA
representatives are yet to sign the final peace agreement that they initialled. I concur
with my Special Envoy that the onus now lies firmly with Mr. Kony to take the last
step for peace and sign the final peace agreement, and that the Special Envoy has
already successfully completed his assignment with the signing of the
aforementioned substantive agreements.
After close consultations with my Special Envoy, it is, therefore, my intention
to suspend his assignment as of 30 June 2009. In this context, the office established
in Kampala to support his activities would close on 30 June 2009. Should a signing
09-35598 (E) 020609

*0935598*

S/2009/281

ceremony of the final peace agreement be arranged, my Special Envoy would attend
the gathering on my behalf.
In closing, I would like to reiterate my deep appreciation for the important
work my Special Envoy has accomplished in discharging the difficult mandate with
which he was entrusted on issues related to the northern Uganda peace process.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

2

09-35598
