United Nations

General Assembly

A/RES/58/10
Distr.: General
19 November 2003

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 27

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 5 November 2003
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/58/L.12 and Add.1)]

58/10. Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41/11 of 27 October 1986, in which it solemnly
declared the Atlantic Ocean, in the region between Africa and South America, a
zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic,
Recalling also its subsequent resolutions on the matter, including resolution
45/36 of 27 November 1990, in which it reaffirmed the determination of the States
of the zone to enhance and accelerate their cooperation in the political, economic,
scientific, cultural and other spheres,
Reaffirming the importance of the purposes and objectives of the zone of peace
and cooperation of the South Atlantic as a basis for the promotion of cooperation
among the countries of the region,
Reaffirming also that the questions of peace and security and those of
development are interrelated and inseparable and that cooperation for peace and
development among States of the region will promote the objectives of the zone of
peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic,
Recalling the agreement reached at the third meeting of the States members of
the zone, held in Brasilia on 21 and 22 September 1994, to encourage democracy
and political pluralism and, in accordance with the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on
25 June 1993, 1 to promote and defend all human rights and fundamental freedoms
and to cooperate towards the achievement of these goals,
Aware of the importance that the States of the zone attach to the protection of
the environment of the region, and recognizing the threat that pollution from any
source poses to the marine and coastal environment, its ecological balance and its
resources,

_______________
1

03 45351

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

A/RES/58/10

Welcoming the adoption of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects at the
United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, held in New York from 9 to 20 July 2001, 2
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General, submitted
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 56/7 of 21 November 2001, 3
1.
Calls upon all States to cooperate in the promotion of the objectives
established in the declaration of the zone of peace and cooperation of the South
Atlantic and to refrain from any action inconsistent with those objectives and with
the Charter of the United Nations and relevant resolutions of the Organization, in
particular actions that may create or aggravate situations of tension and potential
conflict in the region;
Notes with satisfaction the full entry into force of the Treaty for the
2.
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (Treaty of
Tlatelolco), 4 and also notes with satisfaction the progress towards the full entry into
force of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Pelindaba); 5
3.
Encourages all States, in particular the members of the zone of peace and
cooperation of the South Atlantic, to cooperate in promoting and strengthening
global, regional, subregional and national initiatives to prevent, combat and
eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons;
Commends regional efforts being undertaken by States members of the
4.
zone in support of the implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects,2 and calls upon them to keep up their efforts in this regard;
5.
Affirms the importance of the South Atlantic to global maritime and
commercial transactions, and its determination to preserve the region for all
peaceful purposes and activities protected by international law, in particular the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea; 6
6.
Views with concern the increase in drug trafficking and related crimes,
including drug abuse, and calls upon the international community and the States
members of the zone to promote regional and international cooperation to combat
all aspects of the problem of drugs and related offences;
Recognizes, in the light of the number, magnitude and complexity of
7.
natural disasters and other emergencies, the need to continue to strengthen the
coordination of humanitarian assistance by States members of the zone, so as to
ensure a timely and effective response;
Welcomes the offer by Benin to host the sixth meeting of the States
8.
members of the zone;

_______________
2

A/CONF.192/15, chap. IV, para. 24.
A/58/265.
4
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068.
5
See A/50/426, annex.
6
See The Law of the Sea: Official Texts of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of
10 December 1982 and of the Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 with Index and Excerpts from the Final Act of the
Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.97.V.10).
3

2

A/RES/58/10

9.
Requests the relevant organizations, organs and bodies of the United
Nations system to render all appropriate assistance that States members of the zone
may seek in their joint efforts to implement the declaration of the zone of peace and
cooperation of the South Atlantic;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the implementation of resolution
41/11 and subsequent resolutions on the matter under review and to submit a report
to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session, taking into account, inter alia, the
views expressed by Member States;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic”.
56th plenary meeting
5 November 2003

3
