UNITED NATIONS / NATIONS UNmS

SECURITY COUNCil
,OFFICIAL RECORDS
. FOURTH YEAR

No.49

453rd MEETING.L 25 OCTOBER 1949'
-4-53~m-cS""'--13AN-,CE-:2 -5O-CT-OB-RE-194-g.- .- -

.

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES·VERBAUX OfFICIELS
QUATRIEME ANNEE

LAKE SUCCESS. NEW YORK

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

FClur hundred and fifty-third meeting·

Quatre cent cinquante-troisieme seance

Page

1. Provisional agenda
'"
2. Adoption of the agenda ...•..........
'3. Demilitarization of the Jerusalem area,
with special reference to General Assembly resolution 194 (Ill), dated 11 December 1948

1
1

1

Pag6s

1. Ordre du jour provisoire
2. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
3. Demilitarisation de la region de Jerusalem, eu egard notamment a la resolution
194 (IIl) de l'Assemblee generale, en
date du 11 decembre 1948

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the texts of the meetirigs of the
Security Council are published in monthly supplements to the Official Records.
All United Nations documents are designated by symbols, i.e., capital letters
~"mbined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Les documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans. le texte
des seances du Consei1 de securite sont publies dans des supplements mensuels aux
Proces-verbaux officiels.
Les documents des Nations Unies portent tous 1J,ne cote, q·ui se compose de
lettres majuscules et de chiffres. La simp,le mention d'une cote dans un texte signifie
qu'il s'agit d'un document des Nations Unies.

.

1
1

1

po

NA'TIONS UNIES

UNn'ED NATIONS

SECURITY
COUNCIL

'CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS

FOURTH YEAR

No. 49

QUATRIEME ANNEE

No 49

FOUR HUNDRED AND FIFTY-THIRD
MEETING

QUATRECENT
CINQUANTE-TROI8IEME ,SEANCE

Held at Lake Success,New York,
on Tuesday, 25 October 1949, at 3 p.m.

Tenue a. Lake Success, New-York,
le mardi 25 octobre 1949, a15 heures.

President: Mr. Warren R. AUSTIN
(United States of Ameri~a).

. President: M. Warren R. AUSTIN
(Etats-Unis d'Amerique).

Presents: .Les repres~ntants des pays suivants.:
Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Argentina, Canada, China, C~ba, Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukrainian Sovi.et Social- France, Norvege, Republique socialiste sovietique
ist Republic, Unio!! of Soviet Socialist Republics, d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes 50United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 'vietiques, Royaume"-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et
d'Irlande du.Nord, Etats:'Unis -d'Amerique..
Ireland, United States of America.

1. Provisional agenda (8/Agenda .453)

'1. Ordre dn jour provisoire
(8/Agenda 453)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour~

2. Demilitarization of. the Jerusalem area, with
special reference to General Assembly resolution 194 (UI), dated 11 December 1948.

2. Demilitarisation de la region. de Jerusalem, eu
egard notamment a la resolution 194' (Ill) de
l'AssembIee general~, en date dU'11 decembre
1948.

2. Adoption of the agenda

2. Adoption de l~ordre du jour

'The agenda was adopted.

L'ordre du jour est adopte.

3. Demilitarization of the Jerusalem
area~ with special· reference to
General . Assenilily resolution 194
(HI) ~dated .11 December 1948

3. Demilitarisation de la regIOn de
Jerusalem~ eu egard notamment it
la resolution 194 (Ill) de l'Assemhlee generale~ en date du 11 dec'em~
hre 1948

The PlmSIDENT:· I. have' a. request in .proper
form from the rr;;presentative of Israel to be
allowed to participat~,' without the. right to vote,
in any discussion an this subject If there is no
objection,. I sha.l1invite him to take his place at
the Council table.

Le PRESIDENT (tradu# de l'anglais) :.]e suis
saisi d'une demande par laquel1e le representant
d'Israel sollicite officiellement d'et1'e admis a participer, sans droit de vote, a tout debat sur la
question. Sauf objection, je I'inviteraiaprendre
place a la table duConseil.
.

On the invitatiolitof the President, Mr. Eb~n,
representat-ive of Israel, took h1".s place at the
Security Cmmcil table.
.

Sur l'i1witation du President, M. Eban, t"cpresentant d'Israel, prend place ala table du Conseil
desecuriM.

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt): When, on
11 October 1949 [450th nteetis;,g}, upon the request
.of the delegation of Egypt,' the. 9uestion .• of the

Mahmoud FAwZI Bey (Egypte) (traduit de
l'anglais) : Lorsqtle, le 11 octobre 1949 [450eme
seance], Jaquestion de la demilitarisation de la

....
r.·'""'''_n

1IIli-'......,

demilitarization of the Jerusalem area was put
. on the agenda of the Security Council, ten months
had. passed since the General Assembly adopted
its resolution 194 (Ill) concerning this matter.
It is clear to all of us that during those ten
months-which have now become ten and onehalf months-the Security Council has done
Lothing in. connexion with the resolution of the
General Asse.1llbly in wis respect, namely, the
taking of further measures for the demilitarization of the Jerusalem area. The world-and particularly the Members ~! the United Nations-is
entitled to know the reasons for which the
SecurifyCouncil. has so far taken no measures in
this respect,and to enquire, on the other hand,
what the Security Council intends to do !egarding this very important matter of safeguarding
the Jerusalem area, a Inll-tter which also concerns
peace in a very important part of the Middle East.

region de Jerusalem a ete, a la demande de la
delegation d,e 1'Egypte, inscrite G. 1'ordre du jour
GU Conseil de securite, dix mois s'etaient ecoules
depuis le jour Oll l'Assemblee generale avait adopte
sur cette question la resolution 194 (Ill). Nul
d'entre nous n'ignore qu'au cours de ces dix mois
- ou plutot dix mois et demi, aujourd'hui -le
Conseil de securite n'a lien fait pour donner suite
a. la recommandation, que lui avait faite l'Assemblee generale, de prendre de nouveUes mesures
en vue d'assurer la demilitarisation de Jerusalem.
Le monde, et particulierement les Nations Dnies
ont le droit de connaitre les raisons pour les~
queUes le Cons~il de,securite n'a, jtisqu'ici, pris
aucune mesure a cet eg::trd et de demander,· ci'autre part, queUes sont les iqtentions .du Conseil
au sujet de cette quel3tion extremement importante
de la protection de la region de Jerusalem, question qui interesse egalement la paix dans une
region iIr-portante du Moyen-Orient.

-Before proceeding any further, I should like
to indicate that whatever I shall say on this
(juestion today or later during the Security
l;oundl's debate on it, will be' limited to the
htlecific question - we are dealing with, and will
"flat deal· with other matters: it will be limited,
that is, to the question of the demilitarization
of the Jerusalem area.

Avant d'aller plus loin, je tiens a. indiquer que
tout ce que je pourrai dire a ce sujet aujourd'hui
ou ulterieurement, durant les discussions qu'aura
le Conseil de securite sur cette question, se bornera au probleme tres precis dont nous .sommes
saisis et ne portera pas sur d'autres questions.:
je vetix dire que j e ne m'occuperai que de la seule
question de la demilitarisation de la region de
Jerusalem.

My delegation has been prompted to raise this
question, . not only because ten and one-half
months have elapsed since. the General Assembly
resolution was adopted, but also because we
wanted to explore, in co-operation with the other
members of the Security Council, the possibility
of taking action in this respect. Egypt has a triple
responsibility in this particular matter. It raises
the question in its capacities as a neighbour, as
an Arab country, and asa Member of the UniteCl
Nations, and of the Security Council particularly.
We have both the right and the duty; acting in
any of these capacities, to bring this matter before
the Security Council and to the attention of the
Members of the United Nations and of the whole
world.

Si ma delegation a pris 1'initiative de soulever
cette question, ce n'est pas ·seulement parce que
dix mois et demi se sont ecoules depuis l'adoption
de la resolution de l'AssembIee generale, mais
c'est aussi parce que nous voulons rechercher, en
collaboration avec les autres membres du Conseil
de securite, la possibilite. de prendre des mesures
a. cet egard. L'Egypte a une triple responsabilite
dans ·cette affaire .particuliere. EUe. pose la question en sa qualite d'Etat voisin, en sa qualite d'Etat
arabe et en sa qualite de Membre des Nations
Unies, plus particulierement de membre du Conseil de securite. C'estpour notrepays un droit
et un devoir a la fois, de soulever, a. ce triple titre,
la question devant le Conseil de securite et de la
signaler a. l'attention des Membres des Nations
Unles et du monde entier.

In addition, the Security Council will·be asked
En outre, l'Assemblee generale. va demander
by the General Assembly, probably within a short - probablement d'ici peu - au Conseilde secuperiod of time, what it has done with regard to rit~ ce qu'il a fait pour donner effet a la resolution·
resolution 194 (Ill) of 11 December 1948, and, 194 (Ill) du 11 decembre 1948 et"en particulier
in particular, to the second paragraph of section 8 au deuxieme paragraphe de la" section 8 de cette
of that resolution.
.resolution.

I should like to make myself clear on one
I1 est encore un point Sur lequel je tiens a pre. re~aining point. When I speak of "demilitari- ciser mon attitude. Lorsque je parte de "demilization", I 'do not have in mind a transient matter, tarisation", je ne songe pas a. quelque chose de
a passing phase; I· do not have in mind achieving· trimsitoire, a. une etape; je ne pense pas al'evena semblance of demilitarization, and then leaving tualife qui consisterait a proceder a un semblant
the matter there and allowing the process of . de demilitaiisation, pour ensuite s'en desinteresdemilitarization,-whatever it may· be-to ·be· com- ser et tolerer que les evenementsulterieurs de~
pletely. revoked and annulled by later events. mentent et annu'lent completement les mesures
When I speak of "demilitarization", I mean de- . (queUes qu'elles soient) qui auraient ete prises.
militarization that is real. and sustained.
Quand je parle de demilitarisation, je veux parter
d'une demilitarisation effective et durable.
Those are the remarks which I wished tQ make
at this stage.
The PRESIDENT: I· should now like to refer to
·the .parliamentary. situation in. which hie Security
Council finds itself in regard to this matter.

Telles sont lesobservations que je tenais a faire

a. ce stade de la discussion.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit .de f anglais) : .Il c?nviendrait maintenant que je precise la ,Sltu~t!O~
dans laquelle se trouve le Conseil de secUrlte a ,
cet egard, du point ·de vue de la proc€d~:...........I

No, question of substance is pending. The
remarks of the representative of Egypt contained
points relating to procedure--what has been done
and what is intended to be done.
.
Briefly stated, the report of the United Nations
Conciliation Commission for Palestine! is on the
agenda of the General Assembly. It will be discussed by the First Committee of the Assembly
v,·iihin a few weeks. It would therefore appear
inappropriate for the Security Council to ent{~r
at this time into a discussion of the substance of
the question of the demilitarization of Jerusalem,
which is a part, and only a part, of the broader
question which is on the agenda of the General
Assembly.
At present, the situation in Jerusalem has been
stabilized by the Jordan-Israel Armistice Agreement,2 which was noted with satisfaction by the
Security Council at its [437th] meeting of 11
August 1949. This Agreement provides, among
other L'lings, for a partial demilitarization of
Jerusalem and an armistice between the opposing
forces. The Security Council is now watching
and observing the situation. The armistice and the
Security Council's cease-fire <;>rders are being
faithfully observed by both parties. There is
therefore no threat to the peace or other situation which would call for Security Council action
now, and it probably would not do any good
to have a discussion in the Security Council now
on the substance of the matter.

It appears, therefore, that the appropriate thing
to do would be to postpone any further discussion
of this question indefinitely, and to let the item
be left on the list of questions of which the Council
is seized, pending the decision of the General
Assembly.

Il n'y a pas la de question de fond. Les observations du repr.esentant de l'Egypte portent sur
les points de procedure, a savoir sur ce qui a ete
fait ~t sur ce que 1'0n se propose de faire.
En brei, le rapport de la Commission de conciliation des Nations Unies pour la Palestine! est
a l'ordre du jour de l'AssembJee generale. Ce
rapport sera diseute a la Premiere Commission de
l'Assemblee d'id quelques semaines. Il semble
done inopportun que le Conseil de securite entame
actuellement la discussiOll sur le fond, de la question de la demilitarisation de Jerusalem, ,laque11e
est une partie - et une partie seulement - de la
question plus vaste qui est it::.scritea l'ordre du
jour de l'Assemblee generale.
Actuellement, la sitllation a Jerusalem se trpuve
stabilisee a la suite de l'accord d'armistice condu
entre Israel et la J ordanie2 , dont le Consell de
securite a pris acte avec satisfaction a sa [437eme]
seance, le 11 aout 1949. Cet accord prevoit. entre
autres choses, une demilitarisation" partielle de
Jerusalem et la cessation des hostilites entre les
forces adverses. ·Le Conseil de securite' surveille
et observe actuellement la situation. L'accord
d'armistice, ainsi que les or4res de cessez-le-feu
lances par le Conseil de securite sont actuellement
loyalement observes par les deux parties. 11 n'y
a done pas menace cantre la paix; it n'existe pas
non plus une situation qui exige pour le moment.
une decision du Conseil desecurite et il n'yaprobablement pas interet a ce que le Conseil de securite entame, a 'l'heure actuelle, une' discussion sur
le fond de la question.
It semble done qu'll convienne d'ajournersine
die le probleme, en le maintenant sur la liste des
questions dont est saisi le Conseil, en attendantla decision de l'Assemnlee generale.

Mahmoud FAwzI ,Bey (Egypt): In eonnexion , Mahmoud FAwzI Bey (Egypte) (traduit de
with the statement just made by the President, l'anglais) : A propos de la declaration que vient de
I should like respectfully to submit several points. faire le President, je tiens a presenter respectueu-I could' no~ help but notice Some contradictions- sement plusieuis (lbservat~ons. Je n'aipas pu ne
perhaps only apparent"":-between one part of this pas constater certaines contradictions ~'qui ne
statement and another'.
sont peut-etre qu'apparentes---'- entre les deux
parties de eette declaration.
On the one' hand, the President said that there
D'une part, ,le President a dit que le Conseil de
was no question of substance before'the Security securite n'etait pas saisi pour le moment d'une
Council now.' ,This I doubt. ,The President him- auestion de fond. C'est la une affirmation dont je
self said vario'Usthings which dealt with the doute. Le President lui-meme a mentionne divers
substance of the matter. In any case, when the points qui interessent le fond de la question. En
President said that we have merely a matter of tous cas, lorsque le President a dit que la quesprocedure before us and no, question of substance tion posee n'est qu'une question de procedure et
his point was not clear to me. I do not know non pas une question de fond, jen'ai pas bien
exactly what he meant by, saying that
have suivi sa pensee. Je ne comprends pas exactement
no question of substance before us. We have' ce qu'll veut dire quand il declare que nous ne
before us' the question of the demilitarization of sommes pas saisis d'une question de fonds. Ce
Jerusalem. I have no doubt about that, especially dont nous sommes saisis, c'est la q'Uestion de la
when I remember, the resolution of the General demilitarisation de 'Jerusalem. De cela, je ne doute
Assembly which, evenl before Iibrought the pas, surtout si je merappelle la resolution de
matter to the attention of the Security Council
l'Assemblee generale qui, avant meme que
was latently on our agenda. Theref~re, I should l'Egypte eut attire l'attention du ,Conseil de seeube grateful to the President· if he would clear my rite sur la question, figurait virtuellement anotre
mind as to this point.
ordre du jour. C'est pourquoi je serais reconnaissant au President de bien vouloir m'edairer sur
ce point.

we

Document A/992. .
'
• See Ojf~ciallRecords of theSecurit~ Council, fourth
year, Special Sltpplemmt No. 1: General Armistice'
Agreement between the Hashemite Jordan Ki,·ngdom
and Israel.
1

~.7.r.'1.'. .1IIliIlIIiIil_-.......-..

Voir 'le document A/992.
,
• Voir les Proces-verbau%' officiels du ConsciLd-e
securiU,. quatriemeannee, Supp15ment special No 1:
Convention generale d'a'1"mistice entre le Royaume ha·'
c'hemite de Jordanie et Israel.
1

Another point to which I cannot readily subIt est un autre point sur leque1 j e ne saurais
scribe is in connexion with the matter of sub- partager l'avis du President: c'est la question de
stan!;e which the President mentioned: that there fond qu'il a mentionnee, cl. savoir qu'il n'y aumit
is no menace to the peace. This might not be pas menace contre la paix. 11 est possible que telle
exactly the matter with which we are dealing ne soit pas exactement la question dont nous nous
at this preliminary smg: :>£ our debate on the occupons a. ce stade preliminaire de notre discusquestion, but that is a ve.. y important statement. 'sion, mais il y a la. une declaration tl'es imp(lI'I cannot subscribe to what the President said. I tante. J e ne puis donner mon accord a. ce que le
reserve the position of my delegation on this President a dit. Je reserve l'attitude de ma dele~
point, and I am waiting until I have heard further gation sur ce point et j'attendrais de plus amples
details, if the President desires to give them, in details, si le President desire en donner, a. propos
connexion with what he began by calling "'the de ce qu'il a d'abord appe1e "la situation du point
parliamentary situation".
de vue de la prl'Cedure".
The PRESIDENT: In response to the request of
the representative.of Egypt, I would say that the
President was speaking, in all that he said, only
of the parliamentary situation. There is no ques~
tion of substance pending in the Security Council
at this time. No proposal of any kind has been
presented to the Security Council, and there is
no issue of fact. That applies also to the other
point: that there is no menace to the peace. So
far as the SeC'Urity Council is aware, the wisest
thing ior the Security Council to do would be to
wait until there is such a complaint, if it comes
befbre the GeneraI Assembly makes its report;
but, if it does not, then to wait for ther~port of
the General Assembly.

As there are no other speakers on the list, I
shall ask whether there is any objection to
adjourning the further discussion of this· question
indefinitely and to leaving the item, pending the
discussion in the General Assembly, ~n the list
of matters of which the Security Council is seized.
Since I do riot hear any objection, I affirm that
we have unanimously agreed to that. Is there any
other matter before the Council?
'

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Pour re~
pondre a. la demande du representant de l'Egypte,
je tiens a. dire que le President, dans tout ce qu'il
a dit, parlait seulement de la situation au point
de vue de la procedure. ::"e Consei1 de securite,
pour le moment, n'est pas saisi- d'une question de
fond. Aucune proposition, queUe qu'eUe soit, n'a
ete presentee au Conseil de securite et il n'y a pas
de question de fait. Ce1a est vrai egalement de
l'autre point: a. savoir qu'il n'y a pas menace contre
la pai,,:,. Nous ne SOmmes saisis d'aucune resolution mentionnant la moindre situation de ce
genre., S'il s'en tient awe renseignements qu'il
possede, la sagesse voudrait que le Conseil de
securite attendit qu'une plainte en ce sens ait ete
presentee a. l'Assemblee generale, s'i1 en est presente avant que l'Assemblee generale ne. fasse son
rapport; mais si tel n'est pas le cas, mieux vaudrait attendre.le rapport de I'Assemblee generale.
Comme la Hste des orateurs est epuisee, je demande au Conseil si quelque representant voit
un inconvenient a. ce que la suite de la discussion
soit ajoumee sine die, l'aftaire restant inscrite a.
l'ordre du jour du Conseil de securite jusqu'a. ce
que l'Assemblee generale en connaisse.
. Puisqu'il n'y a pas d'objection, je declare que
le Conseil en a decide ainsi a. I'unanimite. Le
Conseil est-il saisi d'une autre question?

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt): I most respectMahmoudFAwzI Bey (Egypte) ttraduit de
fully would like to mention that I did not agree, l'anglais): Je tiens tres respectueusement a. ce .
although T did not raise any objection, seeeing the qu'il soit fait etat du fait que le n'ai pas donne
general feeling round this table. Therefore, may mon asseI!timent, bien que, par egard pour le
I respectfully submit that this fact be included sentiment general des membres ici presents, je
in the record c f this meeting of the Security n'aie pas formule d'objection. C'est pourquoi je
Council, w which baiy I have made my position demande respectueusement qu'il en sait fait etat
very dear and to which I have made equally .dans les proces-verbaux de la presente seance du
dear tbe concern of my ccuntry over this matter. Conseil de securite, devant lequel j'ai clairement .
expose mon attitude et auquel rai egalement fait
part de la preoccupation que la question inspire a
mon pays.
Le PRESIDENT (tr04uit de 1:anglais) : Si a~cun
The PRESIDENT: If there is no objection, the,
record will be as stated by the representative membre ne souleve . d~objection, le proces-verbal
sera redige de la fac;onindiquee par le represen;'
of Egypt. I have heard no objection.
tant de l'Egypte. Je n'ent~nds pas d'objection.
Je.propose l'ajournement de la seance; en l'abI &,uggest that our meeting now be adjourned.
There being no objection, the meeting is sence d'objection, la seance est levee.
adjourned.
The' meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

La seance est levie a15 h. 45.

--"""!!!"""-"''!!'"':==-=~''''='"-=-=:'-_

.._---' ._...._. ,.

SALES AGENTS OF THE UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICArlONS DES NATIONS UNIES
ARGENTINA-ARGENTINE
Editorial Sudamericana S.A.
Alsina 500
BUENOS AIRES
AUSTRALlA-AUSTRALlE
H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
SYDNEY, N. S. W.
BELGIUM-BELGIQUE
Agence et Messageries de la
Presse, S. A.
14-22 rue du PersiA
BRUXELLES
BOLlVIA-BOLlV~E

Libreria Cientifica y Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 972

La PAZ
CANADA
The Ryerson Press
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO
CHILe:...-CHILI
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846
SANTIAGO

CHINA.-CHINE
The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
SHANGHAI
COLOMBIA-COLOMBIE
Libreria Latina Ltda.
Apartado Aereo 4011
BOGOTA
COSTA RICA-COSTA-RICA
Trejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313
SAN JOSE
CUBA
La Casa Belga
Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LA HABANA
CZECHOSLOVAKiATCHECOSLOVAQUIE
F. Topic
Narodni Trida 9
PRAHA 1
DENMARK-DANEMARI<
Einar Munksgaard
NJ6rregade 6
KPBENHAVN
DOMINICAN REPUBLlC-oREPUBLlQUE DOMINICJ.\INE
Librerfa Dominicana
Calle ~ercedes No. 49
Apartado 656
CWDAD TRUJILLO
ECUADOR-EQUATEUR
Mufioz Hermanos y Cia.
Nueve de Octubre 703
Casilla 10·24
GUAYAQUIL
EGYfT-EGYPTE
Librairie "La Renaissance d'Egypte"
9 Sh. Adly Pasha

CAmo

FINLAND-FINLANDE
Akateeminen Ki:rjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI
FRANCfi
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Soufllot
PARIS, Ve
GREECE-GRECE
"Eleftheroudakis"
Librairie internationale
Place de la Constitution
ATHENES
GUATEMALA
Jose Goubaud
Goubaud & Cia. Ltda.
Sucesor
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA
HAITI
Max Bouchereau
Librairie "A la Caravelle"
BOlte postale Ill·B
PORT·AU·PRINCE
ICELAN[)-ISLANDE
llokaverzlun Sigfusar Eymundsonnar
Austurstreti 18
RE1.'lw\vue
,INDIA·~-INDE

Oxford Book & Stationery Company
Scindia House
NEW DELHI

IRAN
Bongahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
TEHERAN
IRAQ-IRAK
Mackenzie & Mackemrie
The Bookshop
BAGHDAD
LEBANON-LlBAN
Librairie universelle
BEYROUTH
.
LUXEMBOURG
Librairie 'J. Schummer
Place Guillaume
LUXEMBOURG
NETHERLANOS-PAYS·BAS
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff
Lange Voorhout 9
'S·GRAVENHAGE
NEW ZEALANDNOUVE(LE.ZELANDE
Gordon & Gotch, Ltd.
Waring Taylor Street
WELLINGTpN
United Nations Association of
New Zealand
P; O. lOll, G.P.O.
WELLINGTON

NICARAGUA
Ramiro Ramirez V.
Agencia de PuhIicaciones
MANAGUA, D. N.

ETHIOPIA-EVHIOPIE
Agence ethiopienne de pubIicite
P. O. Box 8
ADDIS-.ABEBA

NQJWAY-NORVEGE
JO~1an Grundt Tanum Forlag
Kr. Augustgt. 7A
QSLO

Printed in the U.S.A.

Price in ,the United StaJl:es: 10 cents

PERU-PEROU
Libreria internacionaI del Peru
I
S.A.
Casilla 1417
LIMA'
PHILIPPINES
D. P, Perez Co.
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN, RIZAL
POLAND-POLOGNE
Spotdzielna Wydawnicza
"Czytelnik"
38 Poznanska
WARSZAWA
SWEDEN-SUEDE
A.·B. C. E. Fritzes Kungl!
Hofbokhandal
Fredsgat8~ 2
STOCKH'3LM
SWITZERIAND-SUISSE
Librairie Payot S. A.
LAusANNE, GENEVE, VEVEY,
MONTREUX, NEUCHATEL,
BERNE, BASEL
Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
ZURICH!
SYRIA-SYRiE
Librairie universelle
DAMAS

TUl~:J~ie Wa~~'::~

469 istiklal Caddesi
BEYOGLU·IsTANBUL

k
r

' ~,

UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA- rUNION SUD·AFRICAINE
~
Central News Agency
Commissioner & Rissik Sts.:
JOHANNESBURG and at CAPETOWN..
andDu~AN
.

l

UNITED KINGDOM'"'"'[
ROYAUME·UNI
.
H. M. Stationery Office
P. O. Box 569
LONDON, S.E. 1
and at H.~{.S.O. Shops in
'.
LONDON, EDINBURGH, MANCHESTF~
CARDIFF, BEJ.FAST, BmMINGHAM 1'and BRISTOL
UNITED STATES OF AMERICAETATS·UNIS D'AMERIQUE
International Documents Service
Columbia University Press
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK 27, N. Y.
r. .

I

URUGUAY
OficIDa de Representaci6n de
Editoriales
Av. 18 de JuIio 1333 Esc. 1
MONTEVIDEO
VZSNEZUELA
Escritoria Perez Macnado
Conde a Pifiango 11
CARACAS

.10'

""','
~

YUGOSLAVIA-.YOUGOSLAVIE '
Drzavno Preduzece
II
J ugoslovenska Knjiga
Moskovska Ul. 36
.
BEOGRAD '
[49i
