IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

37/112. Convention on the Law of Treaties between
States and International Organizations or
between International Organizations
The General Assembly,
Recalling that, following consideration of a recommen­

dation adopted by the United Nations Conference on the
Law of Treaties, held at Vienna in 1968 and 1969, the
General Assembly, by its resolution 250 I (XXIV) of 12
November 1969, recommended that the International Law
Commission should study, in consultation with the principal
international organizations, as it may consider appropriate
in accordance with its practice, the question of treaties con­
cluded between States and international organizations or
between two or more international organizations, as an im­
portant question,
Noting that, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 36/
114 of 10 December 1981, the International Law Commis­
sion, taking into account the written comments of Govern­
ments and of principal international organizations as well
as views expressed in debates in the Assembly, completed
at its thirty-fourth session the second reading of the draft
articles on the said question, 41
Noting that, as reflected in paragraph 57 of the report of
the International Law Commission on the work of its thirty­
fourth session,42 the Commission decided to recommend
that the General Assembly should convoke a conference to
study the draft articles on the law of treaties between States
and international organizations or between international or­
ganizations prepared by the Commission and to conclude a
convention,
Recalling the adoption of the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties of 23 May 1969, 43 the Vienna Convention
on the Representation of States in Their Relations with In­
ternational Organizations of a Universal Character of 14
March 197544 and the Vienna Convention on Succession of
States in respect of Treaties of 23 August 1978,45
Mindful of Article 13, paragraph I a, of the Charter of
the United Nations, which provides that the General As­
sembly shall initiate studies and make recommendations for
the purpose of encouraging the progressive development of
international law and its codification,
Believing that the successful codification and progressive
development of the rules of international law governing
treaties between States and international organizations or
between international organizations would contribute to the
development of friendly relations and co-operation among
States, irrespective of their differing constitutional and so­
cial systems, and would assist in promoting and imple­
menting the purposes and principles set forth in Articles I
and 2 of the Charter,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the International Law
Commission for its valuable work on the law of treaties
between States and international organizations or between
international organizations and to the Special Rapporteur on
the topic for his contribution to this work;
•• Ibid., Supplement No. JO (A/37/IO), chap. II.
42
/bid., Supplement No. JO (A/37/IO).
43
Official Records of the United Nations Conference on the Law of
Treaties, Vienna, 26 March-24 May 1968 and 9 April-22 Mav /969 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.70.V.5), p. 287.
44
Official Records of the United Nations Conference on the Represen­
tation of Slates in Their Relations with International Or!(anizations, Vi­
enna, 4 FebrMry-/4 March /975, vol. II (United Nations publication.
Sales No. E.75.V.12), p. 207.
" Official Records of the United Nations Conference on Succession of
States in Respect of Treaties, Vienna, 4 April-6 May 1977 and 31 July23 August 1978, vol. Ill (United Nations publication, Sales No. E. 79. V. IO).
p. 185.

271

2. Invites States to submit, not later than I July I 983,
their written comments and observations on the final draft
articles on the law of treaties between States and interna­
tional organizations or between international organizations,
prepared by the International Law Commission, as well as
on the questions referred to in paragraph 60 of the report
of the Commission on the work of its thirty-fourth session;40
3. Invites also the principal international intergovern­
mental organizations to submit within the same period their
written comments and observations on the subject;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate such
comments so as to facilitate the discussion on the subject
at the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly;
5. Decides that an international convention shall be con­
cluded on the basis of the draft articles adopted by the
International Law Commission;
6. Takes note of the recommendation of the Interna­
tional Law Commission on the subject and agrees to decide
at its thirty-eighth session upon the appropriate forum for
the adoption of the convention in the light of the comments
received in accordance with the present resolution;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session an item entitled ''Convention on the
Law of Treaties between States and International Organi­
zations or between International Organizations''.

107th plenary meeting
16 December /982

37/113.

Report of the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Re­

lations with the Host Country, 46
Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Convention on Privileges and Immunities of
the United Nations47 and the Agreement between the United
Nations and the United States of America regarding the
Headquarters of the United Nations, 48
Recalling further that the problems related to the privi­
leges and immunities of all missions accredited to the United
Nations, their security and the safety of their personnel are
of great importance and concern to them, as well as the
primary responsibility of the host country,
Noting with deep concern the continued acts violating the
security of missions and the safety of the personnel of mis­
sions accredited to the United Nations,
Recognizing that effective measures should be taken by
the competent authorities of the host country, in particular
to prevent any acts violating the security of missions and
the safety of their personnel,
I . Endorses the recommendations of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country contained in paragraph 43
of its report;
2. Urges the host country to continue to take all nec­
essary measures effectively to ensure the protection, security
and safety of the missions accredited to the United Nations
and their personnel, including practicable measures to pro­
hibit illegal activities of persons, groups and organizations
that encourage, instigate, organize or engage in the per­
petration of acts against the security and safety of such
missions and representatives;
40
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Session.
Supplement No. 26 (N37/26)
47
Resolution 22 A (I).
•• Resolution 169 (II).
