S/2015/118

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 February 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan
(covering the period from 18 November 2014-10 February 2015)

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2187
(2014), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) until 30 May 2015 and requested that I report on the
implementation of the Mission’s mandate by no later than 16 February 2015. The
report provides an update to my previous report (S/2014/821), dated 18 November
2014, covering developments from that date to 10 February 2015.

II. Political developments
South Sudan peace process
2.
It will be recalled that at the sixth Summit of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) Heads of State and Government, held in Addis Ababa on
6 and 7 November 2014, the participants demanded that the Government of the
Republic of South Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army
(SPLM/A) in Opposition end all hostilities and, should the parties fail to do so,
threatened collective punitive action by the States of the IGAD region, including
sanctions and an arms embargo. The parties were further granted 15 days to consult
their respective constituencies on the core issues impeding progress in the
negotiations.
3.
The core outstanding issues included: the formula for power-sharing between
the Government of the Republic of South Sudan and SPLM/A in Opposition during
a transitional period leading to elections; the timing of the integration of armed
forces; and the timing of the consideration of federalism. The power-sharing
formula has been the most contentious issue.
4.
Government consultations were held in Juba on 24 November. On the issue of
power-sharing, the Government concluded that executive power during the
transition should remain with the President and his Vice-President, offering
SPLM/A in Opposition a position of Prime Minister without executive power. It
further recommended that the demobilization, disarmament and reintegration of
opposition forces be completed before the end of a pre-transition period of three
months, and that deliberations on a federal system of governance be held through
the constitution-making process during the transition.
15-01749 (E)

180215

*1501749*

S/2015/118

5.
SPLM/A in Opposition held consultations from 6 to 12 December in Pagak,
Upper Nile State. It concluded that an executive Prime Minister from SPLM/A in
Opposition should lead the transitional Government, with a ceremonial head of
state; that the Government and SPLM/A in Opposition should maintain separate
armies throughout the transitional period until the holding of elections; and that
South Sudan should be immediately reorganized as a federation of 21 States. The
positions of the two sides reflected some backtracking and hardening of previously
held negotiation positions, particularly with respect to power-sharing.
6.
On 18 December, the negotiation committees on leadership, security
arrangements, and economic, wealth sharing, and public finance management,
resumed talks in Addis Ababa, with limited results. The IGAD Special Envoys
adjourned the talks on 21 December in order to consult IGAD Heads of State and
Government and other partners in preparation for an IGAD Summit to be held in the
margins of the African Union Summit in January 2015.
7.
On 12 January, during a visit to Sudan, the Foreign Minister of China hosted a
meeting in Khartoum between the representatives of the Government of the
Republic of South Sudan and SPLM/A in Opposition. The parties agreed to a “Five
Point Plan”, which provided that they: (a) immediately work to stop hostilities;
(b) speed up the pace of negotiations towards a transitional government;
(c) implement all signed agreements in good faith; (d) take concrete steps to relieve
the humanitarian situation in conflict-affected areas; and (e) ensure the safety of
personnel and assets of international entities operating in South Sudan.
8.
From 9 to 19 January, a second round of the intra-SPLM party dialogue was
convened in Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania, facilitated by the ruling party of
the country, Chama Cha Mapinduzi. On 21 January, in the presence of regional
leaders, including the Presidents of the United Republic of Tanzania, Kenya and
Uganda, and the Deputy President of South Africa, President Kiir, Riek Machar and
Deng Alor Kuol signed an Agreement on the Reunification of SPLM. Under the
agreement, the parties agreed: to uphold the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement and
to use the intra-SPLM party dialogue and IGAD mediation process to conclude a
peace agreement; to reform and transform SPLM, including through promoting
tolerance and political pluralism; and to implement a programme for national unity,
peace, reconciliation, justice and accountability.
9.
From 28 to 31 January, President Kiir and Riek Machar met in Addis Ababa
for direct negotiations, particularly on the issue of power-sharing. While the
consultations failed to deliver an agreement, on 1 February, the two leaders signed a
document entitled “Areas of Agreement on the Establishment of the Transitional
Government of National Unity in the Republic of South Sudan”. The document
recommits the parties to previously signed agreements, including the Cessation of
Hostilities Agreement of 23 January 2014 and its implementation matrix, and, in an
annex, outlines areas of agreement and disagreement on the way forward. In
particular, the document confirms the parties’ agreement to establish a transitional
government by 9 July 2015 for a period of 30 months and to resolve all outstanding
issues, including on power-sharing, by no later than 5 March.
10. Concurrently, on the margins of the African Union summit, the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union held its 484th meeting, on 29 January, at the
level of Heads of State and Government, on the situation in South Sudan. The
African Union Commission of Inquiry on South Sudan concluded its investigations

2/18

15-01749

S/2015/118

in September and presented its report to the Chair of the African Union
Commission, Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, in November of 2014. The Chairperson of
the Commission of Inquiry, former Nigerian President Olusegun Obasanjo, was
scheduled to present the Commission’s report to the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union on 29 January. In the communiqué of the meeting, the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union noted the completion of the Commission’s
work and decided to defer the consideration of its report to a later date. In addition,
the Peace and Security Council reiterated its call on the parties to the conflict in
South Sudan to recommit to the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement and to negotiate
in good faith and without preconditions to establish a transitional government of
national unity before the end of the 24th Ordinary Session of the African Union
Assembly of Heads of State and Government on 31 January. The Peace and Security
Council of the African Union also reiterated its determination to impose sanctions
against all parties that continue to undermine the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement
and obstruct the political process.
Other political developments
11. During the reporting period, the Government affirmed its intention to proceed
with general elections on 30 June 2015 if the parties did not reach a peace
agreement before that time. On 1 December, the National Elections Commission and
political parties met in Juba to consult on the 2015 electoral calendar and party
registration processes. At that time, 15 political parties issued a letter to the
Chairperson of the National Elections Commission, expressing concern that the
situation in the country was not conducive for the conduct of credible elections.
Subsequently, on 23 December, the Council of Ministers approved a budget of
1.5 billion South Sudanese Pounds ($517 million) for the conduct of elections. On
22 January, an alliance of opposition political parties filed a lawsuit in the Supreme
Court against the National Elections Commission seeking to invalidate the
declaration of the date for the elections, because it violates a number of provisions
in the 2011 Transitional Constitution and the 2012 National Elections Act. On
5 February, the Government declared the Political Parties Council formally opened,
requiring political parties to register within a 90-day period, in accordance with the
2012 Political Parties Act.
12. According to media reports, on 21 December, Riek Machar announced the
establishment of a parallel Government in Opposition, abolishing the current system
of 10 states and replacing it with 21 states under a federal system. Since that time,
he has appointed several Governors to the new federal states and named a
six-member General Chiefs of Staff command with 12 commanders for newly
created military regions.
13. Since my latest report, the operationalization of the Greater Pibor
Administrative Area in Jonglei State has made no tangible progress. The budget
approved by the Government in October 2014 has not been released, and the
demarcation of the borders of the Greater Pibor Administrative Area has not yet
commenced. Nevertheless, with regard to the disarmament of the South Sudan
Democratic Movement/South Sudan Defence Army (SSDM/SSDA)-Cobra faction,
led by David Yau Yau, on 27 January, the armed group released the first group of
249 of an expected 3,000 children identified for reintegration (see para. 51 below).

15-01749

3/18

S/2015/118

III. Security situation
A.

Security developments
14. Despite their repeated pledges to end the fighting, the two parties continued
sporadic military engagements in Jonglei, Unity and Upper Nile States. On
6 February, the IGAD Monitoring and Verification Mechanism released the latest
summary of violations of the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement, totalling
26 violations since its deployment on 1 April 2014. Ten of the violations were
attributed to SPLA and 12 to SPLM/A in Opposition, while four were attributed to
both parties.
Upper Nile State
15. The security situation remained volatile during the reporting period, with
repeated clashes between SPLA and SPLM/A in Opposition forces, particularly in
Nassir and Renk counties. Fighting between armed youth aligned with the
Opposition and SPLA occurred on 20 November and 10 December, and on several
occasions between 29 December and 3 January, particularly in and around Nassir.
On 3 January, SPLA repulsed the armed youth to Kedbek, east of Nassir. The SPLA
took control of Kedbek on 12 January.
16. On 20 November, SPLM/A in Opposition reportedly attacked an area
40 kilometres south of Renk town, but were repulsed by SPLA. On 10 December,
17 and 26 January, SPLM/A in Opposition briefly took control of villages in
northern Renk County, near the border with Sudan, before withdrawing. On 18 and
19 January, UNMISS heard shelling between SPLM/A in Opposition-held areas in
Manyo County and Renk town, which remains under SPLA control. In Maban
County, clashes between SPLA and SPLM/A in Opposition occurred on
24 November and on 8 and 9 January. Tensions also rose in Maban County in early
January between SPLA and the Maban Defence Force (a local pro-SPLA armed
group) reportedly owing to the latter’s reluctance to integrate into SPLA, with the
Maban Defence Force commanders and senior officers replaced with SPLA
commanders. The Maban Defence Force also clashed with Opposition forces in
southern Maban County on 24 January. On 19 and 23 December, exchanges of
shellfire were reported in Panyikang County. The situation in Ulang and Baliet
counties remained tense.
Unity State
17. Major tensions continued in areas north and south of the state capital, Bentiu,
with skirmishes concentrated around the oilfields in Unity State and in Pariang
County. On 18 November, the SPLA regained control of the oilfields in Unity,
27 kilometres north of Bentiu in Rubkona County, which had been contested since
mid-September. In early January 2015, however, SPLA and SPLM/A in Opposition
forces reportedly exchanged fire around the oilfields in Unity State. Fighting also
reportedly occurred south and south-east of Bentiu in Guit and Rubkona counties
between 6 and 12 January. On 21 and 22 January, clashes were reported in Pariang
County, with SPLA repulsing the Opposition northwards. On 30 January, UNMISS
received reports of clashes between SPLA and SPLM/A in Opposition near the
border between Mayom and Rubkona counties, west of Bentiu.

4/18

15-01749

S/2015/118

Jonglei State
18. SPLA and SPLM/A in Opposition clashed in Fangak and Pigi counties in the
north-western part of Jonglei State between 27 November and 10 December and
again on 19 and 23 December, resulting in the reported displacement of thousands
of civilians. Each party controls parts of Pigi County, with SPLA reportedly in
control of New Fangak, in Fangak County.
Western Bahr el-Ghazal State
19. The situation in Raga County has been tense throughout the reporting period.
Reports indicate that in early January, approximately 30 Nuer soldiers deserted from
SPLA at Boro Medina and Raga towns in Raga County. The group has been blamed
for four ambushes that took place between 15 and 25 January, resulting, inter alia, in
the injury of the Raga County Commissioner and up to 11 people killed.
Eastern Equatoria State
20. Tensions briefly rose in mid-December following the defection of SPLA
Commander Major General Martin Kenyi, an ethnic Maadi from the Nimule area,
and claims were made that Kenyi and forces loyal to him were responsible for an
ambush of two trucks on the Juba-Nimule road on 15 December. On 21 December,
Riek Machar appointed Martin Kenyi as SPLM/A in Opposition’s Deputy Chief of
Staff for Moral Orientation and the commander of SPLM/A in Opposition’s “Eastern
Equatoria Forces”. In January, SPLA and personnel of the National Security
Services detained Maadi and Acholi youth in Pageri, Magwi County, on suspicion of
sympathizing with Kenyi and SPLM/A in Opposition.
Intercommunal conflict
21. The onset of the dry season contributed to an escalation in intercommunal
violence, particularly in Lakes State and the Equatorias. In Lakes State,
intercommunal conflict between Dinka-Agar subsections continued, despite efforts
at the national and State levels to stem the violence. In the most significant incident
of intercommunal fighting, in Rumbek East on 27 December, up to 48 people were
killed. Government efforts to transition law enforcement responsibility in the State
back to the national police from SPLA, which was deployed as a temporary
mitigation measure to strengthen the weak presence of the national police in the
State, have had limited success. Moreover, the State-sponsored civilian disarmament
campaign is yet to take place amidst a continuing influx of weapons.
22. In Eastern Equatoria State, a cattle raid in Torit County on 6 December left
28 people dead. On 19 January, conflict between the Bari and Mundari tribes in Juba
County, Central Equatoria State, over cattle grazing on Bari farms, resulted in
11 people killed and Bari homes destroyed. Meanwhile, in Western Equatoria State,
the influx of Dinka pastoralists from Lakes and Jonglei states displaced local
farmers from the eastern counties.

B.

Regional dimensions of the conflict
23. Regional involvement in the conflict continued during the reporting period
with the presence of a number of non-South Sudanese militia groups in the border

15-01749

5/18

S/2015/118

areas between Sudan and South Sudan (Western Bahr el-Ghazal, Unity and Upper
Nile States), including cadres belonging to SPLM-North, Justice and Equality
Movement and Sudan Liberation Army factions. In December, media outlets
reported a warning from the National Security Director of Sudan, that, if required,
the Government would pursue Sudanese armed groups into South Sudanese
territory. On 30 December, an unidentified aircraft, reported by local authorities to
be a Sudan Armed Forces aircraft, bombed Deim Jalab in Raga County. Seven
civilians were killed and two others were injured. In the meantime, the Ugandan
Peoples Defence Force remains deployed in South Sudan, particularly in Bor and
Juba, in support of the Government. On 3 February, Uganda and the Government of
the Republic of South Sudan signed an agreement to extend Uganda’s military
presence for a further four months.

IV. Humanitarian situation
24. Persistent insecurity continued to cause displacement, heightened risk of
disease and disruption of livelihoods. As of 4 February, 1.5 million people had been
internally displaced. According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), South Sudanese continue to flee to
neighbouring countries, bringing the total number of South Sudanese refugees to
nearly 500,000 since the crisis began. Approximately 112,900 internally displaced
persons are also sheltered in UNMISS bases, up from 100,000 reported during the
last reporting period. Aid agencies have reached 4.9 million people, exceeding the
3.8 million people targeted in 2014. The full needs of those assisted have yet to be
met.
25. Owing to continuing displacement and insecurity, crop planting in crisisaffected states is lower than usual. This will have an impact on overall food
production and will lead to faster stock depletion. From January to March 2015,
some 2.5 million are likely to face severe food insecurity. This situation is expected
to deteriorate until July. While the majority of affected people are in Jonglei, Unity
and Upper Nile States, approximately 1 million food insecure people are outside
conflict areas, half of them in Lakes and Northern Bahr el-Ghazal States. The
conflict has also caused unprecedented displacement of millions of cattle from
conflict-affected areas into areas of mostly agricultural lands in Greater Equatoria,
Greater Bahr el-Ghazal, and north-eastern Upper Nile State. This, in turn, has
affected local power structures, the availability of natural resources, and livestock
disease patterns. Malnutrition rates of children under the age of 5 are already at
critical or serious levels, with global acute malnutrition levels above 15 per cent.
Around 235,000 children remain at risk of severe acute malnutrition in conflictaffected areas of Jonglei, Unity and Upper Nile States as well as high burden areas
of Northern Bahr el-Ghazal and Warrap States. In 2014, over 93,204 children under
the age of 5 were reached with treatment for severe acute malnutrition across the
country.
26. Viral leishmaniasis disease remained a concern, as it reached its seasonal peak.
As of 4 February, a total of 8,543 cases and 229 deaths had been reported, with
figures for the first five weeks of 2015 higher than those in the same period in 2014.
Children between the ages of 5 and 17 were disproportionately affected. HIV/AIDS
was among the leading cause of mortality among displaced persons, owing mainly
to disrupted treatment or limited access to health care. Partners continued to combat

6/18

15-01749

S/2015/118

disease with an integrated campaign targeting children under 5 years of age. In
round three of the National Immunization Days completed in November, 2.4 million
children were vaccinated against polio and 1.7 million against measles, mostly in
non-conflict-affected States. A Short Interval Additional Dose campaign is now
ongoing in the conflict-affected States of Jonglei, Unity and Upper Nile, with
trivalent oral polio vaccine targeting 2.5 million children up to 15 years of age for
each round of the campaign.
27. The Crisis Response Plan for 2014 was 78 per cent funded as of 4 February,
with more than $1.4 billion secured out of the requirement of $1.8 billion. The
humanitarian community has now launched the Humanitarian Response Plan for
2015, appealing for $1.8 billion to reach 4.1 million people with assistance. Of this
amount, $600 million is required by the end of February to take advantage of the
current dry season, during which aid agencies can pre-position supplies to deliver
lifesaving and livelihood assistance later in the year when roads again become
impassable. The South Sudan Common Humanitarian Fund has allocated
$60 million to aid agencies to kick-start the 2015 response.
28. Active hostilities and insecurity, especially in the greater Upper Nile region, as
well as continued insecurity in large parts of Lakes State, did at times disrupt
humanitarian response activities and restrict road and air access for humanitarian
agencies. Violence against aid workers, facilities and assets were registered. Seven
humanitarian staff members were detained for approximately two weeks when they
landed at Juba International Airport in December, coming from an area controlled
by SPLM/A in Opposition. One humanitarian worker was detained in territory
controlled by SPLM/A in Opposition and released later on the same day. There were
at least 13 cases of robbery and looting during the reporting period, with unknown
actors responsible, likely linked to a rise in common criminality.

V. Implementation of the Mission’s reprioritized
mandated tasks
A.

Protection of civilians
29. UNMISS continues to pursue a three-tiered strategy to protect civilians. Under
the first tier, protection through conflict resolution, UNMISS continued to promote
locally owned interventions to address intercommunal violence. In this regard, in
December, UNMISS assisted authorities and traditional leaders in Lakes State to
address intercommunal violence between Dinka clans, including through the
provision of advice on the identification of 1,500 youth tasked to mitigate tensions
within their communities by identifying perpetrators of crime and dissuading cattle
camp youth from engaging in raiding activity. Also in December, in the Greater
Pibor Administrative Area, UNMISS conducted conflict resolution workshops to
assist traditional and youth leaders in preventing conflict between Murle and
Lou-Nuer youth in Jonglei State. In Western Equatoria State, UNMISS facilitated
the organization of a state peace conference between indigenous farmers and
migrant pastoralists. The conference resulted in the signing of an agreement on
17 January that provides for the return of migrant pastoralists to their home states
by 9 February, under SPLA guard. During the reporting period, UNMISS
implemented 42 community-based workshops across the 10 states of South Sudan

15-01749

7/18

S/2015/118

that provided assistance to 1,575 civilians in the development of conflict
management skills and in the prevention and mitigation of disputes.
30. Under tier two, provision of physical protection to civilians under imminent
threat of violence, UNMISS continued to provide protection to about 112,900
internally displaced persons at seven protection of civilians sites, including over
53,000 in Bentiu, 35,000 in Juba and 21,000 in Malakal. While some internally
displaced persons have left the protection of civilians sites, insecurity resulted in
new influxes into the sites in some areas.
31. Intercommunal tensions, a growing number of community leadership
struggles, increased youth radicalization, the use of alcohol and drugs, as well as
threats against humanitarian service providers continue to pose serious challenges in
many of the UNMISS protection of civilians sites. Of particular concern is the high
incidence of use by women and adolescent girls of unsafe traditional methods to
terminate unwanted pregnancies.
32. A total of 364 security incidents were recorded in the UNMISS protection of
civilians sites during the reporting period, with theft, assault, disorderly conduct and
fighting the most prevalent. Between 25 and 30 incidents were related to sexual,
gender-based and domestic violence, including rape. UNMISS and humanitarian
actors assisted the victims with access to health and psychological services.
UNMISS police worked to identify, locate and detain the perpetrators. During
search operations, UNMISS police seized prohibited items, including firearms,
machetes, knives, and drugs and alcohol, in violation of rules established for the
security and safety of the protection sites. While the Mission has taken additional
measures to enhance safety and optimize the response to insecurity in the sites,
addressing the underlying causes and reducing the potential for conflict remains
challenging.
33. Holding facilities for the temporary isolation of those suspected of committing
serious crimes remained operational in Juba, Bor, Bentiu and Malakal. Since the
establishment of the holding facilities in May 2014, a total of 856 offenders have
been temporarily detained. Most of the offenses are being handled under
community-led informal mitigation and dispute resolution mechanisms. In isolated
instances, offenders were expelled from the protection sites. UNMISS continues to
engage the Ministry of Justice on mutually acceptable modalities between the
Mission and the Government on the handover of those suspected of committing
serious crimes to national authorities for criminal prosecution. The absence of a
commonly agreed framework on the transfer of suspects to national authorities
poses considerable challenges to the Mission’s ability to operate the holding
facilities in accordance with international standards.
34. UNMISS continued to deter violence against civilians beyond UNMISS
premises. The Mission deterred threats to communities through the targeted use of
short- and long-range, integrated, and dismounted patrols and proactive community
engagement. To increase its impact beyond UNMISS bases and ensure unimpeded
and quick access to critical population centres, the Mission is assessing options for
the establishment of forward operating bases in the towns of Bentiu, Malakal and
Bor. In Lakes State, the Mission continued efforts to mitigate intercommunal
violence, including through Human Rights Due Diligence Process cleared support to
the national police, and proactive deployment of UNMISS military personnel.

8/18

15-01749

S/2015/118

35. Despite those efforts, the Mission continued to observe a lack of free and safe
movement for internally displaced persons, including harassment by SPLA,
SPLM/A in Opposition and national police personnel. Incidents of sexual and
gender-based violence near UNMISS protection sites are reportedly often
perpetrated by men in uniform. For example, in December, in a village located near
the protection site in Bentiu, Unity State, three women were reportedly raped by
three SPLA soldiers while they were on the way to collect firewood. Similarly, a
13-year-old girl was reportedly raped by SPLA soldiers in Pakur, Unity State.
UNMISS is currently investigating those reports.
36. Under tier two, UNMISS has begun to provide technical support, in line with
the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy, to a pilot initiative by the Inspector
General of Police aimed at improving the security environment in selected
neighbourhoods in Juba to facilitate voluntary returns of internally displaced
persons from UNMISS protection of civilians sites. To this end, national police
officers are being selected for redeployment and vetting; locations for sensitization
training are being identified; sensitization material, including on community
policing, sexual and gender-based violence, and international humanitarian law, is
being prepared; and the first police station funded by UNMISS (under quick-impact
projects) was handed over to the national police.
37. Outside of Juba, UNMISS police conducted 98 vehicle patrols in several
locations, visited camps for internally displaced persons located outside of UNMISS
bases and resumed routine interaction with national police in several less affected
states to foster a secure environment to encourage voluntary returns. The United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and UNMISS are providing support to
the national police in the vetting of personnel to carry out protection-focused tasks.
In Juba, the Emergency Call Centre, which is supported by UNDP and is aimed at
promoting public safety and security, received 1,867 calls (including 29 that were
related to cases of sexual and gender-based violence) between 18 November and
31 December 2014. Meanwhile, at the community level, UNDP supported 14 Police
Community Relation Committee meetings in Central Equatoria, Eastern Equatoria,
Western Bahr el-Ghazal and Northern Bahr el-Ghazal states to encourage
community involvement in addressing local security issues and support police in
their efforts to protect civilians. The meetings resulted in the establishment of
neighbourhood watch campaigns and the involvement of tribal chiefs in promoting
security in their areas.
38. The United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) provided critical
assistance to protect civilians from the threat of explosive remnants of war and
unsafe and unsecured weapons. UNMAS conducted weapons and ammunition
destruction activities in Bentiu, Bor, Juba, Malakal, Nassir, and Wau. A total of
273 small arms and light weapons were destroyed, along with 18,937 rounds of
ammunition and other weapons. UNMAS increased survey, clearance, and risk
education activities with the deployment of 15 additional mine action teams.
Despite notable progress in the removal of explosive remnants of war, two new
caches of anti-personnel mines as well as man-portable air defence systems and
anti-tank mines were identified in the Bentiu area. In coordination with local
military authorities, UNMAS destroyed the anti-personnel mines as well as the
man-portable air defence systems, anti-tank mines, and other explosive remnants of
war. In total, UNMAS released 2,597,835 square metres of safe land, and destroyed
435 landmines, 5,894 items of unexploded ordnance and 60,592 items of small arms

15-01749

9/18

S/2015/118

ammunition, assessed 600 kilometres of roads, and provided risk education to
50,460 civilians in the period from 18 November 2014 to 31 January 2015.
39. Under tier three, UNMISS and the United Nations country team continued to
engage the parties and other protection stakeholders, such as the IGAD Monitoring
and Verification Mechanism, in the creation of a protective environment that
enhances the safety and supports the rights of civilians, including through advocacy
for adherence to the rule of law and to human rights and international humanitarian
law.
40. UNMISS and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) provided support to local counterparts to
review priorities identified during a national peace forum in 2012, in support of the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security and subsequent related resolutions adopted by the Security Council.
The review highlighted: the high incidence of cases of sexual and gender-based
violence; the insufficiency of access to justice for victims; and the low prosecution
rates in South Sudan for perpetrators of crime. In this connection, the review team
welcomed the completion of the National Action Plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), which will be launched on 8 March, International Women’s
Day. During the 16 Days of Activism against Gender-Based Violence in December
2014, UNMISS, in collaboration with several partners, conducted awareness-raising
activities on sexual and gender-based violence, targeting internally displaced
persons, local communities, civil society and the media, among others.
41. As part of a comprehensive strategy towards the formulation of sustainable
solutions for displaced persons in protection of civilians sites, UNMISS and
humanitarian partners are currently assessing the security and viability for return
locations identified by internally displaced persons during a biometric registration
process completed last year. Upon the completion of this assessment, internally
displaced persons will be offered transportation to those locations. All departures
from UNMISS protection sites will be on a voluntary basis.

B.

Human rights monitoring and reporting
42. On 19 December, UNMISS released a public human rights report on its
investigation into the attack on 29 October 2014 against Bentiu and Rubkona in
Unity State. Preliminarily findings indicate that at least 11 civilians were killed,
including two women and a child, and that several women were raped by
Opposition forces during the attack. On 9 January, UNMISS released a human rights
report detailing investigations into attacks on civilians in Bentiu and Bor in April
2014. The report found reasonable grounds to believe that at least 19 civilians were
killed at the Bentiu Civil Hospital and that approximately 287 civilians were killed
in the Kalibalek mosque by Opposition forces when they temporarily gained control
of Bentiu on 15 April 2014. The report also concluded that at least 47 civilians were
killed when a mob attacked the UNMISS protection of civilians site outside of Bor
two days later, and that in both attacks, victims were deliberately targeted on the
basis of ethnicity, nationality or perceived support for one of the parties to the
conflict. The report concluded that those attacks could amount to war crimes.
Nearly nine months after the attacks took place, no one has been held accountable.

10/18

15-01749

S/2015/118

43. Investigations of alleged violations and abuses of human rights and
humanitarian law continue in several areas of the country. UNMISS is investigating
reports of an attack by SPLA on a group of traders at Tharwangiyel in Unity State
on 12 December in which several people were killed. Allegations of shelling,
resulting in civilian deaths and displacement and destruction of property, were also
reported in the New Fangak area of Jonglei State. Continued hostilities, however,
have made verification difficult.
44. Intercommunal violence continued to have a negative impact on the human
rights situation, particularly in Lakes and Eastern Equatoria States. Two members of
the State Legislative Assembly in Lakes State have remained in detention since
24 October, for allegedly assisting armed youth to resist Government efforts to
separate two local communities to reduce violence. The detainees have not been
charged with a crime or granted access to legal counsel. In Eastern Equatoria State,
national police prevented UNMISS from conducting an investigation and
interviewing detainees associated with an incident of intercommunal violence that
occurred on 6 December in Torit County, in which several civilians were killed,
including women and children. Reports received by UNMISS indicate that security
forces responding to the incident had committed human rights violations, including
the looting of property and acts of sexual violence against women.
45. Significant challenges persist concerning the administration of justice in
accordance with international human rights standards. Cases of proxy detention,
prolonged detention, detention based on actions not amounting to crimes, and
detention on orders of customary courts lacking authority to do so, continued to be
reported. In a few cases, the intervention of UNMISS led to the release of some
detained individuals, such as in Aweil East County, Northern Bahr el-Ghazal State,
where the county judge ordered the release of 25 inmates, including three women,
detained on orders of customary courts.
46. Acts of intimidation, harassment and threats against media and journalists by
agents of the National Security Services have continued to be reported. Allegedly,
on several occasions, members of the National Security Services attempted to
interfere with the content of local newspapers in Juba. In an incident on
16 December, the National Security Services reportedly confiscated 2,500 copies of
the Nation Mirror from a distribution centre in Juba, owing to the inclusion of
information about and photographs of figures of SPLM/A in Opposition. On
22 December, for similar reasons, the content of the newspaper was again
questioned by officials of the National Security Services. Thereafter, on 9 January,
the newspaper was temporarily closed, reportedly by personnel of the National
Security Services. The paper resumed operations on 13 January. Yet another incident
allegedly occurred on 16 January when the Juba Monitor received threats after the
publication of two articles that were deemed to be critical of the Government. The
National Security Services reportedly granted the newspaper a reprieve after
receiving an apology for printing the articles in question. On 3 February, personnel
of the National Security Services again ordered the closure of the Nation Mirror,
alleging that it issued “anti-government publications”, in relation to a reported
misprint in an article published on 28 January, discussing skirmishes in Renk
County, Upper Nile State, which suggested that SPLA had withdrawn from Renk.
47. No major accountability measures appear to have been taken by national
actors with regard to alleged violations of human rights and humanitarian law

15-01749

11/18

S/2015/118

committed during the conflict. In December, senior officials of the Presidential
Committee on Human Rights Abuses informed UNMISS that it had submitted a
report on its investigations to the President. In addition, a national police
investigation committee had also submitted its investigation reports to the
Presidential Committee for consideration. SPLA reported on 17 December that
41 soldiers had been disciplined, including one who had been sentenced to death for
murder, in connection with violations committed in December 2013 and January
2014. The majority of those disciplinary measures comprised dismissals for
desertion, while the death sentence for murder involved the ethnically motivated
killing of a soldier by a fellow soldier.
48. With regard to the development of a legal framework supporting the promotion
and protection of human rights, on 16 December, President Kiir returned the
National Security Service Bill to the National Legislative Assembly for further
amendment. Concerns were cited regarding the bill’s compatibility with the
Transitional Constitution of South Sudan (2011) and the Penal Code Act (2008). The
bill also appears to fall short of several international standards, including on
procedural safeguards surrounding detention.
49. During the reporting period, members of the Country Task Force on the
Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism on grave violations committed against
children by all parties to the conflict, including the recruitment and use of children,
recorded a total of 46 incidents, affecting 859 children (534 boys and 325 girls). Of
the 46 incidents, 12 were verified, affecting 659 children (349 boys and 310 girls).
50. At present, 33 schools in South Sudan are being used for military purposes;
the United Nations continues to advocate at various levels for the armed actors to
vacate the schools. Meanwhile, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and
implementing partners identified and registered 128 unaccompanied children, who
are now receiving family tracing and reunification services. Since the outbreak of
the conflict, a total of 7,116 children have been registered as either unaccompanied,
separated or missing, 658 of whom have been reunited with their families. Since
mid-December, more than 140,000 children have been reached with child-specific
protection services.
51. On 5 December, the National Disarmament Demobilization and Reintegration
Commission, with support from UNICEF, organized a workshop for representatives
of the Government and the SSDM/SSDA-Cobra faction, which resulted in the
signing of a memorandum of understanding on the release and reintegration of the
approximately 3,000 children associated with the former armed group. On
27 January 2014, the first group of 249 boys were released in Gumuruk. Families of
227 of those children have so far been traced, while the rest have been placed under
interim care pending family tracing and reunification. Further release of children is
expected prior to the integration of the SSDA-Cobra faction troops into SPLA.

C.

Creating the conditions for delivery of humanitarian assistance
52. UNMISS continued to carry out a broad range of activities to create the
conditions for the delivery of humanitarian assistance. In order to improve living
and security conditions at UNMISS protection sites, the Mission has invested
substantial engineering capacity and financial resources to the enhancement of
existing sites and the construction of new ones, complementing the extensive

12/18

15-01749

S/2015/118

investment by humanitarian partners and the donor community. By 24 December, all
internally displaced persons in the UNMISS Tomping site in Juba (approximately
20,000 people) had moved voluntarily to the new protection site near UN House in
Juba. In the Malakal protection site, nearly 15,000 persons were relocated to areas
with improved conditions, while construction work to further extend the new site
(scheduled to be completed by the end of February), will accommodate the
remaining internally displaced. While insecurity and the lack of financial and
engineering resources impeded the construction of a new site in Bentiu, the
necessary drainage works and expansion of the site will be carried out during the
dry season.
53. The distribution of humanitarian assistance within protection sites proceeded
effectively, with a few exceptions. Intercommunal tensions in the UNMISS
protection of civilians site in Malakal, including violent attempts by internally
displaced youth to block humanitarian assistance to specific ethnic groups,
temporarily disrupted the delivery of humanitarian services in mid-November. From
late November to 2 February, the World Food Programme (WFP) suspended food
distribution at one of the three protection sites in Juba after humanitarian staff were
assaulted. In Bentiu, the biometric registration of all 53,000 internally displaced
people in the protection site, which provides the basis for the delivery of services,
was concluded.
54. In Unity State, UNMAS cleared and destroyed explosive remnants of war near
the Rubkona Airstrip, which serves during the rainy season as the sole logistics
point for aid deliveries to internally displaced persons in the UNMISS protection
site in Bentiu. Survey and clearance of the Rubkona-Pariang roads allowed for the
more efficient transport of aid. Similarly, the completion of road reconnaissance
operations along the Malakal-Baliet and the Malakal-Melut roads in Upper Nile
State will permit UNMISS and humanitarian partners to deliver aid by road.

D.

Supporting the implementation of the cessation of
hostilities agreement
55. UNMISS continued to provide support to the IGAD Monitoring and
Verification Mechanism, notably with force protection and transport for verification
activities in Renk, Maban and Baliet counties in Upper Nile State, helicopter
landing site reconnaissance in Jamam, Upper Nile State, and Pajut, Jonglei State,
and medical evacuation exercises to promote the safety of Monitoring and
Verification Teams. UNMISS also continued to provide fixed security and
accommodation to the IGAD Monitoring and Verification Mechanism Teams in
UNMISS compounds in Jonglei, Upper Nile, and Unity states.

VI. Mission staffing and status of deployment of surge capacity
56. As at 3 February, UNMISS troop strength stood at 10,470 military personnel
of the total authorized strength of 12,500. Of the remaining 2,030 to be deployed,
286 additional military personnel of the Kenyan battalion are to be deployed during
March. Deployment of the battalion from China commenced in January and is
expected to be completed by March. The additional 400 troops for the Ghanaian
battalion are expected to be deployed by the middle of March, and the riverine unit

15-01749

13/18

S/2015/118

from Bangladesh is expected to be deployed by late May. With regard to air assets,
the three military utility helicopters from Sri Lanka are expected to deploy in the
beginning of March. The arrival dates of the five tactical armed helicopters from
Rwanda and Ethiopia are still to be confirmed.
57. As of 3 February, UNMISS police strength stood at 1,036 of the authorized
1,323 officers, including 607 individual police officers and 429 in formed police
units. The Mission will reach its full capacity of formed police unit personnel
between February and March with the deployment of the three formed police units
from Ghana, Nepal and Rwanda.
58. The 2014 civilian staffing review resulted in the reduction of 386 posts
associated with tasks that ceased to exist following the revision of the mandate
under Security Council resolution 2155 (2014). The General Assembly, in its
resolution 69/260, abolished a further 24 posts, mainly in the area of mission
support. This brings the total number of abolished posts in UNMISS during the year
2014 to 410. As of 3 February, the actual strength of the civilian personnel of
UNMISS stood at 2,331, including 781 international staff members, 1,146 national
staff members and 404 United Nations Volunteers.
59. UNMISS continued risk assessment and awareness raising activities with a
view to enforcing the United Nations policy of zero tolerance towards sexual
exploitation and abuse; prohibition against discrimination, harassment, sexual
harassment and abuse of authority; and ensuring accountability.

VII. Violations of the status-of-forces agreement, international
humanitarian law and security of United Nations staff
60. During the reporting period, UNMISS registered a total of 39 violations of the
status-of-forces agreement, involving staff members, associated personnel, premises
and equipment of UNMISS. Of the 39 incidents, 20 were related to restrictions of
movement, affecting land, air and riverine operations. Other violations included the
impound of United Nations vehicles; threats to personnel and/or premises;
harassment, assault, and arrest and detention of UNMISS personnel. Of particular
concern is the fact that 38 of the reported violations of the status-of-forces
agreement were perpetrated by Government security forces, in particular SPLA and
national security personnel. The deployment of contingent-owned equipment
suffered severe delays following importation restrictions at the border and
subsequent impound of UNMISS vehicles and equipment. This had a specific
impact on the deployment of the Ethiopian and Kenyan contingents and resulted in
severe contractual financial penalties, which by mid-January had amounted to
$800,000.
61. The three national staff members who were arrested in August and October of
2014 remain in the custody of the National Security Services in Juba. While
UNMISS has regular access to the detainees and is monitoring their well-being, the
Government has yet to notify the Mission of the outcome of investigations or of the
charges levied against them.
62. The UNMISS national independent contractor, abducted on 10 October while
working at the UNMISS air terminal in Malakal, Upper Nile State, as well as a staff
member of a United Nations agency who was abducted from Malakal airport on

14/18

15-01749

S/2015/118

16 October, both of Nuer ethnicity, remain missing. An UNMISS internal
investigation report has recently found that elements of the former Shilluk militia
group led by Major General Johnson Olony was responsible for the abduction of the
UNMISS independent contractor. However, Major General Olony has denied the
allegation. All other efforts by UNMISS to ascertain the fate or whereabouts of the
abducted independent contractor have failed to achieve any result.
63. UNMISS continued to formally notify the Government on a regular basis of
these violations through notes verbales and meetings with senior government
officials. The monthly matrix of incidents is also shared with the Government.
Despite those efforts, the Government has not revealed to the Mission the outcome
of any of the investigations it has committed to undertake.

VIII. Financial aspects
64. The General Assembly, by its resolution 69/260, appropriated the amount of
$1,097,315,100 for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015. As at 10 February
2015, unpaid assessed contributions to the UNMISS Special Account amount to
$479.1 million. Total outstanding assessed contributions for all peacekeeping
operations at the same date amount to $2,735.2 million. As at 10 February 2015,
reimbursement of troop-contributing governments for troop and contingent-owned
equipment costs has been made for the period to 31 August 2014 and 30 June 2014,
respectively, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

IX. Observations and recommendations
65. Over one year into the conflict in South Sudan, and despite the efforts and
demands of the international community, the Government and SPLM/A in
Opposition continue to engage in hostilities on the ground, while making little
meaningful progress towards a political resolution of the crisis. Developments on
the ground are increasingly worrisome, with all signs indicating that both parties to
the conflict have not given up the military option. There is a risk that armed conflict
could intensify, especially around the oil fields, as well as spread, particularly to the
Greater Bahr el-Ghazal and the Equatorias, which have not been directly affected by
the conflict, as each side seeks to consolidate and strengthen its position at the
negotiating table. The impact on the economy of the continuing conflict is seriously
weakening the social fabric of South Sudan. Moreover, increasing involvement of
regional players and the potential of the conflict to spill across borders cannot be
discounted. I appeal, once again, to both parties to stop the violence immediately
and to implement fully the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement. Every additional day
of fighting further exacerbates the indescribable conditions faced by the people of
South Sudan.
66. I wish to thank all international peace partners, including the IGAD mediators,
IGAD Heads of State, the Troika States, China, the United Republic of Tanzania,
South Africa, the African Union, and the European Union for their sustained efforts
to keep the parties engaged in peaceful dialogue. The Chinese-led initiative on
12 January, in Khartoum, to bring the warring factions together to forge a common
objective of bringing peace to South Sudan was encouraging. The Agreement on the
Reunification of SPLM by the three factions on 21 January 2015, in Arusha, United

15-01749

15/18

S/2015/118

Republic of Tanzania, is also a positive step. It was my hope that those initiatives
would have generated the momentum and created the political space for the
leadership of South Sudan to conclude a peace agreement during the IGAD Summit,
which was to be held in the margins of the African Union Summit. Regrettably,
South Sudan’s leaders wasted yet another opportunity to make peace. Nevertheless,
their public acknowledgment, on 1 February, of areas of agreement with respect to
the establishment of a transitional government of national unity, and their
commitment to resolve all outstanding issues, including power-sharing, by no later
than 5 March, and begin a transitional phase of governance by 9 July, provides hope
for the long sought resolution of the conflict. I call on President Kiir and Riek
Machar not to miss another opportunity to bring peace to South Sudan.
67. As I have said repeatedly, the primary responsibility for resolving the conflict
in South Sudan rests with its leaders. I urge the parties to spare no effort and make
the necessary compromises to conclude a peace agreement that addresses the root
causes of the crisis. The agreement must provide a foundation for badly needed
national, political, security and economic reform, justice and accountability, and
reconciliation and healing to rebuild their fledgling nation, which has been torn
apart by this conflict. The international community must also seriously reflect on its
responsibilities. Now is the time for the international community to act with one
voice and impress upon the leaders of South Sudan that they can no longer hold the
fate of the country hostage to their personal ambitions and that there are
consequences for those who continue to undermine the peace effort.
68. I urge the parties to the conflict, in particular the Government, which has the
primary responsibility to protect civilians, to establish a secure environment for
civilians and create the conditions necessary for the voluntary return of internally
displaced persons. I also renew my earlier calls for troop-contributing countries to
expeditiously deploy the remaining surge capabilities and military equipment, which
are critical to enable UNMISS to conduct its mandated tasks effectively.
69. For peace to be sustainable in South Sudan, it is crucial that the perpetrators of
human rights violations and abuses during the conflict are held accountable.
However, as I have noted in the present and previous reports, there has been little in
the way of national accountability measures for human rights violations committed
to date. Peace and justice are not mutually exclusive. I therefore urge the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union to urgently consider the report of the African
Union Commission of Inquiry on South Sudan and its recommendations. In the
meantime, in accordance with the Security Council’s request for accountability in its
resolution 2178 (2014), I have asked the Secretariat to develop possible options for
the establishment of criminal accountability and transitional justice processes for
South Sudan, based on past experiences, to address the gravity and scope of the
serious human rights atrocities committed in the country since the beginning of the
crisis.
70. I am increasingly disturbed by the continued access challenges faced by
humanitarian and peacekeeping personnel, as well as the insecurity and violence,
including harassment, threats, physical assault, arrest, detention and abductions,
they face while carrying out their duties. I am deeply concerned by the abduction
and disappearance of an UNMISS independent contractor and a staff member of a
United Nations agency, and the continued arbitrary detention of three national staff

16/18

15-01749

S/2015/118

members of UNMISS. I call on the Government to ensure their immediate release
without harm.
71. In November and December, UNMISS faced increased restrictions imposed by
the Government on the importation and movement of essential contingent-owned
equipment belonging to its troop contributors. I remind the parties that such
impediments on UNMISS and humanitarian personnel hinder the Mission’s ability
to implement its mandate and carry out vital humanitarian and protection related
operations. I reiterate my call to both sides to ensure unfettered freedom of
movement and humanitarian access for UNMISS and humanitarian workers and to
remove all restrictions that undermine their ability to implement their mandates.
72. Finally, I wish to express my sincere appreciation for the courage and sacrifice
of UNMISS personnel, who, under the able leadership of my Special
Representative, Ellen Margrethe Løj, continue to work to protect tens of thousands
of civilians under threat of physical violence and stabilize the security situation. In
particular, I thank the troop- and police-contributing countries that have provided
much-needed uniformed personnel and assets to the Mission. I also commend the
personnel of the United Nations country team and non-governmental organization
partners for their tireless efforts to provide much needed humanitarian assistance to
the population, under often arduous and dangerous conditions.

15-01749

17/18

S/2015/118

18/18

15-01749
