UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR
th
MEETING:

29 JULY

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2384)

. ,.. ., ,. ... .,... .. .... ., .... .. ..... ..

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . , . . , . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . , . .
The situation in the Middle East:
(N) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162);
(0) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent Representatives of Egypt
and France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1.5316) . . . . . . . . . . . , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . *. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

SiPV.2384

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI. . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~~pplcments of the Qfficial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement
in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1’964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Secwity Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

Held in New York on Thursday,
Pwsidcnt:

Mr. Noel G. SINCLAIR

(Guyana).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, IJnion of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Provisional
I.

Adoption

29 July 1982, at 12 noon

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Pakistan in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

agenda (S/Agenda/2384)

of the agenda

2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15162);
(h) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent
Representatives of Egypt and France to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/15316)

3. The PRESIDENT:
The Council is resuming consideration of this item today in response to the request
contained in the letter dated 28 July from the representatives of Egypt and France to the President of
the Council [S//.53/6].

Adoption of the agenda
4. Members of the Council have before them document S/ 1.5317, which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by Egypt and France.
The situation in the Middle East:
(0) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162);
lb) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent
Representatives of Egypt and France to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Cuuncil (S/15316)

5. I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/15274,
containing the text of a letter dated 5 July from the
representative of Cuba to the President of the Council;
S/15276, containing the text of a letter dated 2 July
from the representative of Brazil to the SecretaryGeneral; S/15284, containing the text of a letter dated
10 July from the representative of China to the Secretary-General; S/15288, containing the text of a letter
dated 12 July from the representative of Pakistan to
the Secretary-General;
S/ 15294, containing the text of a
letter dated 8 July from the representative of Seychelles
to the Secretary-General:
S/ 15297, containing the text
of a letter dated 15 July from the representative of
China to the Secretary-General:
S/15299, containing
the text of a letter dated 16 July from the representative of Jordan to the Secretary-General;
S/15300, containing the text of a letter dated 16 July from the representative of Lebanon
to the Secretary-General;
S/15302, containing the text of a letter dated 20 July
from the representative of Ethiopia to the Secretary-

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken at previous meetings on this item [2374t1?,
2375th trnd 2377th meetings], I invite the representatives of Lebanon and Israel to take places at the
Council table; I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a place at
the Council table; I invite the representative of Egypt
to take the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber,

1

General; S/15308, containing the text of a letter dated
26 July from the representative of Jordan to the President of the Council; S/15309, containing the text of a
letter dated 26 July from the representative of Lebanon to the Secretary-General:
S/15310, containing
the text of a letter dated 26 July from the representative of Lebanon to the President of the Council:
5115312, containing the text of a letter dated 23 July
from the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the Secretary-General:
and S/l 53 18,
containing the text of a letter dated 28 July from the
representative
of Jordan to the President of the
Council,
6. The first speaker is the representative
upon whom I now call.
7.

I I. Since 25 June, we have unfortunately l~~i~d~no
progress towards peace. The threat of an attack.
preceded by the most lethal bombardments, continuci
to hang over besieged west Beirut. The French Government rejects such an eventuality with horror.
12. While paying a tribute to those who have becfl
striving to bring about a dialogue that could lead to
a loosening of the noose of fire and iron that is SWW
gling Beirut, France believes it to be its duty to appeal
once again to the Council.
13. On 2 July, the representative of Egypt and 1 sub
mitted to our colleagues in the Council, through yr3U0
Mr. President, a working document designed to Noel
both the immediate concerns arising out of the proiong&ion and worsening of the siege of Beirut and the
need, above and beyond those concerns, to deal
with the substance of the problem: Beirut, Lebanon
and the Middle East will know no peace so lot% ibs
the principles from which any solution to the prexcnt
crisis must be derived are not set forth and :lgrced
upon.

of France,

Mr.

de La BARRE
de NANTEUIL
(France)
.fi~)rn French): Since 2 June, Lebanon
has been subjected to an invasion that was immediately condemned by the French Government and by
the international
community.
From the outset, that
condemnation was tied to a demand for the withdrawal
of Israeli forces from all Lebanese territory and fol
the restoration of the independence, integrity, unity
and sovereignty of Lebanon.

(intcrprctntion

14. Today, the continuation
of tragic confrotW
tion and of a situation which, if it continues, may well
lead to an impasse, has led us to take one further ~tCp.
France, determined to bring about the subst;Lnti\‘e
debate the present crisis demands and in full itgrcement with Egypt, wishes to submit offici,ally to the
Council the draft resolution contained in documr:nt
S/l53 17. I must point out in this respect that the French
text before you contains a mistake in section A, pamgraph 6. It should read “to ensure” rather than “TV

8. In its resolutions 508 ( 1982), SO9( 1982),5 I I ( I982),
512 (1982) and 513 (19821, the Council expressed
similar concerns: it called for a cease-fire, for the
withdrawal of Israeli troops to the internationally
recognized boundaries between Israel and Lebanon
and for the belligerents to protect the rights and property of civilians, in accordance with the international
rules laid down at the Hague in 1907’ and at Geneva
in 1949.’

assume”.

9. Fragile cease-fires have of course been established, but they have most often been honoured in the
breach. The city of Beirut has very frequently been
bombed, without any distinction being made between
civilian and military targets.

15. It will be noted that the text is the same ilS thd
issued earlier as an unofficial working documellt.
in
fact, we consider that the impetus behind the FrenchEgyptian approach on 2 July remains fully valid and
that it can therefore help to direct the Council’s thinking
along positives lines.

IO. It was to spare the civilian populations of Beirut
further intolerable suffering that the President of the
French Republic, on 24 June, made a solemn appeal
to the combatants to observe the requirements of the
cease-fire. At that time, Mr. Fransois Mitterrand
stated the need for a disengagement “between all the
forces now in action in west Beirut and on its periphery and for the Lebanese army to be allowed to interpose itself, with the backing, if the legitimate Government so desires, of a force constituted under the
auspices of the Security Council.” On 25 June, those
ideas were set forth in a draft resolution sponsored
by France [s//52.S.S//?~~.2], but in spite of a near
unanimity of votes in favour, the Council was unable
to adopt it [.VCJC>
2381st mrrtinayj. We remain convinced, however, that that dc ,firc.tcl neutralization
of
Beirut constituted not only the most obvious way to
spare many human lives, but also the first step towards
a broader settlement in the interests of Lebanon and of
peace in the area.

16. I should draw attention to the fact that the ot’ganization of the draft resolution that has been submitted
is based on the relationship to be established betwccn
the disengagement of forces that now confront
cash
other in and around Beirut and the establishment
of
conditions of justice, security and peaceful coexistence for all the peoples and States of the r-e&>n:
this concerns the Palestinian and well as the IsI-acli
and Lebanese peoples.
17. We believe that a disengagement in Beirut cannot
be achieved without a recognition of the pL>fitical
dimension of the problems and, therefore, \NithOklt
;~n
assurance of political discussions. We believe
;tlso
that this political approach is the indispensable
condition for the success of a disengagement tihat would
be of benefit to all involved, and especially fol- L.chanon.

2

18. In our opinion, there is an intimate and basic
relationship between sections A and C of the draft
submitted to the Council.

more willingly because our primary concern is to make
it possible for the legitimate authority of the Lebanese
Government in its own land to be restored. Needless
to say, I have made sure of the agreement of my Egyptian colleague on all these points before stating the
general direction of our thinking.

19. In section A of our draft. we demand the immediate disengagement
of the fighting forces in west
Beirut, and in section B request the use of United
Nations observers and a prospective United Nations
force. This, of course, is only a necessary and indeed
obligatory step towards the restoration of Lebanon’s
independence,
sovereignty and territorial
integrity
through the withdrawal of all non-Lebanese forces
located in that country. unless their presence is authorized by the legitimate Lebanese Government.

24. We know that in this part, as well as in other
parts. of our text, different language has been or will
be suggested by one delegation or another. We shall
consider those suggestions with an open mind, as long
as they do not change the meaning of a draft resolution which, we know, has been encouraged by many
Middle
Eastern and European
countries,
which
reflects the hopes of peoples whose existence is
threatened and which has no goal other than security,
justice and peace.

20. Lebanese integration cannot be restored without
the initiation
of the process of a negotiated settlement
to the Palestinian problem. In section C, the draft resolution submitted to the Council therefore attempts to
set forth the principles that should underlie such a
negotiation:
the reference to resolution 242 (1967)
indicates that the Council maintains its condemnation of the acquisition of territory by war and states
the right of all States in the region to existence and
security, as well as “their right to live in peace within
secure and recognized boundaries free from threats
Or acts of force”.
The draft resolution further provides for recognition of the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people, including its right to self-determination, and, consequently, for the association of the
PLO in the negotiations to which the draft resolution
refers. Finally, it calls for mutual and simultaneous
recognition of the parties concerned.

25. We do not ask that the Council begin today a
d&ailed consideration of the draft resolution we have
submitted. We ask only-but
to this we attach importance-that
this meeting provide all Council members
with the opportunity to become more keenly aware of
what we consider to be the essential relationship
between the search for :I solution to the immediate
problem of Beirut and the search for a direction on
the fundamental
problems whose persistence has
brought about the present crisis. We ask that this
meeting provide al! Council members with the opportunity to become more keenly aware of the relationship
between the solution of military problems and that
of political
problems,
between the acceptance of
concessions on the military level and the definition
of prospects on the political level. It is the task of the
Council to define the principles of a settlement. Our
draft resolution and, today, 0111’ exchange of views
ure aimed at bringing out the fundamental elements
which must be part of any settlement.

to make
21. It will be for the Secretary-General
proposals to the Council so as to initiate the negotiating process, the general direction of which I have
just pointed out.
22. If one is determined to respect the Charter of
the United Nations, particularly
Article 2, which
condemns the use of force, one must be convinced
that there will be no disengagement in Beirut-apart
from a few fragile lulls-and that there will be no peace
for the Lebanese people, the Palestinian people or the
Israeli people if the settlement of the crisis with
which we are dealing is not viewed in a political perspective.

26. Thus, WC should be very happy for all those who
wish to speak at this meeting to express their feelings
on the general direction of our draft resolution: we hope
that they will be willing to support the effort which
has given rise to it.

23. In this connection, the Council has before it a
proposal. It is not drafted perfectly. We realize, fol
example, that section A of our text is contingent on
many things and that the formulations made several
weeks ago should be amended to take account of
developments and of the situation on the ground, The
representative of Lebanon, among others, has proposed that certain adjustments be made precisely
because of those developments.
I can assure him
-and other delegations which have made commentsthat we are ready to accept their very interesting
suggestions, provided that they do not water down
our text. I say this to my Lebanese colleague a!! the

28. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): Sir, I should like
to take this opportunity
to congratulate you on your’
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of July, at a crucial juncture of events which
have a considerable bearing on international
peace
and security. I should like also to convey, through
you, to the people and the Government of Guyana the
greetings of the Egyptian people and Government
and their best wishes for progress and prosperity.

27. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Egypt. 1 invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

29. I wish also to seize this occasion to express my
delegation’s appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Luc
dc La Bnrrc de Nanteuil. of France. who carried out
3

his mandate as President
an excellent manner.

of the Council last month in

region to existence and security, to territorial integrity and sovereignty, and particularly
the national
legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination and to statehood in the West Bank and
the Gaza Strip. That stand is based on the fact that the
Palestinian question is the core and crux of the Middle
East problem and that no lasting and comlprehcnsivz
solution of it could be attained without a just seltle
ment for the Palestinian question in all its aspects.
The dispersion of the Palestinians could never be an
antidote for the problem unless it were done within
the framework of a comprehensive
settlement
of
their question.

30. I do not propose to add to what we all know about
the Middle East problem except to reaffirm what has
become a universal outcry, a unanimous stand and a
world-wide consensus: that the problem of the Middle
East will continue to defy settlement unless and until
a just solution to the Palestinian question has been
achieved.
31, The serious situation we are facing in Lebanon
is a case in point. It is a situation which has arisen
from the continued Israeli denial of the rights of the
Palestinian people, on the one hand, and the aggression committed
by Israel against the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of Lebanon, on the other.

36. Well-grounded
instruments
that c<ould help
achieve peace in the Middle East are Council rcsulutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). In this context. Egypt
re-emphasizes the validity of these resolutions in th
unrelenting work towards a comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the Middle East question. The significance of these resolutions emanates from the essence
of the international
principles
embodied
therein.
particularly the principles of the inadmissibility
of the
acquisition of territory by war, the right of all Stfttes
of the region to live in peace and security within their
recognized international boundaries and the resolving
of disputes through peaceful means. These principles’
constitute a pathfinder for the achievement of il jusl.
and comprehensive peace in the Middle E.ast. These
resolutions
should, however, be read within
the
context of the purposes and principles of the Chnrter
of the IJnited Nations which provide for the right 0f
all peoples to self-determination
ahd fundamental
human rights and freedom.

32. Egypt, the first-or
let me say the only-Arab
country to recognize Israel and maintain normal
relations with it, cannot be accused of unfairness to
Israel, since Egypt has recognized all the rights to
which Israel is entitled under the prevailing political
order. And it is from this position that we rise up with
all vigour against all of Israel’s policies in the area.
We reject totally and unconditionally
the Israeli invasion of Lebanon with all its consequences. We likewise reject Israeli policies and measures against the
Palestinian people and against the PLO.
33. It is inconceivable to us-as it must be to every
member of the Council-that
the tension-ravaged
situation in Lebanon can have been dragging on for
several weeks without a solution, There should be
limits on how long this situation can prevail and can
remain in no way conducive to advancing the cause of
peace in the Middle East. We must share the conviction that peace in Lebanon can be attained only through
respect for its territorial
integrity, sovereignty and
political independence.
That can never be realized
without the complete withdrawal of all Israeli forces
from all Lebanese territory.

37. In this context, we are gratified to note that in the
25th of this month a new development emerged when
the Chairman of the Executive Committee of the PI.0
signed a document accepting United Nations wsofUtions relevant to the Palestinian question.
Indeed.
this marked a new turn in the long-standing posit ion of
the PLO towards Israel, a step that should be received
with encouragement and support.

34. Aware of the gravity of this situation, a number
of peace-loving countries have embarked on all-out
initiatives to bring to an end this harrowing situation
which seriously threatens the prospects of peace and
security in the Middle East,

38. In the light of this positive initiative by Chairman
Arafat, the simultaneous mutual recognition
of the
rights of both Israel and the Palestinian
shoufd be
energetically
promoted. Such a step should be enhanced by a parallel direct dialogue to be initiated
between the United States and the Palestinians.

35. Egypt, for its part, cannot but support all efforts
aimed at defusing the current situation while at the
same time giving due consideration to the wider situation involving the prospects of a durable peace in the
Middle East. From the standpoint of its regional responsibilities,
and out of its inherent conviction that
peace is indivisible,
Egypt, together with France,
has embarked on a new initiative to help achieve a just,
lasting and comprehensive
peaceful settlement not
only for the extremely pressing crisis of Lebanon but
for the ever-chronic Middle East problem, a settlement
fulfilling the rights of all States and peoples of the

39. Both elements-mutual
recognition between the
two parties and Israel’s recognition of the right of the
Palestinians
to self-determination-must
be &a11
with as an integral package deal. Thus, both elements
should be implemented simultaneously.
40. The French-Egyptian
initiative
presents
u set
of internationally
recognized principles asi a g:r-uund
basis for establishing a-just., lasting and com;prehcnsive
peace in the Middle East. It offers a starting-paint
to
open wide avenues for further consultations
and con4

tacts between all parties concerned,
achieving peace in the Middle East.

with a view to

46. In section C. the draft resolution deals with the
question of Palestine; it calls for the initiation of a
durable restoration of peace and security in the region
within the framework of negotiations based on the
principles of security and justice for all States and
peoples of the Middle East in order to reaffirm the right
of all States in the region to live in peace and security
in accordance with Security Council resolution 242
(1967) and, equally, to reaffirm the legitimate national
rights of the Palestinian people, including their right to
self-determination,
with all its implications,
on the
understanding
that the Palestinian people shall be
represented in the negotiations and, consequently, the
PLO shall participate therein. It also calls for mutual
and simultaneous recognition of the parties concerned,
and emphasizes the necessity of pursuing political
means to achieve the aforementioned objectives with
the aim of recognition of and respect for the existence
and security of all the States and peoples of the region.

41, The joint draft resolution contained in document S/ 153 17, which I also have the privilege to introduce to the Council, was initiated jointly by the Governments of Egypt and France. This draft resolution
deals substantially with the three main elements that
could well serve as a foundation for putting an end
to the appalling situation in Lebanon as well as in the
Middle East as a whole.
42. Under its preambular paragraph, the draft resolution, guided by the purposes and principles of the
Charter, reaffirms the validity of Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) as regards a lasting and
comprehensive
settlement of the Middle East question. It also reaffirms Council resolutions 508 (1982),
509(1982),511(1982),512(1982)and513(1982~,which
deal with the situation in Lebanon, It further reaffirms
the right ofall States to live in peace within recognized
international
boundaries and the principles and the
obligation of all to settle disputes by peaceful means
and to refrain from the threat or use of force against
the territorial
integrity and political independence of
any State, and it calls for security for all States and
justice for all peoples.
43. The operative part of the draft resolution
sists of four sections.

47. In section D, the draft resolution deals with
procedural matters; it requests the Secretary-General
to report to the Council on the status of implementation
of the draft resolution. Section D also requests the cooperation of all Member States in the implementation
of the draft resolution, should it be adopted.
48. Those are the elements contained in the draft
resolution which is before the Council. This text was
carefully outlined in such a manner as to produce a
balanced draft resolution that touches equally upon the
main elements of this most intricate question before
us. And here I wish to state that, like my French
colleague, I have an open mind about any amendments that will ameliorate our text and be in conformity with our objective.

con-

44. Section A deals objectively with the situation in
Lebanon; in it the draft resolution demands specific
measures to end the hostilities in Lebanon and also
the immediate
withdrawal of Israeli forces engaged
around Beirut to an agreed distance as a first step
towards their complete withdrawal from Lebanon.
It also demands the simultaneous withdrawal of Palestinian armed forces from Beirut. Section A also deals
with the restoration of the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Lebanon and
supports the Government of Lebanon in its efforts to
reassert its exclusive control of its capital.

Egypt, in its endeavour for peace, has placed
great importance on the contribution
of the Government of the United States in establishing the peaceful
foundations
and principles for solving the Middle
East question. We look forward to the United States,
as a full partner in the peace process, intensifying its
efforts with a view to reaching a just, comprehensive
and lasting peace in the Middle East.
49.

45. In section B, the draft resolution deals with the
role of the United Nations in supervising the ceasefire and disengagement in and around Beirut by stationing United Nations military observers therein.
It also requests the Secretary-General
to submit a
report on the prospects of the installation of a United
Nations force which could take up positions beside
the Lebanese interposition forces or the use of the
forces already available to the United Nations in the
region. Also, the Secretary-General
is requested to
submit a plan concerning the installation of a United
Nations peace-keeping force in Lebanon. Section 8
also calls on all States to co-operate with the SecretaryGeneral in this respect. In this context, we should
recognize with appreciation the positive contribution
of the United Nations throughout the different stages
of the Middle East conflict. Indeed, t,he United Nations
has a vital role to play in promoting‘ihis
peaceful initiative.

50. At this crucial juncture, we are well aware of the
immense difficulties and pains that accompany the
birth of peace. However, we are convinced that only
through peace can the peoples and States of the Middle
East enjoy security and attain progress. To this end,
Egypt calls again upon all the parties in the Middle
East to join in an all-out peaceful &;/rttl~hc in goodwill and sincerity. Let all the peoples of the Middle
East live together in justice, peaceful coexistence,
co-operation and reconciliation.
51. For a number of decades, Egypt suffered and
sacrificed itself in serving the principles and purposes
that it believed in. Today, Egypt is willing to exert
every effort so as to spare the Palestinian, the Lebanese and the Israeli peoples further sacrifices and
5

hardships. To this end. let us all shoulder our responsibilities towards a peaceful settlement in Lebanon.
a just solution to the Palestinian question and a lasting
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

historic and ancient city of Beirut. its environs ;mJ it*
bread-basket, the fertile Bekaa valley.
57. By every word in the dictionary, b:y ever1 pr+
vision in the Charter, by every norm of ethical imW
ative, the Council is duty-bound promptly to warn tb:
aggressor that it will not tolerate continuance IFSifi:
holocaust it is at present perpetrating against ttlr l-eke
anese and Palestinian civilian population. The (_;~~il ~
has the power to invoke the relevant provisit\n+ itf ~
Chapter VII of the Charter and to take effective -tr’Pt ~
commensurate with that crime against humunir)’ tt!
ensure total Israeli withdrawal. The Council is nod~~u~~
fully aware of the Israelis’ long-standing arId ~jfti- )
cially recorded designs against southern L~hufWa~
principally
concerning seizure of the waters \*f the
Litani for their own insatiable and burgeoning ;rpi’ctite: one can read about this in the late Ben-Gur.i+n’$
memoirs and in the late Moshe Dayan’s di;lric~. 1-h:
Israelis are already treating the south a:; a tr’l.rilN’
under occupation to be followed by dr ,/irc.lo :~nr~\;ttion, as has been the case with Jerusalem. tilt: ‘&it\\
Bank, the Gaza Strip and the Golan Heights. ‘rhc
Prime Minister of Lebanon has already curr@ain~~
that the Israelis have established in southern l.&:Wn
a parallel administration
which has usurped ~Iw prc’
rogatives of the legitimate Lebanese administr~rti~ln.

52. Mr, NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): Mr. President, this has
been an inordinately
tumultuous month for international peace and security, which is the primary responsibility of the Council.
53. I have had occasion, in our closed meetings,
to pay highest tribute to our President for the month of
July, Mr. Noel Sinclair, of friendly Guyana, for the
outstanding manner in which he has diligently striven
to co-ordinate
the Council’s
work in crisis-management. His statemanship,
agility and dedication
have shone the more brightly against the bleak and
ever-more-darkening
skies which overshadow
a
Middle East that is the victim of aggression.
S4. This has been a continuum of gruesome and
barbaric Israeli aggression begun in the early days of
June, in which a mindless and heedless Israeli military
robot invaded and savagely destroyed southern
Lebanon, razing some of the most venerable and
ancient cities, towns and villages of the renowed
Phoenicians, whose inspiration and voluminous contributions included the invaluable gift of the alphabet
in humanity’s onward march to an elevated and civilized life,

58. If I were living in a world of normalcy prridck! hi
international law, what I have stated would
hc the 11~~~
normal response- indeed, the only response--ttl
d
genocidal act of aggression. And yet I am iIS full!
aware as all members of the Council that intt’rn;ie
tional conduct has relapsed to a humiliating
iiWni*
escence in the deadly game of r(w/poli/ik.
whkh
throughout the century has wrought disasti‘r
;rficr
disaster upon the community of nations.

55. Tyre, Sidon, Nnbatiya and scores of villages have
been destroyed by the criminal and genocidal bombardment by air, land and sea, as have all of the I4 Palestinian refugee camps which for almost 34 years
sheltered the very same Palestinians who had been
uprooted and dispersed by the criminal Israeli wan
machine and usurped of their ancestral homes and
homeland in Palestine. It devolved upon our President
for the month of June, Mr. de La Barre de Nanteuil,
of friendly France, to handle the co-ordination of the
Council’s response to the brazen Israeli act of all-out
aggression against the independent sovereign State of
Lebanon and the Palestinian refugees who have been
its guests pending their redemption and repatriation.
Under his presidency, this was accomplished with
great distinction and forthrightness when the Council
promptly and unequivocally
adopted resolutions 508
(1982), SO9 (1982), 511 (1982) and 512(1982).

SC). Hence, Jordan assesses as sincere arlcI \<till*
intentioned the initiative of France and Egypt tlrvl i\
before us today. But I feel impelled to state Itlo fgjl.
lowing, with all due respect and commendation
ftl 0~
co-sponsors of the draft resolution, On 2 July,
lhr
representatives
of France and Egypt prcst’nlcd
;I
working paper to the parties concerned and I’c~~~I~*YIc~
those parties to suggest amendments
or give thh
thoughts as they deemed essential. The parties
ONI
cerned submitted ideas, which were incorpur~%t~d
ir
the 2 July text, and with those incorporations
:L te\~
was made available to me as the would-bc dr:lft w w
lution, in the blue type-colour. Unfortunately.
the Jraci
resolution before us today is the original
wul*kini
paper of 2 July and was made available to LIS only trdag
The statement that 1 am about to make cnilorse~
the working paper as amended and made nv;liiahll
to us two days ago, the text which Jordan sup~r~tr
My Government’s
endorsement, therefore, dotes no
refer to the original working paper but to the arncnd~,
draft to which we have contributed. I do not hcliw
that the changes are basic,.but sometimes little t~t~ance
can have an impact on the overall meaninlg of :I YYS;IU
lution.

56. All those resolutions
categorically
demanded
that Israel, the aggressor-the
ubiquitous aggressor
against neighbouring States-withdraw
all its military
forces forthwith and unconditionally
to the internationally recognized boundaries of Lebanon. It is almost
two months since those resolutions were unanimously
adopted and yet, instead of abiding by categorical
Council
resolutions-which
every Member
State
must abide by according to the Charter of the United
Nations-the
Israeli war leadership has continued, and
even enormously
expanded, its savage aggression
right to the heart and soul of Lebanon’s capital, the
6

60. The preamble reaffirms the Council’s undaunted
commitment
to its own resolutions, old and new,
which mandate withdrawal of the Israeli occupation
forces from Arab Jerusalem, the West Bank, the
Gaza Strip, the Golan Heights and, latterly, Lebanon.
Resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) are explicit in
demanding
such withdrawal from the territories
occupied in the aftermath of the 1967 war, as well as
the equally unconditional
withdrawal of Israeli forces
from Lebanon.
61. It reaffirms the obligation of all States and peoples
to settle their disputes by peaceful means-in
accordance, of course, with Article 2 of the Charter-in
such
a manner that international
peace and security and
justice are not endangered. Hence, it is imperative to
emphasize in the preamble the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force-and
that principle was inserted in the preambles to both
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973); but
subsequently the Israelis torpedoed the basic tenet
of the principle by staking claims to substantial partions of the territories that they had occupied in 1967,
an act that leaves very little room, indeed, for any
meaningful
self-determination.
viability
or existence for the Palestinian people.
62. Moreover, and in view of the ongoing and extensive confiscation and colonization of those territories
-amounting
to almost 40 per cent of the total area
of the tiny West Bank, the Gaza Strip and the Golan
Heights-the
Council should reaffirm in the preamble
both resolutions 465 (1980) and 478 (1980) on Jerusalem, the importance of which to the world is probably second to none.
63. If we are to achieve a just settlement, we should
not allow an aggressor to reap the fruits of his aggression, nor should the Council gloss over its own resolutions on basic issues or acquiesce in newly created
fi/i,if.r rwcomplis
by omission. I fully recognize that no
resolution can possibly list all the many resolutions
-numbering
possibly in the hundreds-adopted
ova
the past 30 years on the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, both individually and collectively. The
present draft resolution is a laudable framework and
its thrust could be the basis for more elaborate and
detailed efforts by all parties concerned.
64. The subject of section A of the French-Egyptian
draft resolution is at present the centre-piece and focus
of world attention and profound concern. It is the
situation in Lebanon and involves the fate, survival
and future of both the Lebanese people and the Palestinian people, who, as refugees, are guests. We are
meeting today at the eleventh hour, possibly almost
at the stroke of the twelfth, to shoulder our historic
responsibilities
fully and unequivocally,
as we are
obligated to do under the Charter.
65. One half to three quarters of a million Lebanese
and Palestinian civilians-men,
women and children-

stand in present, imminent and grave danger of suffering a real holocaust. far greater in magnitude than
the devastation and barbarism which have already
been inflicted by Israeli nazism in the south and which
have been inflicted daily for the past seven weeks
against the besieged city of Beirut. The entire Israeli
war machine and people are armed to the teeth with
the most lethal and destructive weaponry that the
United States arsenal has so abundantly and meekly
provided and continues to provide to a confessedly
expansionist Israel which is now poised to launch an
all-out assault on this great capital of Lebanon.
66. Massive bombardments by air, sea and land have
spared hardly a single building, and civilian losses are
already staggering. Representatives
may have had
glimpses of the victims maimed by phosphorus bombs,
persons whose legs have been amputated by cluster
bombs and other ghastly scenes which are shown
from time to time on our television screens, The Israeli
invaders may make their final assault any time. But
let there be no mistake about it: the few thousand heroic
Lebanese and Palestinian
I-esistance fighters are
determined
to turn an invaded Beirut into a vast
cemetery for the invaders. Their will is unflinching
and their resolve unbreakable.
They have already
recorded one of the great epics of this century during
the past two months, because they are fighting for a
just cause against great odds in repelling arrogant and
heedless aggression. They are not attacking Tel Aviv.
They are not attacking any other Israeli city. They are
defending Beirut, the capital of a sovereign independent State.
67. It is not for the Palestinians to leave or the Lebanese to go wandering into the wilderness of nowhere
instead of staying in or returning to their homeland.
It is for the Israeli army to withdraw to where it came
from, and particularly those forces engaged around
Beirut, as the French-Egyptian
draft resolution provides in section A, operative paragraph 2, as a first
step towards the complete withdrawal of Israeli forces
from Lebanon and the simultaneous
withdrawal of
Palestinian armed forces to an agreed distance.
68. The major goal of section A of the draft resolution is to avert a colossal carnage of the civilian inhabitants of Beirut, which all decent and ethical people
must support, and the restoration of exclusive control
by Lebanon over its capital and, thereafter, throughout its entire territory within its internationally
recognized boundaries-no
enclaves, which are subterfuges for Israeli control from which we have been
suffering for the past five years. Otherwise, the situation would revert to internal strife and conflict. There
is only one Lebanon, highly advanced and articulate.
It can be preserved only by its Constitution and legitmanipulation.
imacy, not by any Israeli-imposed
Indeed, public leaders have already declared that there
will be no elections for a President as long as one
Israeli soldier remains on Lebanese soil. No amateurs
or adventurers can play tricks with the subleties and

nuances of Lebanon’s social fabric. That could prolong
the terrible ordeal which Lebanon has already been
enduring for far too long.

one knows who they are-to
make prop<~sals ;wI
perhaps set up a full-fledged mechanism OI- machincr);
under United Nations auspices to pursue by political
means the aforementioned
objectives. There \vc~ld
have to be a conference, specialized committees ;~nd
many sub-committees
to sort out the rights of the
parties to the conflict, which are numerous and almulative indeed. That would be the litmus test of whether
or not the Israelis can hide any longer behind their
oft-repeated contention that the Palestiniant peopIc and
the PLO seek to destroy Israel. That is not true: it is
Israel which is determined to destroy the Palestinian
people, almost physically, in the kind of carnage \\hich
it is now waging in Lebanon and other parts of Ihe
Middle
East, including
the occupied
territoriej.
without let or hindrance and with little more than a
siap on the wrist by Israel’s main benefactor.
the
United States, which gives to every Israeli an ;wWl
gratuity of $3,500 directly and through tax-deductible
funds-this
at a time when considerable segments of
the American people, owing to a world-wide eeonon~ic
depression, need every available dollar for viobk
living.

69. Section C of the draft resolution calls for durable peace and security in the region while reaffirming
the right of all States to existence and security in
accordance with Council resolution 242 (19671, in all
its parts-and
I emphasize “in all its parts”, which
unfortunately does not appear in the draft resolution
which is before us. It also reaffirms the legitimate
national rights of the Palestinian
people, including
their right to self-determjnation
with all its implications.
70. I should emphasize that the PLO is recognized
not only by the League of Arab States-22 Statesbut also by the overwhelming majority of the community of nations as entitled to speak and negotiate on
behalf of the Palestinian people on the question of
Palestine. The two-stage negotiating teams, as proposed, are therefore incongruous, unless, for reasons
beyond my comprehension,
the PLO itself agrees to
such a cumbersome procedure. Not only does the PLO
have an unquestioned
entitlement
to speak for the
Palestinians but, additionally,
it has earned that right
in the crucible of battle.

It is not for me or anyone else to interfere in the
way the United States Government arranges its dispensations or priorities. But I am certainly entitled
to protest against the fact that those huge funds git””
to Israel are being used to buy hundreds of first-lint
combat planes and other weapons of mass destruction to kill, orphan, maim and systematically
dcstW’
our beloved Lebanon, the valiant Lebanese
p~P!e
and their valiant Palestinian refugee guests, WED ;W
not there by choice and who are not fighting tr, t&e
an inch of Lebanon, but rather to go back to their honwland. That would be their day of liberation.
74.

71. Paragraph I (c-f of section C calls for the mutual
and simultaneous recognition
of all the States and
peoples concerned. That is the crux of the entire
question and is the only avenue for achieving a just,
comprehensive and durable peace in the Middle East.
It is astounding that this simple fact should have
baffled-or
seemed to have baffled-so many learned
policy-makers and scholars, particularly in the United
States. No people in the world should be expected
unilaterally
to abdicate its national and individual
rights in exchange for nothing. Not only would that
be putting the cart before the horse, but it would also
be tantamount to highway robbery and blackmail.

,

75. It is a sad commentary that we have yet t~l hear
a world of public condemnation from any top-level
United States official-1 am not talking about possibti:
private condemnations-of
Israel’s invasion uf l..cbanon and its accompanying genocide and devrtsttttion.
A super-Power like the United States, and the ere;rt
American people, whose basic goodness is widely
recognized throughout the world, would curtninly
not wish to associate themselves with the Begin-Shxon
acts of indiscriminate
genocide, nor would they condone the fact that more than half a million
civilian
inhabitants in west Beirut and elsewhere a.re dying of
thirst, hunger or mortal wounds for lack of medical
supplies, as has been the case in Lebanon ovet- the
past three of four days. In today’s Nell! Yot*k Titws,
we read that a former Lebanese Prime Ministerhas
sent an SOS because people have been without writer.
food and medical supplies for 72 hours. I Wish to ;lsstlrt:
Begin and Sharon that the resistance fighters
have
their own supplies of food and water that ciln 1x1
them for a long time, It is the civilians who ;lt’t the
victims of this sadistic treatment.

72. If the Israeli leadership declares openly and
almost daily that it will in no circumstances recognize
the PLO or redeem Palestinian
rights, except as
exercised on temporary
Indian reservations, why
should the Palestinian people, the aggrieved party,
recognize their tormentors and usurpers? It takes two
to make an agreement. If one is refused recognition,
then the other’s claim to legitimacy will be legally null
and void. Indeed, Israel was created by General Assembly resolution 181 (IT) adopted in 1947, which
provided for the establishment
of a Jewish State
alongside a Palestinian
State. An ephemeral $ri~
tr~ompli
would be an act of force that would be chalIenged continually and in full measure and cannot
therefore be the basis of a just or durable peace to
which we all aspire and which we seek.
73. The Egyptian-French
draft resolution requests
the Secretary-General,
in consultation with the Council, as well as all the parties concerned, including the
representatives of the Palestinian people-and
every-

74. I call upon the Council, perhaps through a strlte*
ment by its President, to reaffirm on the most imme.
8

diate basis resolution

513 (1982), which calls for the
restoration of the normal supply of vital facilities such
as water, electricity, food and medical provisions,
particularly in west Beirut. Is it too much to ask, in
this latter part of the twentieth century, that ordinary
civilians be given a cup of water to drink?

noon’s meeting, but I would ask the Council’s indulgence in order to make a very brief announcement.
80. As we entered this chamber this morning, al
11.25 to be precise, I received a cable from my Government stating that it had been advised by the International Committee of the Red Cross that Israeli checkpoints are as of this morning still preventing the entry
into west Beirut of any food or supplies, despite all
promises.

77. The delegation of Jordan supports the basic
spirit and thrust of the French-Egyptian initiative and
would be ready to endorse it, with whatever peripheral
amendments are presented by members of the Council. France and Egypt deserve the highest commendation for their timely initiative, which has put the question of Palestine and the Middle East back on the right
track.
78. The PRESIDENT:
Lebanon.

I call on the representative

of

NOTES

’ Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, T/wHugrrcCarlwr~tkm rrmf Ddwt~tiom of I890 turd /907 (New York, Oxford

79. M. TUl$NI (Lebanon): I know that it has been
agreed that I shall make my statement at this after-

University Press, 191).
2 Uniled Nations, T,n~/y Satins, vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.

9

J+OW

TO

United
world.

Nations
Con&

COMMENT

OBTAIN

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
l’rom bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales Section.
New York or Geneva.

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
auprts
des ventes, New York ou Gentve.

COMO

CONSEGUiR

in United

Nations,

New

York

DES

NATJONS

sent en vente dans les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACJONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes dcl mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

DE

LAS

NACJONES

Unidas
estln
en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00300

UNIES

et Its agences
a : Nations

dipositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Seccibn de Ventas,

8%60989-June

198~---2.050
