A /77/PV.56

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

56th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 20 December 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(b) Election of members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission
The President: Members will recall that, in accordance with paragraphs 4 (a) to (e) of resolution 60/180, of
20 December 2005, the Organizational Committee shall
comprise the following: seven members of the Security
Council, including permanent members; seven members of the Economic and Social Council, elected from
regional groups; five top providers of assessed contributions to United Nations budgets and of voluntary
contributions to United Nations funds, programmes
and agencies, including a standing peacebuilding fund;
five top providers of military personnel and civilian
police to United Nations missions; and seven additional
members elected by the General Assembly, giving due
consideration to representation from all regional groups
in the overall composition of the Committee.
By the same resolution, the General Assembly also
decided that each of the five regional groups shall have
no fewer than three seats in the overall composition of
the Organizational Committee.
Members will also recall that, at the 44th plenary
meeting of its seventy-fifth session, the Assembly
elected Brazil, Costa Rica, Egypt, Lebanon and South
Africa as members of the Organizational Committee

of the Peacebuilding Commission for a two-year term
of office, beginning on 1 January 2021, and that at the
52nd meeting of its seventy-sixth session, the Assembly
elected Bulgaria and the Dominican Republic as
members of the Organizational Committee for a twoyear term of office, beginning on 1 January 2022.
Consequently, the General Assembly will need to
fill the seats to be vacated by Brazil, Costa Rica, Egypt,
Lebanon and South Africa, whose two-year terms of
office expire on 31 December 2022.
By a letter dated 16 December 2022 addressed
to the President of the General Assembly (A/77/650),
the President was informed by the facilitator of the
group of troop-contributing countries that Bangladesh,
Ethiopia, India, Nepal and Rwanda would serve on the
Organizational Committee for the period beginning
1 January 2023 and ending on 31 December 2024.
By a letter dated 19 December 2022 addressed to
the President of the General Assembly (A/77/652), the
President was informed by the facilitator of the group
of the leading financial contributors that Canada,
Germany, Japan, Norway and Sweden had been selected
to serve on the Organizational Committee for the 2023–
2024 term.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to take note of the information contained in
documents A/77/650 and A/77/652?
It was so decided.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-76275 (E)

*2276275*

A/77/PV.56

The President: The Assembly will now proceed
to the election of five members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission.
By its resolution 60/261, of 8 May 2006,
the Assembly decided that the members of the
Organizational Committee shall serve for renewable
terms of two years, as applicable. Accordingly, Costa
Rica, Egypt, Lebanon and South Africa are eligible
for immediate re-election, while Brazil has already
been elected by the Economic and Social Council in its
decision 2022/206 D, of 21 July 2022.
Regarding candidatures for the five vacant seats,
I should like to inform members that from among the
African States, three endorsed candidates have been
communicated, namely, Egypt, Kenya and South
Africa. From among the Asia-Pacific States, one
endorsed candidate has been communicated, namely,
Qatar. From among the Latin American and Caribbean
States, one endorsed candidate has been communicated,
namely, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
Members will recall that, by its resolution 60/261,
the General Assembly decided that the rules of
procedure and established practice of the Assembly for
the election of members of its subsidiary bodies shall
apply to its election of members of the Committee.
For this election, rules 92 and 94 are applicable.
Accordingly, the election shall be held by secret ballot.
However, I should also like to recall paragraph 16
of decision 34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing
with the secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs
when the number of candidates corresponds to the
number of seats to be filled should become standard,
unless a delegation specifically requests a vote on a
given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on
that basis?
It was so decided.
The President: Since the number of candidates
endorsed by the Group of African States, the Group of
Asia-Pacific States and the Group of Latin American
and Caribbean States is equal to the number of seats
to be filled, may I take it that the General Assembly
decides to elect Egypt, Kenya, Qatar, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines and South Africa as members of
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
2/11

20/12/2022

Commission for a two-year term of office beginning on
1 January 2022?
It was so decided.
The President: I congratulate Egypt, Kenya, Qatar,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and South Africa
on their elections as members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 117?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: I now invite the attention of
the General Assembly to draft decision A/77/L.42,
circulated under sub-item (a) of agenda item 18, entitled
“Towards the achievement of sustainable development:
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development,
including
through
sustainable
consumption and production, building on Agenda 21”.
Members will recall that, at its 3rd plenary
meeting, on 16 September 2022, the General Assembly
decided to allocate sub-item (a) of agenda item 18 to
the Second Committee. To enable the Assembly to take
action expeditiously on the document, may I take it that
the Assembly wishes to consider sub-item (a) of the
agenda item 18 directly in plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 77/505).
Agenda item 18 (continued)
Sustainable development
(a) Towards the achievement of sustainable
development: implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, including
through sustainable consumption and
production, building on Agenda 21
Draft decision (A/77/L.42)
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft decision A/77/L.42, entitled “Accreditation
and participation of an intergovernmental organization
in the United Nations Conference on the Midterm
22-76275

20/12/2022

A/77/PV.56

Comprehensive Review of the Implementation of the
Objectives of the International Decade for Action,
‘Water for Sustainable Development’, 2018–2028”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt the draft decision?
Draft decision A/77/L.42
(decision 77/546).

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor to
delegations in explanation of position, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We would like to note that we did
not undermine the consensus. However, our
delegation would like to dissociate itself from the
consensus, given that the European Union and
its structures — unfortunately — are politicizing
environmental and climate cooperation.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 18.
Agenda items 13 and 72 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft resolution (A/77/L.40)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.40.
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica): Today I have the
honour to address the General Assembly, on behalf of
France and Costa Rica, to introduce draft resolution
A/77/L.40, entitled “2025 United Nations Conference to
Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development
Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas
and marine resources for sustainable development”.

The ocean faces a continued emergency, with an
unprecedented number of escalating challenges. And
yet Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 14 is currently
the most underfunded of all the SDGs. It is estimated
that an additional $175 billion would be needed each
year, until 2030, for its full implementation.
In the meantime, sea levels are rising and coastal
erosion is worsening, impacting the lives, livelihoods
and culture of many island nations and coastal
communities. As the largest carbon sink, absorbing over
90 per cent of the heat generated by greenhouse-gas
emissions, the ocean is also becoming warmer and
more acidic. Coral reefs and mangroves, which are
key to supporting life on land and sea, face extensive
damage, and marine pollution continues to spread.
Fish stocks are overexploited, marine biodiversity is
rapidly declining and coastal ecosystems could become
irreversibly damaged.
The current situation is beyond alarming. However,
thanks to the successful first and second conferences
to support the realization of SDG 14, ably hosted by
Fiji and Sweden and Kenya and Portugal, respectively,
the international community has rallied around ocean
health and sustainability, with commitments and actions
pledged for better stewardship of the ocean. We must
now build on the extraordinary momentum achieved and
move towards scaling up action and implementation.
The Presidents of France and Costa Rica
therefore announced in Lisbon their offer to host the
third United Nations Ocean Conference, to be held
in France in June 2025, preceded by a high-level
themed event in Costa Rica in June 2024. We believe
that the Conference can be a crucial opportunity to
reconvene all stakeholders working to sustainably
protect and manage the ocean. They include Heads of
State and Government, scientists, non-governmental
organizations, financial institutions and development
banks, philanthropists, young ocean professionals
and maritime entrepreneurs, small-scale fishers,
representatives of the world’s coastal cities and regions
and a wide range of civil society representatives. By
mobilizing all actors, funding and innovative solutions,
we will work to ensure more sustainable governance of
the ocean.
The Conference will also provide a platform
to review progress on key processes that require
the highest level of political will and engagement,
namely, the instruments on plastic pollution and the

22-762753/11

A/77/PV.56

20/12/2022

conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity
of areas beyond national jurisdiction, the discussions
around deep sea mining, the United Nations Decade of
Ocean Science for Sustainable Development and the
commitments from more than 100 States to protect at
least 30 per cent of marine areas by 2030, to name but
a few.
On behalf of France and Costa Rica, we would
like to sincerely thank all Member States for their
very positive engagement during the consultative
process of this enabling draft resolution, during which
we received extensive expressions of support for the
text and the process, which concluded in record time.
The co-sponsorship of over 50 Members States sends
a strong signal in favour of pursuing the momentum
for action and commitment to fully achieve SDG 14 by
2030. Their overall support also means that our call for
greater ambition to address the dire state of the ocean
has been heard.
The second part of the process will entail the
modalities of the Conference, which we hope to begin
early next year. We will continue open and transparent
consultations with the United Nations membership
in order to identify the priorities of Member States
at the Conference in 2025. We also intend to engage
with all partners in order to gather ideas, as well as
wide-ranging and concrete solutions.
The health of the ocean is a global responsibility that
belongs to all of us. It requires continued, committed
multilateral action from the United Nations. We must
take advantage of this great momentum to save our
ocean. And time is of the essence.
The President: The Assembly will take
action on draft resolution A/77/L.40, entitled
“2025 United Nations Conference to Support the
Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14:
Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and
marine resources for sustainable development”.

Barbados, Belgium, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Djibouti, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, Germany, Guinea, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Latvia,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mexico, the Federated States of Micronesia, Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, the Niger, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Senegal, Singapore, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia and the United Republic of Tanzania.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.40?
Draft resolution A/77/L.40
(resolution 77/242).

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
items 13 and 72.
Agenda items 14 and 121 (continued)
Culture of peace
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy
Draft resolution (A/77/L.41)
The President: I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.41.

of

Mr. Hadi (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of
the delegation of the Republic of Iraq, I thank you,
Mr. President, for your cooperation and for adding
draft resolution A/77/L.41 to the General Assembly
meeting scheduled for today. I also express my thanks
and gratitude to all delegations that supported and
co-authored the draft resolution.

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that, since the submission of draft
resolution A/77/L.40, and in addition to the delegations
listed in the document, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Andorra,
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Bangladesh,

We have the pleasure and honour of introducing
to the General Assembly draft resolution A/77/L.41,
entitled “International Day for the Prevention of Violent
Extremism as and when Conducive to Terrorism”. We
worked with the delegations of the sisterly Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, the sisterly State of Qatar and the
sisterly Sultanate of Oman, under agenda items 14 and
121 of the General Assembly.

I give the
the Secretariat.

4/11

floor

to

the

representative

22-76275

20/12/2022

Iraq is one of the countries that has suffered the
most from terrorist acts. Terrorist organizations
have repeated their attempts to sow instability and
insecurity in my country by targeting the facilities of
the Iraqi State and killing and terrorizing civilians by
perpetrating horrible and inhumane acts.
The Government of the Republic of Iraq is
committed to cooperating with the international
community to fight and totally eradicate terrorism
in all its forms and though various means, including
judicial accountability, security follow-up, supporting
the victims, preventing extreme violence that leads
to terrorism and addressing the radical causes for the
emergence and spread of extremist thought.
To that end, the Government of the Republic of Iraq
reiterates its commitment to fighting terrorism in all its
forms and preventing all entities that sponsor violence,
terrorism, claims about others’ religious disbelief and
hate speech. We denounce all terrorist acts wherever
they occur in the world and call for the need to unify and
coordinate all subregional, regional and international
efforts to fight terrorism and prevent violent extremism
regardless of its origin or name.
Iraq is working very carefully to develop its
national strategies on fighting terrorism and preventing
violent extremism in line with global developments
and the United Nations counter-terrorism strategy. Our
national strategy encompasses, inter alia, addressing
and preventing extreme thought, fighting organized
crime and eradicating sources of financing terrorism in
addition to waging field war. In this regard, Iraq values
the great efforts made by the United Nations, including
the Office of Counter-Terrorism, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and all other
United Nations entities that coordinate international
efforts and promote national capacities.
Furthermore, Iraq shares the concerns noted in
the fifteenth report of the Secretary-General on the
terrorist threat posed by Da’esh (S/2022/576), which
still constitutes a threat that could get worse. Iraq
also expresses its grave concern that circumstances
conducive to the spread of extreme thought still exist,
especially in camps where terrorists and their families
are detained. It is for that reason that Iraq is introducing
draft resolution A/77/L.41 for consideration by the
General Assembly today.
The main objectives of the draft resolution are
to declare 12 February the International Day for

A/77/PV.56

the Prevention of Violent Extremism as and when
Conducive to Terrorism, to raise awareness of the threats
linked to violent extremism conducive to terrorism and
to enhance international cooperation in that regard.
The date of 12 February was chosen to commemorate
on which the General Assembly adopted resolution
70/254, on the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674), the first United
Nations document on the issue (see A/70/PV.84).
Iraq launched the initiative in line with our top
priorities, which are to fight terrorism and prevent
violent extremism as part of our national strategies to
counter both scourges. Iraq believes that preventing
violent extremism conducive to terrorism is a necessary
step towards a comprehensive response to the threat
of terrorism in line with the seventh review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and pursuant to the commitments under international
humanitarian law.
Further, pursuant to resolution 75/291, on the
seventh review of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, which was adopted by consensus on
30 June 2021, the sponsors of draft resolution A/77/L.41
preserved the agreed language. The primary objective
is to adopt a consensual resolution that sends a strong
and unified international message and to address and
prevent the root causes of terrorism. Accordingly,
my delegation has facilitated transparent and open
negotiations, having held two informal meetings, on
18 and 28 November 2022, to that end. Also, to ensure
consensus, we have engaged in bilateral and multilateral
negotiations with all delegations.
My country believes that international efforts
must be made collectively to bolster partnership
and that States should bear collective responsibility,
respect each other’s sovereignty and ensure national
ownership of efforts aimed at fighting terrorism and
preventing violent extremism. We underscore that draft
resolution A/77/L.41 fully respects those principles and
emphasizes national ownership of fighting terrorism
and preventing violent extremism.
The text of the draft resolution stresses the important
role played by intergovernmental organizations, civil
society, academics, religious leaders and the media in
fighting terrorism and preventing violent extremism
conducive to terrorism. We once again emphasize that
terrorism and violent extremism cannot be linked to
any religion, nationality, civilization or racial group.

22-762755/11

A/77/PV.56

My country reiterates that it unequivocally
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
It also reiterates its firm commitment to promoting
international cooperation aimed at fighting terrorism
and preventing violent extremism conducive
to terrorism.
We must not use other countries to settle scores and
jeopardize their security and stability. We must also
uphold the principles of the United Nations Charter,
in particular respect for the sovereignty of other
countries, good-neighbourly relations and cooperation
among countries.
My delegation reiterates the importance of agreeing
on a unified definition of terrorism by Member States
in order to pool international efforts towards addressing
the dangerous scourge that threatens the security of the
international community. We look forward to working
with the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
to celebrate the International Day for the Prevention
of Violent Extremism as and when Conducive to
Terrorism, upon the adoption of A/77/L.41.
In conclusion, Iraq reaffirms its full commitment
to cooperating with the international community
bilaterally and multilaterally for fulfilling the purposes
of the draft resolution through the exchange of best
experiences and national expertise with interested
countries. We call on members to support draft
resolution A/77/L.41 as a step forward in the joint
international efforts to fight terrorism and prevent
violent extremism conducive to terrorism.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
the draft resolution contained in document A/77/L.41.
Before giving the floor for explanations of vote
before the voting, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Mikhaylov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation requested a
vote on draft resolution A/77/L.41, as no extensive
discussions were held on it. There were just two
rounds of consultations. The coordinators decided
to push the draft resolution through without taking
into consideration the concerns expressed, nor the
comments and proposals made. This draft resolution
will not be granted the status of a consensus document.
Let me explain why.
6/11

20/12/2022

First, the international community has not agreed
to a definition of violent extremism. The attempt to
introduce this wording — “violent extremism” — has
created conditions under which double standards may be
deployed. In other words, terrorists are now to be divided
into two categories, the bad ones and the not-so-bad
ones. Violent extremists fall in the latter category — the
not-so-bad ones. Under this classification, international
counter-terrorism legislation does not reach violent
extremists, who are, as a rule of thumb, radical
elements that have garnered outside support. That is
the first reason.
Secondly, let us consider why the draft resolution on
celebrating an International Day for the Prevention of
Violent Extremism as and when Conducive to Terrorism
selected the date of 12 February. On 12 February 2016,
resolution 70/254, on the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, was adopted by
the General Assembly. The Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action was one of the first attempts to institutionalize
the idea of preventing violent extremism in a universal
format, which actually waters down traditional
international legal norms and objectives related to
counter-terrorism.
Let me remind the General Assembly that the
reaction of the Member States to the plan of action put
forward by the then-Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
was ambiguous, to put it lightly. Many States noted that
the Plan in fact ignored very important factors leading
to the radicalization of political and civilian groups, for
instance, arbitrary outside interference in the domestic
affairs of sovereign States, tolerance for using terrorist
groups for political purposes, and a dismantling of
State institutions. Instead, the Plan listed as, among the
reasons for radicalization, the repressive policies and
systematic violations of human rights.
It is rather ironic that the greatest uptick in racially
and ethnically motivated violent extremism has been
seen in Western societies. How did it get to this? Are
Western societies in fact repressive regimes? Are they
systematically violating human rights? That may be
the case, but it may also be that Ban Ki-moon’s Plan
of Action is the embodiment of a host of superficial
assertions that have not been given proper consideration.
We would also like to note that resolution 75/291,
dated 30 June 2021, on the review of the Global
Counter-Terrorism strategy does not actually endorse
the Secretary-General’s Plan as the starting point for
22-76275

20/12/2022

A/77/PV.56

national plans. Rather, as part of the review of the
Strategy’s implementation in 2021, the international
community declared s that the implementation of any
recommendations in the Plan of Action should depend
on the sovereign decision of each and every State. Is
this ambiguous document what we are being asked to
celebrate now at the international level?
We suggested that we swap out the object of the
draft resolution and focus on the prevention of terrorism,
as this would reflect the full scope of approaches and
opinions in Member States. Furthermore, we have very
clear binding instruments on the prevention of terrorism:
Security Council resolutions, international conventions
and the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. The prevention-of-violent-extremism agenda
should be taken within the context of the prevention
of terrorism.
It is not quite clear why the root causes of terrorism
are ignored, including by Iraq, a country which is
regularly hit by terrorist attacks. Just a few days ago,
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant once again
committed a terrorist act on Iraqi soil. Moreover, the
Iraqi representative just mentioned terrorism when
presenting draft resolution A/77/L.41, so why is it that
the prevention of terrorism is absent from A/77/L.41?
It would make sense to withdraw the draft resolution
from today’s agenda and continue with a constructive
discussion of the issue. In that way, we might come to
a common understanding before the next review of the
global counter-terrorism strategy, which is scheduled
for 2023.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting. The Assembly
will take action on draft resolution A/77/L.41 entitled
“International Day for the Prevention of Violent
Extremism as and when Conducive to Terrorism”. For
the Assembly’s information, the draft resolution has
closed for e-sponsorship.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that, since the submission of
draft resolution A/77/L.41, and in addition to the
delegations listed in the document, the following
countries have become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Canada, Denmark, Djibouti,
France, Germany, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy,

Japan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Luxembourg,
Mauritania, Micronesia (Federated States of), Morocco,
Mozambique, the Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Portugal,
Spain, the Sudan, Sweden, Tonga, Tunisia the United
Arab Emirates, the United Republic of Tanzania and
the United States of America.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Türkiye, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe

22-762757/11

A/77/PV.56

20/12/2022

Against:
None

We support the strengthening of United Nations
efforts to combat terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. We therefore reiterate our support for
the adoption of a general convention on international
terrorism in order to overcome the existing legal
loopholes in relation to the definition of terrorism,
which is imperative to addressing the deficiencies and
omissions in the current legal framework.

Abstaining:
Belarus, Congo, Madagascar, Russian Federation
The draft resolution was adopted by 154 votes to
none, with 4 abstentions (resolution 77/243).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Romero Puentes (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation thanks the representative of Iraq for
introducing resolution 77/243, entitled “International
Day for the Prevention of Violent Extremism as and
when Conducive to Terrorism”, which we supported.
Our vote in favour of resolution 77/243 is based
on Cuba’s historic position against terrorism, namely,
that Cuba is absolutely and categorically against all
terrorist acts, methods and practices, in all their forms
and manifestations, by whomever, against whomever
and wherever they are perpetrated, whatever their
motivations, including those in which Governments are
directly or indirectly involved.
By voting in favour of the resolution, my delegation
reaffirms that the prevention of violent extremism or
terrorism should not be used as a pretext for violating
the United Nations Charter or to promote covert
agendas to subvert or change the constitutional orders
of sovereign States. It is unacceptable that under
the banner of a supposed fight against terrorism,
certain States carry out acts of aggression directly
or indirectly against sovereign peoples and commit
flagrant violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. Terrorism cannot and should not be
linked to any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic
group. It must be confronted holistically, through direct
actions aimed also at prevention, so as to address its
root causes.
We condemn the unilateral acts of certain States
that arrogate for themselves the right to certify
conduct and draw up politically motivated lists, which
are also contrary to international law. We reject the
manipulation of an issue as sensitive as terrorism in an
effort to turn it into an instrument that could be used
against any country.
8/11

Cuba knows very well what terrorism is. In
defending its independence, sovereignty and dignity,
my country has for decades suffered the consequences
of terrorist acts, which have brought a toll of 3,478 dead
and 2,099 disabled in Cuba. In many of these cases, the
evidence shows the complicity, support and protection
given by the Government of the United States to the
perpetrators of these acts.
We will never forget, nor will we fail to denounce,
the fact that 45 years after the mid-flight explosion of
a Cuban airliner that caused the death of 73 people at
the hands of self-confessed terrorists based on United
States territory, the authorities of that country have not
let justice be done for the victims of this horrendous
crime. Nor will we fail to denounce the terrorist attack
against our embassy in Paris on 28 July 2021, which
resulted from a brutal campaign to incite hatred and
violence and support the commission of hostile acts that
were unleashed with total impunity on social networks
and digital platforms from the territory of the United
States. Nor will we fail to denounce the terrorist attack
on the Cuban embassy in Washington in 2020, when an
individual used a semi-automatic rifle to discharge 32
rounds against our diplomatic headquarters without the
Government of the United States saying a single word
about it. Unfortunately, the events I have mentioned are
but a few examples of the terrorist attacks that Cuba has
had to face.
For all the aforementioned reasons, my delegation
voted in favour of resolution 77/243.
Mr. Elgharib (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
voted in favour of resolution 77/243 as part of its
support for promoting international efforts to counter
terrorism and causes of and conditions conducive
thereto from a holistic point of view, as well as efforts
to raise awareness of this dangerous phenomenon and
how to address it.
Nonetheless, we continue to have concerns about
violent extremism. Those concerns were clearly
expressed in the discussions on the various resolutions
22-76275

20/12/2022

on countering terrorism, foremost of which occurred
during the reviews of the United Nations global counterterrorism strategy. In that context, we affirm that
although we voted in favour of resolution 77/243 today,
that should not in any way be considered a change of
our views about the issue as a whole.
Our concerns on the issue include the following.
First, we are concerned about the ongoing absence of
any internationally agreed definition of what is known
as violent extremism. Such a definition should highlight
the difference between extremism, on the one hand,
and terrorism, on the other.
Secondly, the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism issued in 2015 (A/70/674)
was not the product of discussions among countries.
Therefore, it does not reflect the supposed consensus
among countries.
Thirdly, we are concerned about the lack of a clear
legal framework to govern violent extremism, whether
at the international level, meaning international
conventions, or at the national level in many countries.
Fourthly, there is a general trend towards using
the term “violent extremism” to describe acts of
terrorism committed by non-Islamic criminal groups,
which makes the term “terrorism” — contrary to the
truth — pertinent only to the criminal acts committed
by some Islamists.
Fifthly, many uses of this concept undermine the
main responsibility of countries to counter terrorism,
causing an unnecessary misunderstanding with regard
to the reasons leading to terrorism.

A/77/PV.56

community in implementing joint projects for
preventing terrorism and violent extremism conducive
to terrorism. It is unfortunate that a delegation requested
a recorded vote, despite all the efforts we made to reach
a consensus on the draft resolution. We showed extreme
flexibility, listened carefully to and took into account
comments of Member States in order to amend the text.
However, a number of initiatives that were launched
by our delegation and others were rejected. The only
other option on the table was to set aside the resolution,
which we found unacceptable.
Iraq is eager to cooperate with Member States on
the basis of mutual respect for the sovereignty and
national ownership of counter-terrorism operations as
well as operations for preventing violent extremism
conducive to terrorism in line with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter, international
law and international humanitarian law. We are open
to promote cooperation and partnership for addressing
this danger which threatens all of us.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
items 14 and 121.
Agenda item 118 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(j) Appointment of members of the Joint
Inspection Unit
Note by the President of the General Assembly
(A/77/643)

The President: The exercise of the right of reply has
been requested. May I remind members that statements
in the exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10
minutes for the first intervention and to five minutes
for the second intervention and should be made by
delegations from their seats.

The President: As indicated in document A/77/643,
the General Assembly is required during the current
session to appoint a member of the Joint Inspection Unit
to fill the vacancy that will arise from the resignation
of Inspector Kamioka Keiko of Japan with effect from
31 December 2022. In accordance with the procedures
described in Article 3, paragraph 1, of the Statute of
the Joint Inspection Unit, and with resolution 61/238,
of 22 December 2006, the President of the General
Assembly, having held the necessary consultations,
requested Japan to propose a candidate to serve for a
period of five years beginning on 1 January 2023.

Mr. Hadi (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation
expresses its thanks and gratitude to all the delegations
that voted for and sponsored resolution 77/243. The result
of the voting confirms the interest of the international

As indicated in document A/77/643, the candidate,
in accordance with paragraph 7 of resolution 59/267,
should have experience in at least one of the following
fields: oversight, audit, inspection, investigation,

That is why, like many other countries, Egypt
supports adding the phrase “conditions conducive to
terrorism” wherever violent extremism is mentioned so
that we are able to accept the inclusion of that concept
in United Nations documents.

22-762759/11

A/77/PV.56

evaluation, finance, project evaluation, programme
evaluation, human resources management, management,
public administration, monitoring and programme
performance, as well as knowledge of the United
Nations system and its role in international relations.
As further indicated in document A/77/643, as a result
of the consultations held in accordance with paragraph
2 of article 3 of the statute of the Joint Inspection
Unit, including consultations with the President of the
Economic and Social Council and with the SecretaryGeneral, in his capacity as Chair of the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, the
President of the General Assembly has submitted to the
Assembly the candidature of Hoshino Toshiya of Japan
for appointment as a member of the Joint Inspection
Unit for a five-year term of office beginning 1 January
2023 and expiring on 31 December 2027.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to appoint Mr. Hoshino Toshiya of Japan as a
member of the Joint Inspection Unit for a five-year term
of office beginning on 1 January 2023 and expiring on
31 December 2027?
It was so decided (decision 77/417).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (j) of agenda item 118?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 116 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs
(b) Election of members of the Economic and
Social Council
The President: Since no candidate obtained the
required two-thirds majority in the previous ballot at
the 98th plenary meeting of the seventy-sixth session,
on 2 September 2022, there remains one seat to be
filled from among the Eastern European States. We
shall therefore proceed to a tenth restricted ballot.
In accordance with rule 94 of the rules of procedure,
this twentieth round of balloting shall be restricted to
the two States from among the Eastern European States
that were not elected but obtained the largest number of
votes in the previous unrestricted ballot, that is, North
Macedonia and the Russian Federation.
10/11

20/12/2022

Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order on
the actual conduct of the voting.
We shall now begin the voting process. Ballot
papers will be distributed. The voting has thus begun.
Members are requested to put an “X” in the box
next to the name of a State printed on the ballot paper.
There should not be more than one checked box for
the vacant seat to be filled. A ballot will be declared
invalid if both boxes are checked. Any notations other
than a vote in favour of an eligible Member State will
be disregarded.
At the invitation of the President, the representatives
of Brazil, Hungary, Japan, Mozambique, the
Netherlands and Sri Lanka acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 11.10 a.m. and
resumed at 11.35 a.m.
The President: The result of the voting is as follows:
Eastern European States (1 seat)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members present and voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Russian Federation
North Macedonia8

181
1
180
1
179
120
97
2

The President: Since no candidate obtained the
required two-thirds majority in the previous ballot,
there still remains one seat to be filled from among the
Eastern European States.
We shall therefore proceed to an eleventh
restricted ballot. In accordance with rule 94 of the
rules of procedure, this twenty-first round of balloting
shall be restricted to the two States from among the
Eastern European States that were not elected but
obtained the largest number of votes in the previous
unrestricted ballot, namely, North Macedonia and the
Russian Federation.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
22-76275

20/12/2022

A/77/PV.56

procedure of the General Assembly, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order on
the actual conduct of the voting.
We shall now begin the voting process. Ballot
papers will be distributed. The voting has thus begun.

shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order on
the actual conduct of the voting.
We shall now begin the voting process. Ballot
papers will be distributed. The voting has thus begun.

Members are requested to put an “X” in the box
next to the name printed on the ballot paper. There
should not be more than one checked box for the vacant
seat to be filled. A ballot will be declared invalid if both
boxes are checked. Any notations other than a vote in
favour of an eligible Member State will be disregarded.

Members are requested to put an “X” in the box
next to the name of a State printed on the ballot paper.
There should be no more than one checked box for
the vacant seat to be filled. A ballot will be declared
invalid if both boxes are checked. Any notations other
than a vote in favour of an eligible Member State will
be disregarded.

At the invitation of the President, the representatives
of Brazil, Hungary, Japan, Mozambique, the
Netherlands and Sri Lanka acted as tellers.

At the invitation of the President, the representatives
of Brazil, Hungary, Japan, Mozambique, the
Netherlands and Sri Lanka acted as tellers.

A vote was taken by secret ballot.

A vote was taken by secret ballot.

The meeting was suspended at 11.45 a.m. and
resumed at noon.

The meeting was suspended at 12.15 p.m. and
resumed at 12.30 p.m.

The President: The result of the voting is as follows:
Eastern European States (1 seat)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members present and voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Russian Federation
North Macedonia

179
1
178
1
177
118
96
81

The President: Since no candidate obtained the
required two-thirds majority in the previous ballot,
there remains one seat to be filled from among the
Eastern European States. We shall therefore proceed
to a twelfth restricted ballot. In accordance with rule
94 of the rules of procedure, this twenty-second round
of balloting shall be restricted to the two States from
among the Eastern European States that were not
elected but obtained the largest number of votes in the
previous unrestricted ballot, namely, North Macedonia
and the Russian Federation.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, no representative

The President: The result of the voting is as follows:
Eastern European States (1 seat)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members present and voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Russian Federation
North Macedonia

179
0
179
1
178
119
99
79

The President: Since no candidate obtained the
required two-thirds majority in the previous ballot,
there remains one seat to be filled from among the
Eastern European States. In accordance with rule 94
of the rules of procedure, we should continue with the
series of balloting. In view of the late hour, further
balloting will take place on a later day to be announced.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 116.
I shall now suspend this meeting until the reports
of the Fifth Committee are available for consideration
by the General Assembly.
The meeting was suspended at 12.35 p.m.

22-7627511/11
