UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS
{I‘

THIRTY-FIRST

,

YEAR
QC]* 2 _ :,EZ

1894

i.;,rij

th
MEETING:

22 MARCH

.‘, _I .

1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l894)

.....................................

Adoption of the agenda ................................................
Request by the Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan for consideration of the
serious situation arising from recent developments in the occupied Arab
territories:
Letter dated 19 March 1976 from the Permanent Representatives of the
Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/12017) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Cbuncil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1894th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 22 March 1976, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Thomas

Meguid (Egypt), Mr.Sharaf (Jordan), Mr. Aliaf (Syrian
Arab Republic) and Mr. Petrib (Yugoslavia) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

S. BOYA (Benin).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I should also like to inform the Council that I have
just received a letter from the representative of Saudi
Arabia in which he requests to be invited, in accordance with rule 37 of the provisional rules or procedure, to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote.

agenda (S/Agenda/l894)

of the agenda

3. If I hear no objection, I propose, in accordance
with. the practices of the Council and the relevant
provisions of the Charter, to invite the representative
of Saudi Arabia to participate without the right to vote
in the discussion.

Request by the Libyafi Arab Republic and Pakistan
for consideration of the serious situation arising
from recent developments in the occupied Arab
territories:
Letter dated 19 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representatives
of the Libyan Arab Republic
and Pakistan to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/12017)
The meeting

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia) took a place at the side of the Council
chamber.

was called to order at 4.25 p.m.
Adoption

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Fiench):
The first speaker is the representative
of Jordan.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

5. Mr. SHARAF (Jordan): Mr. President, I extend to
Lou my delegation’s
sincere congratulations
and
highest esteem on your assumption of the presidency
of this august body of the United Nations. It is a
tribute to your distinguished
person and to your
brave and struggling country, Benin. It is of great
symbolic significance that a distinguished
son of
Africa should preside over the deliberations
of the
Security Council on the grave situation in the occupied
Arab territories and the struggle of the Arab people
for freedom and self-determination.
On an earlier
occasion, last January, another prominent
son of
Africa, the distinguished representative of Tanzania,
presided over another debate in the Council on the
rights of the Arab people which are the target of
continuing aggression. This is a good omen. Your
Presidency
symboiizes
the inevitable
triumph
of
freedom and self-determination.

Request by the Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan for
consideration of the serious situation arising from
recent developments in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 19 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representatives of the Libyan Arab Republic and
Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12017)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decisions which we reached
this morning, at the 1893rd meeting, I shall now invite
the representatives
of Israel and of the Palestine
Liberation
Organization
to take their places at the
Council table. I also invite the representatives
of
Egypt, Jordan, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yugoslavia to take their places at the side of the Council
chamber on the understanding that, as is customary,
they will be invited to take a place at the Council
table when it is their turn to speak.

6. May I also on this occasion extend a word of
welcome to the distinguished
representative
of the
United States. Many of us who know him, including
myself, know that he is a man’ of conviction, courage
and dedication to the service of his country and to the

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Herzog
(Israel) and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation Organizaiion) took places at the Council table, and Mr. Abdel
1

9. While all this was happening, Israel was saying an
adamant “no” to the two most natural and legitimate
Arab claims in the conflict: that Israel withdraw from
the Arab territories occupied and that the Palestinian
people, the victims of Israel’s initial and continuing
violence, be enabled to return and to exercise selfdetermination.
Not even in the context of a full-fledged
and guaranteed peace would Israel agree to these just
and natural claims. Repeatedly the Arab parties came
seeking redress at the Security Council. The Palestinians came to the Council. Even in that instance,
Israel turned its back on the Council. Instead of
imagination
and an earnest effort to correct historic
mistakes and reach accommodation,
Israel chose to
recoil into a shell of hostility to the United Nations,
suspicion towards its own decreasing friends and
vengeance against its victims. Refugee camps were
successively shelled and bombarded. The people in the
occupied territories were held in a tightening noose
while they watched the very character of their land
undergo a horrible metamorphosis.

causes in which he believes. While we have no illusions about his total or near-total agreement with our
position in days to come and on several other occasions
in the future, at least we knov that heading the
American delegation will be someone of prominence
who desires to achieve co-operation, to solve problems
and to face them earnestly with a sense of the need to
co-operate and to develop a constructive approach to
the United Nations and to world problems.
7. So, the Security Council meets again to discuss
the plight of the people that has been under a ruthless
and repressive occupation for the last nine years. Only
last January the Council met to discuss the broad and
general question of the Middle East, including its
essential Palestinian
component.
At that time the
Council was thwarted by ,a veto. Now the people
under occupation have risen in anger and protest
against the oppressive and intolerable
situation,
sending the Council the message of urgency it failed
to grasp in January. An oppressive status quo must
not be mistaken for stability. A situation controlled by
force is not a situation of normalcy. A state of armed
occupation cannot be treated by a section of the
international
community
as an acceptable condition
with no explosive implications.
The explosion has
occurred. The people of the occupied West Bank-the
people of Jerusalem,
of Hebron,
of Nablus, of
Ramallah-have
revolted. They have risen in anger and
courage to face, without arms or defences, the ruthless
military machine of the force of occupation.

10. Nowhere is the metamorphosis more radical and
more painful than in occupied Jerusalem. No wonder,
then, that the spark of rebellion started in Jerusalem.
Jerusalem is the most beautiful and precious part of the
historic legacy of the Arabs of Palestine; it is unique.
It is also the symbol of a deep and transcendental
unity in the Islamic world. It stands for human brotherhood and common destiny. It is as universal and
pluralistic in spirit and in symbolism as it is distinctly
the legacy of the distinct people who inherited it and
protected it and lived in and around it for many
centuries. Until the advent of the invading and fanatical
Zionists, Jerusalem signified tolerance, openness and
the eternal spiritual values. It was the first phase of
Zionist invasion which divided Jerusalem in 1948.
The second phase of the invasion, accomplished
in
1967, led to its immediate and forcible annexation by
Israel and the gradual but systematic mutilation of its
physical, cultural and demographic
character. As
early as July 1967 the matter was brought to the
urgent attention of the General Assembly,
which
adopted two resolutions calling on Israel to withhold
its measures and actions aimed at changing the
character and status of the occupied city [resolutions
2253 (ES-I/j and 2254 (ES-k’)]; Then, repeatedly, the
Security Council considered the deteriorating
situation in Jerusalem resulting from the feverish Israeli
measures there and adopted resolutions 252 (1968),
267 (1969) and 298 (1971). There was even a special
debate and a resolution [271 (1969)] when the arson
in the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque took place under Israeli
occupation in September 1969;-

8. The most enlightened and benevolent occupation
in history-as
the ample apologists of Israeli racism
have for years been telling us it is-has panicked and
discarded all pretences. The subtlety of Israel’s repressive techniques in the occupied territories has rapidly
evaporated and given way to the crudest and most
blatantly cruel and abhorrent methods, which even
the friendly media in our host country could not conceal sufftciently. Some of us have been warning all
along against international
complacency and lack of
sensitivity towards an inherently explosive situation.
Some of us have been warning for years that it is most
dangerous and irrational to allow the state of occupation in the Middle East to last indefinitely and not
expect a drift towards violence and explosion. How
could Israel be allowed to continue to occupy since
June 1967 an area three times its own size and
inhabited by over a million Arabs? How could Israel
be allowed to block every avenue to a peaceful settlement and a’peaceful evacuation? How could Israel
be allowed to utilize every hour of its occupation to
plant its own settlements in the occupied territories,
transfer the population, expropriate vast areas of land
belonging to the inhabitants,
exploit and absorb the
economy of the areas under its occupation, force the
needy and helpless members of the Arab population
in the West Bank and Gaza to be turned into cheap
labour in Israel’s factories and construction projects,
and, above all, annex offtcially and absorb physically
the most historic and precious part of the occupied
territories, Jerusalem?

11. But notwithstanding
these clear and explicit
resolutions, Israel continued its systematic policy of
physically and demographically
altering the character
of the city and subjecting it to Israel’s aggressive
religious chauvinism. The occupation authorities continue to expropriate Arab land and property inside
the occupied and annexed walled city and outside it,
C
2

in order to build new Israeli quarters on the ruins of
bulldozed Arab quarters. The area of land confiscated
so far in Arab Jerusalem has exceeded 20,000 dunums,
which is a very substantial area in a small and highly
congested city.

Their religious sites have no sanctity. Their cultural
heritage is a barrier to Zionist cultural domination.
Al-Aqsa Mosque has been violated not only physically
but increasingly in more radical and ugly ways. Its
spiritual dignity has been increasingly undermined.
The last few years have witnessed increasing violations
and acts of desecration against it. This year there is
a rising tide of attacks by gangs of delinquents who
enter the mosque publicly to create commotion
and
chaos and to commit acts of desecration and provoke
Muslim worshippers. There have also been orchestrated voices inside Israel calling for the division of
the mosque and the taking over of part of it. Others
call for its elimination.
In such a climate of fanaticism
and xenophobia came the ruling by an Israeli magistrate
last January allowing Jews to exercise religious rites
in the courtyard’of Al-Aqsa Mosque, thereby reversing
practice and tradition and giving justification
for more
blatant encroachments on the Islamic holy places and
cultural heritage.

12. At the beginning of 1975 the Knesset-the
Israeli
parliament-approved
the realization of a master planfor Jerusalem, by which 30 per cent of the total area
of the West Bank of Jordan would be annexed to
Jerusalem in order to be gradually absorbed. This area
includes 9 towns and 60 villages, inhabited by 250,000
people; on their ruins new Israeli quarters are to be
built, extending over all of Arab Jerusalem. Shu’fat,
Jabal Al-Masharif, Hai Al-Magharbah,
Sharafat, Beit
Hanina, Qalandia, Al-Tur, Nabi Samuel, Jabal AlMukabir, Sur Bahir-all
these ancient Arab names and
areas are quickly disappearing and losing identity.
When the Israeli plan in Jerusalem is completed the
new quarters will comprise 35,000 housing units,
accommodating
122,000 new Israeli Jewish residents
living on Arab land and radically altering the character
and composition of the city.

16. The same pattern has been demonstrated
in
another place: in the city of Hebron the occupation
authorities have outraged the whole Islamic world
and all enlightened
humanity
by their ruthless
encroachments on the sanctity of the sacred Al-Haram
Al-Ibrahimi.
The acts of desecration of the mosque
gradually escalated and intensified.
Muslims were
obstructed in their prayers in this ancient mosque.
The public call to prayer, which is essential at prayertime in the Islamic religion, was banned. Prayer for
the dead in the mosque, which is also essential in the
religious tradition, was banned by the Israeli authorities. -The furnishings and interior belongings of the
mosque were taken away. Jewish feasts and wedding
ceremonies
were held in the mosque. Religious
teachers and personnelof the mosque were subjected
to beating, insults and often detention by the authorities. Finally, the Israeli Minister of Defence ordered
the division of the whole mosque area, assigning the
larger part, which includes most of the Islamic
historical and holy features, as the Jewish part. The
inhabitants of the area, whose ancestors had built the
mosque and worshipped in it for centuries, were
restricted to one entrance.

13. Various methods of pressure are used to effect
this systematic displacement of the Arabs of Jerusalem.
The Arab-owned hills surrounding the city have already
been taken over, thus cutting off the Arab population
of Jerusalem from their compatriots in the rest of the
occupied West Bank of Jordan. In the meantime, the
limits of annexed Jerusalem
have already been
expanded to constitute a substantial part of the West
Bank extending to the north, the east and the south
of the city and to include an expanding number of
towns and villages. These most radical changes in the
physical and in the demographic and cultural composition of the Holy City aim at the systematic*strangulation of the Arab inhabitants and the gradual obliteration of the city’s Arab character.
14. In this relentless enterprise Israel has infringed
upon the Islamic waqf-which
is the Muslim endowments and religious properties-and
pulled down many
of them, as well as mosques and venerated shrines. The
historic quarter of Muslim saints and heroes, Hai
Al-Magharbah,
was 1one of the earliest targets of
demolition.
The Sharaf Quarter, which contains 600
pieces of Islamic religious properties, as well as four
mosques and many unique historical sites, has already
been taken over. “Excavations”
have been undertaken with a spirit of vengeance and provocation
under and around the major Islamic sites, such as the
famous Al-Aqsa Mosque, Hayit Al-Buraq and AlMasjid Al-Umari. Regardless of all Israeli assurances
and justifications,
if these persistent “excavations”
around the Al-Aqsa Mosque continue, they will undermine its foundations and cause its collapse.

17. While religious and cultural domination and displacement take place in the occupied areas, a parallel
systematic process is taking place in the whole of the
occupied territories. Since the occupation in 1967 the
occupation authorities have been engaged in a policy
of planting Israeli settlements in the various parts of
the occupied land. Israeli sources tell us that over
60 settlements are constructed on confiscated land and
in the midst of the Arab population. They represent
a creeping colonization
and national replacement-a
fearful and inescapable national fate for the inhabitants.
There is daily friction and tortured protest as the new
settlers, backed by the military machine of the occupation, embark on a new displacement
of the people
living peacefully in their own ancestral homeland.

15. This Israeli attitude is not accidental. It fits in
with the pattern of attitudes and policies of the
Israeli State towards the cultural legacy and rights of
the people who have come under Israeli occupation.
3

the human rights of the inhabitants
territories.

18. How could such a situation remain calm and
stable? How could the people of the West Bank remain
silent? If the international
community,
paralysed by
the powerful who chose to back the aggressors, could
settle for inaction, the victims could not. There is an
uprising in the occupied Holy Land. The people of
Jerusalem, Ramallah,
Al-Bireh,
Nablus, Al-Khalil,
Bethlehem,
Jericho and Tulkarm
have exploded
against the occupation. The mayors and municipal
councils have resigned. Young Arabs are facing Israeli
armed cars with stones and fists. A general strike has
spread through the cities of the West Bank. Violent
street clashes have become a daily event. Israel has
called upon its expertise in various forms of suppression. Curfews have been imposed. Striking storeowners are threatened, beaten, arrested and forced to
open their stores. Schoolchildren
are savagely
attacked by the occupation forces. It is a painful and
tragic but heroic sight.

of the occupied

22. While all this is urgent, the ultimate and most
essential aim of the Council must be the final and
irrevocable Israeli withdrawal from all the occupied
Arab territories.
23. The PRESIDENT
(interprerarion from French):
The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
24. Mr. ALLAF (Syrian Arab Republic): Allow me
at the outset of my statement to express to you, Sir,
how happy I am to deliver my contribution
to this
debate under your leadership. We are convinced that,
under the wise presidency of a son of a brother country
of Africa, this debate will come to a fruitful end.
25. Today the Security Council is considering, for
the fourth time within a period of less than four
months, a dangerous situation resulting from Israel’s
continued ,illegal occupation of the Arab territories.
In fact, the Council met towards the end of last November to consider the expiration of the mandate of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force in the
occupied Syrian Golan and decided, in its resolution 381 (1975), to renew the .Force’s mandate for
another six months and to reconvene on 12 January
1976 in order to undertake a full debate on the Middle
East problem including the Palestinian question, with
the participation
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization.

19. Is it any wonder that the explosion has taken
place in the occupied territories? It would have been
unnatural and against the logic of life and history if
the explosion had not taken place.
20. The message that the spontaneous and massive
uprising gives us has a clear and historic significance.
It is a message to the nations of the world that the
oppression of alien occupation and rule has no place
in the present world order. It is a message to the
nations of the third world that the struggle of the people
of the world against foreign domination is indivisible.
It is a reminder to the powerful and complacent supporters of the oppressor that their policy is deficient
and their calculations wrong and their sense of history
absent. It is an agonized call for international
awakening and decisive intervention to stop the agony by
ending an anachronistic
and’ indefensible
military
domination
by one powerful and powerfully backed
State of a peaceful and unarmed population living in
its own homeland. It is a brave and sad message
from the people of the Holy Land to the world that
Jerusalem, the heavenly and serene, is being mutilated
and desecrated and tortured while the world watches
and the powerful look in the other direction.

26. As Israel responded to that decision less than
48 hours later by a series of barbarous air raids against
the camps of the Palestinian .refugees in Lebanon,
the Council met again early in December to consider
the situation and, on 8 December, voted, by a majority
of 13 to 1, with 1 abstention, adraft resolution 131138981
condemning Israel’s aggression against Lebanon and
the Palestinian refugees. But the draft resolution failed
to be adopted in spite of its overwhelming
majority
because the sole negative vote was that of a permanent
member, namely, the United States.
27. The Council reconvened, as decided, on 12 January 1976. After a serious and constructive two-week
debate, the Council was prevented once more by
another veto by the same member from adopting a
widely supported equilibrated
and equitable draft
resolution
[S/11940]
incorporating
all the basic
elements for the establishment
of a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.
‘i

21. The Security Council cannot ignore the imperative of action this time. If in the past some of its
members found an excuse for inaction in technical
arguments and the claims that action by the Council
would undercut their unilateral initiatives, ,this time
such arguments and claims do not arise. The Council
must act immediately
to highlight the urgency and the
seriousness of the situation. World opinion must know
and be called upon to assist the victims of aggression. Israel must be compelled to abide by the principles of international law governing the conduct of the
occupying Power in the occupied areas. It must refrain
from any action which is designed to change the
character and status of the occupied land, particularly
occupied Jerusalem. It must rescind measures already
taken in this regard. It must be compelled to respect

28. The Council is called upon once more today to
consider urgently the serious situation prevailing as a
result of Israel’s continued occupation,
expansion,
annexation and illegal measures designed to alter the
demographic
composition,
as well as the political,
cultural and religious status of Jerusalem and other
parts of the occupied Arab territories.
4

29. The Secretary-General drew the attention of the
international community to the dangerous situation
arising from the recent incidents on the West Bank
and expressed his concern on 19 March about the
human suffering and casualties. The Secretary-General
very rightly pointed out that those incidents showed
the urgent need to increase efforts in the search for a
just and lasting peace in the area.

on Israeli television on 17March to exhort the residents
of Kiryat Arba to “shoot to kill’ because Al-Khalil
Arabs “have to be taught a lesson and put in their
place”. However, according to Jewish Telegraphic
Agency bulletin No. 55 of 19 March, Minister Shimon
Peres disputed Rabbi Levinger’s privilege of shooting
Arabs and reminded the Kiryat Arba residents later,
in a television interview, that “only the authorized
representatives of the State and its security forces are
permitted to shoot or give others orders to shoot”.
34. The Zionist violations of Moslem religious rights
are not new or confined to this latest act of desecration.
During and after the 1948 war, the Zionists destroyed
hundreds of mosques and churches in the areas which
fell under their occupation. Again, during the 1967
war, the Israeli forces shelled and damaged many
Moslem and Christian shrines in Jerusalem and other
parts of the occupied territories. The Israeli forces
dynamited 135 buildings and a mosque in Old
Jerusalem in order to clear the way for a square in
front of Al-buraq. Since 1967 the Zionist authorities
have violated Moslem rights in Al-Haram Al-Ibrahimi
in Al-Khalil by restricting Moslems to praying in the
mosque on Fridays only. The Zionists gradually turned
a great part of the Ibrahim Mosque into a synagogue,
and their violations culminated in August 1975 in a
decision of the Israeli cabinet to introduce new arrangements for Jewish and Moslem prayers at the Moslem
mosque, which resulted in the actual division of the
holy site of Masjed Al-Khalil and the altering of its
institutional structure and established religious
practices.
35. Since 1967 the General Assembly has adopted
six resolutions and the Security Council four rcsolutions on Jerusalem and the Holy Places. After the
criminal arson at the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque on
21 August 1969, the Council in its resolution 271
(1969) condemned Israel’s failure to comply with
previous Council and Assembly resolutions concerning
the status of the city of Jerusalem and called upon it
scrupulously to observe the provisions-of the fourth
Geneva Convention’ and the principles of international
law governing the military occupation. The Council
reiterated that request in its resolution 298 (1971) and
deplored the failure of Israel to respect the repeated
resolutions of the Council and the Assembly.
36. As reported by the Zionist press itself, the
uprising of the Arab population in the occupied West
Bank, which is spreading to all towns and villages of
the occupied territories and reaching the dimensions
of a wide popular revolution against the Zionist
occupier, was sparked off not only by Israeli desecration of Al-Aqsa and other Moslem holy shrines but
also by the Zionist illegal settlement of Arab land and
Israeli oppression of the Arab population. In fact,
nine years after the occupation of the West Bank, the
Gaza Strip and the other parts of Arab territories,
the Zionist regime is pursuing its inhuman oppression
of the Arab population and it’s systematic policy of
expansion and aggression.

30. In fact, for several weeks now the occupied West
Bank has been the scene of violent mass demonstrations against the Israeli occupier. Thousands of young
Palestinian students, workers, men, women and even
children are facing Israel’s heavily armed soldiers
and paratroopers with nothing more than their determination not to kneel at the feet of their alien
oppressor. The latest spate of revolt against the Israeli
forces of occupation was triggered by the ruling of the
Jerusalem Magistrate’s Court on 28 January to the
effect that Jews have the right to pray in Al-Aqsa
Mosque, as well as by the Israeli authorities’ conspiratorial attitude towards illegal Jewish settlers on the
West Bank.
31. Arab students in Bethlehem, Ramallah, Al-Bireh,
Tulkarm, Jenin, Nablus and Jerusalem roamed the
streets of their towns and villages in protest against
Zionist desecration of Moslem holy places and against
Jewish settlements on .the West Bank. They raised
the Palestinian flag over their schools and buildings
and found nothing but stones to hurl at the Israeli
soldiers who attacked them with tear gas and clubbed
the young boys and girls with heavy wooden sticks and
their rifle butts.
32. Israeli soldiers invaded schools and dragged
young students out and beat them savagely before
arresting them. What is more serious, ‘near Azaria
village, the Zionist soldiers opened fire on a group of
young Arab demonstrators. Three Arab youths were
wounded; one of them, an 11-year-old boy, was hit
in the head by the bullets of the Israeli soldiers and
was taken to the hospital in very critical condition,
Hundreds of young students were beaten severely’and
arrested. A curfew was imposed on Ramallah, AiBireh and Halhoul. The mayors and town councils
of Nablus, Al-Bireh, Ramallah, Bir Zeit, Silwad and
other West Bank towns resigned in protest, despite
Zionist threats. Israel Defence Minister Shimon Peres
threatened that “the Israel Defence Force would take
the required measures and would not hesitate to act
vigorously in the face of any disturbances of public
order”. A few hours later Israeli soldiers opened
fire’ on the young Arab students.
33. But Shimon Peres was not the only Israeli personality to threaten the young Arab students protesting
Zionist violations. As we heard this morning [2893rd
meeting] from the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, Rabbi Moshe Levinger,
leader of Kiryat Arba, the orthodox Jewish settlement
implanted a few years ago adjacent to Al-Khalil, went
5

37. The long list of Israeli violations can best be
summarized by merely recalling paragraph 5 of General
Assembly resolution 3525 A (XXX) of 15 December
1975, on the report of the Special Committee to
Investigage Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories.
In that paragraph in particular the following Israeli
policies and practices were condemned:

Thousands of Bedouins were forcibly evicted from
their land. The total area confiscated from them is
around 100,000 dunums.. .
“The same activity on the part of the occupiers
is also seen in Arab Jerusalem-confiscation of
22,000 dunums of Arab land in the city and its
suburbs and the forcible eviction of tens of thousands
of’Arabs who used to live and work there.

“(a)’ The annexation of parts of the occupied
territories;

“. . . After’ the demolition of 800 Arab buildings,
10 .new Israeli sectors’ were built encircling Jerusalem, reaching Beit Jaiah and the road to Jericho-‘a
ring round Jerusalem’, as the authorities are calling
‘it. A serious demographic change is the result of
this’ policy, a .forcible decrease in the number of
Arabic inhabitants, from 140$00 in 1948 to 70;OO0
in 1974.

“(6) The establishment of Israeli settlements
therein and the transfer of an alien population
thereto;
“(c) The destruction .and demolition of Arab
houses;

“. .. ‘A total of some 13,000houses were destroyed
during the occupation, and this figure ‘does not
include the completely ruined Golan Heights. On
the ruins of the three peaceful villages of Yaln,
Beit Nooba and Arinas, destroyed by the Israeli
Army in 1967,. flowers are now growing. A
Canadian investor has built a recreation centre there.
But under the flowers, from the depths of the earth,
we can hear the cry of a life which was buried under
the ruins.
,

“(d) The confiscation and expropriation of Arab
property in the occupied territories and all other
transactions for the acquisition of land involving
the Israeli authorities, institutions or nationals on
the one hand, and the inhabitants or institutions of
: ,the occupied territories on the other;
“(e) The evacuation, deportation, expulsion, displacement and transfer of Arab inhabitants of the
occupied territories, and the denial of their right
to return;

“The colonization of the occupied territories by
Jewish settlers is going on at this very moment. There
are more than 50 new settlements in the Golan, and
18 more are planned. Near Rafah, a city is under
construction.”

“v) Mass arrests, administrative detention and
ill-treatment of the Arab population;
“(g) The pillaging of.archaeological and cultural
mwp;

39. The Zionist leaders do not even attempt to hide
their designs to usurp all the occupied Arab territories
and to Judaize the Holy City of Jerusalem and the
rest of the sacred religious Moslem and Christian
sites. The New York Times reported only four days
ago, on 18 March, that Mr. Teddy Kollek, the Mayor
of Jerusalem, attacked in a radio interview “right-wing
members of the Municipal Council who had led groups
of young Jews to the Temple Mount for prayer services”, not because this was wrong and illegal but
because such conduct in an explosive situation was
irresponsible. Mr. Kollek added that Israel’s sovereignty over ail of Jerusalem, including “the Temple
Mount”, was undisputed, which means that Israel
claims sovereignty now over the Aqsa Mosque itself.
The Zionist mayor concluded the interview by stating:

“(h) The interference with religious freedoms and
practices, as well as family rights and customs;
“T(i) The illegal exploitation of the natural wealth,
resources and population of the occupied territories.”
38. In a statement at the World Women’s Congress
in Berlin last October, Israeli lawyer Mrs. Felicia
Langer described what she had seen with her own
eyes, day by day, over all those years in the occupied
territory. She said that she wished to state clearly
that “a policy of institutionalized terror is the official
policy of the Israeli occupier in the territories occupied
in 1967”. She went on to say that 27,000 Palestinians
had been imprisoned since 1967 and that some 4,000
were still in Israeli gaols. She told the Congress:

“We must leave some things for future generations
and for the coming of the Messiah. Wedon’t have
to do it all today. We must consolidate what we have
obtained and not invite confrontations.**

“The demolition of houses, the confiscation of
property, the imposition of long curfews, the staging
of sieges against whole villages-these are the
characteristic features of the occupation. Israel has
confiscated more than one and a half million dunums
‘ in the West Bank, more than one sixth of the total
.area of the West Bank, one third of the Gaza Strip.

40. Thus it is evident that the question for the Zionist
leaders is only one of time and opportunity. But must
the international community remain hand-tied or silent
in the face of this systematic Zionist policy of colo6

nizing,the Arab territories, falsifying-their identity and.
altering their demographic,
cultural and political
status?

regrettable
that the United States continues,
on
procedural pretexts, to be the only Council ‘member
to oppose the participation
of the PLO on’ a basis
which has been repeatedly supported by the overwhelming majority of the Council’s members.

41. How much longer is the United Nations going to
cIose its eyes and ears while every principle in its
Charter is defied and violated? Israel’s occupation of
the Arab territories not only is a flagrant violation
of the Charter and the -Universal Declaration
on
Human Rights, but constitutes a continued act of
aggression in violation of the Charter, the principles
of international
law and, in particular, the definition
of aggression adopted by the General Assembly in its
resolution 3314 (XXIX), which affirms that “any military occupation, however temporary, resulting from...
invasion or attack” is an act of aggression.

46. The tragedy of the Palestinian people has been’
going on for so long. During the last 29 years as
many as 244 resolutions have been adopted by the
General Assembly and the Security Council, most of
which remain unimplemented
because of Israel’s
intransigence and its persistent defiance of the United
Nations.
47. The Security Council has the clear responsibility
under the Charter to take the immediate
necessary
measures to put an end to a racist colonial situation
which, if it continues, threatens the whole region with
explosion. An end must be speedily put to Israeli
occupation of the West Bank, Gaza and the rest of the
occupied Arab territories. The nightmare in which the
Middle East has been living for three decades must
come to an end, and Israel must implement the reievant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions.
If it insists on defying the United Nations and
maintaining
its illegal occupation of the Arab territories, the Council should then carry out its responsibilities under the Charter in order to compel Israel
to comply with the Charter and with United Nations
resolutions.

42. Even without oppression or repressive measures,
military occupation is evil enough and constitutes a
violation of the most elementary national rights of the
people of the occupied territories; it is also an affront
to their honour and dignity. However, the Zionist
occupation of the Arab territories is particularly cruel
and ugly because, unlike other cases of military occupation, it is designed to uproot the indigenous population
and to replace it with alien settlers just because these
alien invaders
are Jews.
”1
43. In this era of decolonization,
the United Nations
cannot remain idle while a racist colonial regime is
swallowing the Arab territories piece by piece and
expanding an entity based solely on racial and religious
discrimination.
But Israel cannot succeed in obliterating the Palestinian people. Sooner or later the
Zionists have to recognize the existence of the people
of Palestine, because this existence .is manifesting
itself very strongly through the continued, determined
and heroic struggle of the Palestinian people inside
and outside the occupied territories.

48. The people of Palestine has been prevented from
exercising its right to self-determination
by the forceful occupation
of its territory,
its uprooting
and
expulsion from its land and the denial of the Paletsinian
refugees’ right to return to their homes and property.
No people can exercise its inalienable right to, selfdetermination when, as a result of aggression, its territory is under the yoke of alien occupation, nor can
any person enjoy his basic human rights or participate
in deciding the destiny and future of his own people
as long as that person is denied the right to return to
his land and property. It is indispensable, therefore,
that the national inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people be implemented and guaranteed by the Security
Council and the General Assembly. Resolution 3236
(XXIX) of the General Assembly must be implemented,
particularly
its paragraphs 1 and 2 reaffirming
the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including
its right .to self-determination,
national independence
and sovereignty, as well as the right of the Palestinians
to return to their homes and property.

44. The right of the Palestinians under Israeli occupation to resist the Zionist occupier with all means at
their disposal is legitimate and is recognized by the
Charter and the principles of international law. There
can be no peace or tranquillity
for the Zionists until
they evacuate the last inch of the occupied Arab territories and recognize the inalienable national rights of
the Palestinian people.
45. Israel has’ always defied the international
community and refused to comply with the Charter and
United Nations resolutions. The Zionists have boycotted previous meetings of the Security Council,
affirming that the only place where they would meet the
Palestine Liberation Organization is on the battlefield.
It seems that the Zionists have realized now that their
absence will not prevent the Council or the members
of the international family from coming to the conviction that no solution of the Middle East problem is
possible in the absence of the people of Palestine and
that the PLO is the sole legitimate representative of
the Palestinian people. In this respect, it is really

49. Israel is in the habit of talking about nearly
everything except the rights of the Palestinian people
or the unavoidability
of its withdrawal from all the
occupied Arab territories. There is no doubt in my
mind that the Zionist representative will, a while later,
assault the United Nations, the Security Council
and its members for directing their attention to the
situation in the occupied Arab territories,
where,
according to him, the Arab inhabitants are submerged
7

by the kindness and generosity of their occupiers and
are much better off than their compatriots who are
deprived of the blessings of Zionist occupation. Why
not? Have you not read the editorial of The New York
Times this morning describing the Israeli occupation
of the West Bank as “among the most benign military
occupations of modem times”? What The New York
Times, which otherwise was logical enough to call for
an end to the decade of Israeli military occupation,
should know is that no military occupation is benign,
particularly the Zionist type of settlers’ racist colonization. The point of view of The New York Times
would have been much different, of course, if the
territories in question had been part of American
territory.

to my regret an all too infrequent phenomenon, and to
join in the good wishes and congratulations which
have been expressed to you, Sir, on your position
as President of the Council.
55. I should like to add a word of welcome to the
representative of the United States, whose rich and
outstanding background will stand him in good stand
in representing the greatest democracy in the world and
in being the main defender of the institutions of
democracy in this world Organization.
56. I am invariably intrigued by the- Syrian representative’s propensity for so frequently attributing
to others the wrongs which his regime represents.
This came to mind when I read a very intriguing
story in a current magazine. It’stated:

50. The Security Council is called upon to adopt the
necessary measures in order to put an end to Israel’s
violations of the human and national rights of the Arab
population in the occupied territories. There is only
one way to ensure the termination of Israel’s persistent violations and repressive measures against the
Arab inhabitants, and that is the complete withdrawal
of Israeli occupation forces from the West Bank, the
Gaza Strip and the rest of the occupied Arab territories.

“A West African assigned to the French Foreign
Service for training before his country was given
independence in 1960encountered an Arab diplomat
at a dinner party. The Arab was from the northern
region of what was then the United Arab Republic,
specifically from Damascus. He told the West
African that his country should beware of the Jews.
The West African said that he had never met any
Jews and asked what they were like. ‘They are the
people who come into your country, get a stranglehold on your commerce, move up into finance,
share nothing with the natives and send their profits
back home’ the Arab explained. ‘Ah, you must
excuse me’, the West African replied, ‘in my country
we call them Syrians.’ ”

51. The Arab men, women, boys, girls, students,
workers and youths of the occupied territories are
looking to the Council with hope and aspiration, for
they are unable to confront the war machine or the
sophisticated arsenal of the most ruthless colonialist
racist invasion in modem history. It is within the
Council’s responsibility and power to respond to their
appeal for liberation, national independence and selfdetermination.

57. I am moved by the representative’s concern for
the holy places. Where was he in 1969when, according
to the daily Al-Hayat in Beirut:

52. In concluding, I should like to quote from my
statement a week ago before the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People. I said:

“No one in the whole Moslem world can ever
forget 24 January 1965, the day when for the first
time in history tanks penetrated into the great
Ummayad Mosque in Damascus, shelling the
prayers. Two hundred prayers were killed on that
day. The great Mosque was closed for several days
in order to enable the cleaning of its wails, fences
and roofs and the mihrab, which were soiled by the
blood of the slain.”

“The Syrian Arab Republic is committed to a
just settlement which takes into consideration first
and above all the attainment of the inalienable
national rights of the Palestinian people and the total
liberation of the occupied Arab territories. President
Assad reaffhmed last October that Syria will not
accept any movement on the Syrian front unless it
is coupled with an identical movement on the
Palestinian front. The Syrian Arab Republic stands
by this commitment.“*

58. Words fail me as I contemplate this barren and
futile discussion based on falsities and taking place with
such an obvious lack of enthusiasm on the part of
the participating members. The late Sir Winston Churchill when in opposition on one occasion accused the
then incumbent Prime Minister of turning the Mother
of Parliaments into a public convenience. I cannot
escape the impression that the PLO has succeeded, if
in nothing else, in converting this Organization into
such a public convenience for its own purposes. The
world is on fire, war threatens in a number ofareas,
the issues in Africa are momentous and vital and yet,
when the PLO so willed it as a function of- interArab rivalry, this entire Organization is called to order

53. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Israel, on
whom 1 now call.
54. Mr. HERZOG (Israel): I have a vague suspicion
that in the course of this discussion I shall not be in
total agreement in my remarks with a number of the
members of the Council, and above all with my Arab
colleagues. All the more reason, therefore, to open
them in a spirit of agreement with my Arab colleagues,
8

by it and is obliged to cease the discussion of issues
’ affecting the peace of the world in order to accommodate its political requirements. When it wills it, a
meeting takes place; if it does not desire a meeting,
it does not take place.
59. I have not had the opportunity till now to comment on this new and bizarre departure of seating an
organization which is not a State and does not even
claim to be a State, with rights equal to those accorded
to Member States. This act is in flagrant violation
of the Charter, which specifically allows only for the
seating of States, whether Members or not, or of
individuals, at the Security Council table. Nowhere in
the Charter is there provision for the seating of an
organization, certainly not with rights equal to those
of Member States: The decision of the Council in this
matter has been decried by many international jurists,
such as Professor Gross of Tufts University, as a
flagrant breach of the Charter. Mr. Harlan Cleveland,
a former United States Assistant Secretary of State
and Director of the Aspen Institute programme in
international affairs, wrote on this issue but a few
weeks ago: “For the Security Council to’ decide that
a non-governmental organization can be seated at
the Council table is hardly a ‘procedural matter’;
it’s more like an unorthodox way of amending the
Charter.” You have opened a Pandora’s box, and
I look forward with great interest to viewing the
legalistic acrobatics in which many of the representatives will indulge when dissident and dissatisfied
movements challenge their authority, urged on by
those who can invariably be counted upon to indulge
in a little innocent and not so innocent international
mischief. Yes, a Pandora’s box has been opened, and
the price for this example of moral weakness and of
the triumph of expediency will regrettably be paid by
the Organization. There are seated here these representatives of the only so-called liberation movement
in the world whose leadership does not sufficiently
trust the people it is purporting to liberate to live
amongst them.
60. The President of Egypt is on record in the past
weeks stating exactly what he thinks of them. In-the
Saudi Arabian newspa er Ukat , he expressed the hope
that “I only wish the s aiestinians would give up their
appearances and speak the truth for once”. Indeed,
they cannot appear in any public forum in Egypt
today. They are seated here, and yet it would be more
than their life is worth to enter Jordan, let alone speak
or be active there. The Syrian Government very rightly
maintains the tightest control over them and is in the
active process of turning the PLO into a Syriancontroiied organization. President Sadat, in the
interview I have referred to, says that they propose
to replace Mr. Arafat with their own candidate,
Zuheir Muhsein, whom President Sadat characterized
as a common car thief. They were free to operate
in Lebanon, with what calamitous and, catastrophic
results we ail know, in the face of the callous indifference of this body to the tragedy of Lebanon.

61. Yes, how utterly incongruous this situation is.
Here we are seated solemnly in a forum, which
includes some of the great nations of the world,
discussing an allegation based on malicious falsehoods,
wasting our time, while next door to us in Lebanon
a tragedy of horrifying proportions is unravelling, as a
Member State disintegrates, as a million Christians live
in dire peril of their lives. Here we are facing a
tragedy of immense proportions in human suffering,
in religious repression and in political significance,
while for almost a year the Security Council has
not seen fit to address itself to this calamitous
disaster.. .
62. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization has raised a point of order. I call on
him.
63. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
The Council is meeting this afternoon to discuss items
shown in document S/Agenda/1894. What I am hearing
now is a statement about what is happening in Lebanon,
and this is not on the agenda. So may I please ask
you, Mr. President, to see to it that the speakers
confine themselves to the points mentioned on the
agenda.
64. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I call on the representative of the United Kingdom
on a point of order.
65. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): We have
listened so far to five speeches which on any view of
the matter could hardly be characterized as pro-Israeli.
With great respect, I think that the Israeli delegation
is entitled to have its say in its own way and in its
own words.
66. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I call on the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization on a point of order.
67. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
I have not asked that the representative of the Zionist
entity should. not be able to make a statement. Ail
I have asked you, Mr. President, is that the statement
should be confined to the item on the agenda. In this
meeting we are not discussing Northern Ireland, we
are not discussing the situation in Lebanon; we are
discussing the serious, situation arising from the
practices of the Zionist authorities against our people
in occupied Palestine.
68. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
We shall now continue our discussion. I would request
the representative of Israel to continue his statement.
69. Mr. HERZOG (Israel): Is there no limit to the
basenessof international cynical hypocrisy as reflected
in this situation? According to the figures issued by
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

on 18 February, some 12,000 people have been killed
in Lebanon-more,
incidentally, than the total
casualties of Israel in five wars-some 40,000 have
been wounded and maimed and some 40,000 people
have been directly affected by the events; between
10 and 20 per cent of the homes in Beirut and the
surroundings have been destroyed or damaged. These
were comparatively low estimates.
,70. Whatever the figures, we are seeing-and we in
Israel see it only too clearly as the Christian refugees
seek shelter in our country-a terrifying development
which threatens to escalate into a human holocaust.
And what has the Security Council done? Nothing.
Your silence is as shattering as that of the Christian
church which, gagged by expediency, contemplates
in silence as their flock is threatened with extinction.
Instead you have the time in which to debate an
allegation based on a malicious falsehood, which is
apparent to all, and demonstrations, to which I shall
refer, primarily of incited teenagers in which there was
one killed and two wounded and in connexion with
which an Israeli soldier was arrested by the Israeli
authorities on the charge of opening fire without orders
and was charged in court last Friday. Surely, in the
one-sided orgy of hate against Israel which is beginning
to exercise the United Nations almost to the exclusion
of everything else in the world, even common
expediency would dictate a measure of proportion, if
for no other reason at least for the sake of appearances.
71. The matter which we are discussing here is a
matter sub judice in the courts of Israel.The very fact
of raising the issue at this stage, therefore, focuses on
a most serious development which has taken place
and which must rapidly erode what little standing is
left in the world to the Organization. The principle of
the separation of powers whereby the executive does
not control the judiciary applies in all democratic
countries and is in fact also part of the United Nations
system. One of the forms which it takes, or is supposed
to take; in the United Nations is that whenthe conduct
of a State is challenged two things follow. One is the
notion of the impartiality of the United Nations; the
other is that of giving the party which is charged a
fair hearing in an atmosphere of impartiality. Over
the years, but in particular over the past five years,
both these concepts have been forgetten in United
Nations practice. The idea of an impartial hearing
has been replaced by the idea that the United Nations
organs are both prosecutor and judge. In this very
debate the charge was framed and judgement was
formulated even before I had the opportunity to present
my case. The assumption was simply made that
whatever I might have to say would be totally irrelevant. Nothing could better illustrate the point which
I am trying to make than this meeting. An allegation
has been preferred against the State of Israel.

ment’s side of the case. In other words, it would be
logical to assume that this body would hear the accusations, would listen to Israel’s reply, would deliberate
and then decide. But no, these principles have been
forgotten. On Friday, three daysago, members &this
body had before them a draft of a resolution, a judgement, which they were already discussing amongst
themselves. On Friday, three days ago, the representative of Pakistan and his Libyan colleague who
called this meeting urgently and who submitted‘ the
complaint against Israel, drafted a resolution prejudging the issue and discussed this draft resolution,
this judgement, with many of my colleagues at this
table. Unbelievable, but true. In the type of society
which I represent, this procedure is abhorrent and
would be rejected out of hand; To prepare a- draft
resolution, a judgement, before you have heard the
sides, especially when you are.aware-or most of you
are aware-that the allegation made was nothing but
a damnable lie, is a travesty ofall the principles that this
Organization is today betraying and a form of procedure which we can only condemn. This is a truly
“Alice in Wonderland” situation. “ ‘Let the jury
consider their verdict’, the King said... ‘No, No’,
said the Queen of Hearts, ‘sentence first, verdict
afterwards* “. Had Lewis Carroll lived today, he
would not have been obliged to have recourse to the
creation of a wonderland to house the incongruous.
He need not have done more than let Alice loose in
this building. All she would have to do would be to
wear a Star of David in order to hear the imperious
“Off with her head” at every turn.
73. The failure of the United Nations to understand
the operation of these fundamental principles of natural
law in the international scene is mirrored by its failure
to understand the operation of the same principles in
the domestic scene of true democracies.
74. Let me address myself to the letter of,complaint
dated 19 March to you, Sir, from the representatives
of Pakistan and Libya.[S112017]. This letter also-refers
to the letter dated 12 March from.ther~presentative~~~’
Saudi Arabia to the Secretary-General [S/12022].
According to the statement annexed to that letter, the
ruling of the Magistrate’s Court was to the effect
that Jews have the right to pray in Al-Aqsa Mosque.
I repeat, in Al-Aqsa Mosque. This ahegation is a lie,
a damnable lie, in a mischievous and sinister attempt
to incite religious feeling for political purposes. No
such ruling was made by Judge. Ruth Orr in the
Magistrate’s Court in Jerusalem. And it is utterly
unbelievable to note that the $ecudty Coun.cll, with
all the reserves which- it has at’ its: @posal in or@%
to clarify facts, should agree to be sum-moneddocilely
to consider a ruling in a magistrate’s court in Jerusalem
which was never made-1 repeat, was never made.
75. Let me clarify the facts; they are, after all,
relevant.
76. Mr. President, with your permission I- should
like to distribute to members of the. Council amap of-

72. Under the principles of natural justice it is to be
assumed that the representative of the State of Israel
will appear at this table and will explain his Govem10

.

the areaof the Temple Mount. The-Temple Mount-thefirst and second Jewish temples-in Jerusalem is the
most sacred site in the Jewish religion, In Islam, the
Temple Mount is called Al-Haram Al-Sharif, with the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, which ranks third in importance as
a Moslem holy site after the mosques of Mecca and
Medina. This area is composed of the Al-Aqsa Mosque,
the Dome of the Rock (the Mosque of Omar) which
houses the rock on which Abraham is reputed by
.Jewish tradition to have prepared his son Isaac for
sacrifice, and a large open courtyard. The section of the
western supporting wall of the Temple Mount which
has remained intact since the destruction of the second
Temple in the year 70 is the so-called Western or
Wailing ,Wali, which is the most hallowed spot in
Jewish religious and national consciousness and
tradition by virtue of its proximity to the Western
Wall of the Holy of Holies in the Temple from which,
according to Jewish tradition, the Divine Presence
never departed. During the period of Jordanian occupation, from 1948to 1967, Jews were not allowed access
to the Wailing Wall for prayer, in violation of the terms
of the Armistice Agreement signed by Israel and
Jordan in 1949.3
77. On 5 June 1967, Jordanian forces launched an
attack on Israel in Jerusalem, which was then a divided
city, and one of the results of the ensuing six-day war
was the reunification of the city of Jerusalem. The
Government of Israel, on the 28th of the same month,
June 1967, enacted the Protection of Holy Places
Law 5727-1967, whereby unrestricted access to the
respective Holy Places is guaranteed to members of
all faiths. The relevant sections of the law read as
follows:
“1. The Holy Places shall be protected from
desecration and any other violation and’from anything liable to violate the freedom of access of the
members of the different religions to the places
sacred to them or their feeelings ,with regard to
those places.

“5. This law shall come into force on the date
of its adoption by the Knesset.”
78. The Government of Israel has to this day refrained
from issuing regulations for Jewish prayer on the
Temple Mount in order not to offend the susceptibilities
of the Moslem population and to prevent disturbances
between the religious communities. Israel is therefore
confronted with a paradoxical situation in which not
only have Jews refrained from exercising their inherent
right, but the Government of Israel has even brought
to justice those who have attempted to pray on the
Temple Mount.
79. Since the unification of Jerusalem in 1967, certain
Israeli groups have mounted a public and legal campaign in order to permit Jewish prayers on the Temple
Mount. In 1968, an application for such permission
was rejected by the Supreme Court of Israel. Supreme
Court Justice Witkon in giving judgement stated:
“the situation is a unique one and I doubt whether
there is one like it in the history of our people, or
anywhere else in the world: The situation concerning
the Temple Mount is most sensitive and could greatly
endanger intercommunal relationships. It would be
the height of folly’ not to take full account of the
implications of acceding to the plaintiffs’ applications. Indeed, at this point we have reached the
limits of our legal jurisdiction. A full account of the
matter before us cannot be made without considering
the general political and security situation. It is in
the interest of the Government to act according to
these considerations. The true extent of the issue
goes far beyond the narrow boundaries which the
applicants have drawn. The relevant considerations
are far wider than any that could be submitted to
this court. I therefore believe that there are no
grounds for judicial interference.”
80. Last year several Jews attempted to pray in the
open courtyard of the Temple Mount-1 emphasize,
in the open courtyard-and were expelled by the
Moslem police, guards.appointed by the Islamic Wqf
Bureau, who are charged with the protection of the
holy places. Charges were brought against them. You
can see on the map exactly where the incident took
place. On 28 January this year Judge Ruth Orr, having
heard the case, including the testimony, reached the
conclusion that no Moslems had been present during
the incident and that the prayer had taken place in an
open area in the courtyard some SOmetres from the
Gate of Pity and far removed from any mosque. She
therefore acquitted the accused on the grounds that
this did not constitute a case of public disorder within
the meaning of the Criminal Code Ordinance, 1936,
under which the charges were preferred. On 9 February
the Jerusalem District Attorney appealed-Appeal
5/7O--on a number of grounds, including the ground
that the action by the respondents was consciously
calculated by them to disturb the peace and they were
therefore criminally liable for their actions, and the

“2. (a) Whosoever desecrates or otherwise
violates a. Holy Place shall be liable to imprisonment for a term of seven years.
“(b) Whosoever does anything likely to violate
the freedom of access to the members of different
religions to the places sacred to them or their
feelings with regard to those places shall be liable
to imprisonme.nt for a term of five years.
“3. This law shall add to, and not derogate
from, any other law.
“4. The Minister of Religious Affairs is charged
with the implementation of this law, and he may,
after consultation with, or upon the proposal of,
representatives of the religions concerned and with
the consent of the Minister of Justice, make regulations as to any matter relating to such implementation.
11

ground that the Magistrate’s Court had been influenced
by irrelevant considerations. At no point in the case
was the Al-Aqsa Mosque involved. At no point in her
judgement did the Magistrate mention Al-Aqsa or any
other mosque. The Minister of Police, Shlomo Hillel,
announced on 29 February that the police will abide
by the Supreme Court decision and will arrest any
Jew attempting to pray on the Temple Mount. The
Minister for Religious Affairs, Yitzhak Raphael, stated
on Israel Radio but three days ago that Jews will not
be allowed to pray on the Temple Mount.

appeal to the Moslem nations on b&half of our Moslem
citizens to turn their attention to Saudi Arabia rmd
Jordan, which over the years have persistently prevented Israeli Moslems from carrying out the precept
of the Hadj, the pilgrimage te Mecca, one of the five
basic precepts of Islam. Indeed, it is relevant to recall
that for 19 years-between 1948 and Z967-the gates
of the mosques on the Temple Mount in Jemsalem
were closed to Israeli Moslems by Jordanian order.
These gates were opened to Israeli Moslems only in
1967, when the city was reunified; I reiterate that
I am taking this opportunity to appeal to the Moslem
nations of the world to influence their Arab brethren
in favour of the Moslem citizens of israel.

81. Yesterday, 21 March, Supreme Court Justice
Berenson, in a decision in the case of Rudolf Cohen
versus the Minister of Police-High Court Case
No. 99/76-rejected an application for an order nisi
brought by the applicant to show cause why the Israel
police should not allow him to pray on the Temple
Mount. On behalf of the Court, Justice Berenson
ruled that the Court will not interfere with the discretion
of the police, when the police consider that there is a
danger of disrupting public order. The Supreme Court
on that occasion confirmed its own decision in High
Court Case No. 222/68 of 1968, to which I referred
previously.

86. The Ietter dated 12 March from the representative of Saudi Arabia to the Secretary-General constitutes nothing but a mass of fabrications 00 Iess
inaccurate and untrue than the fairy tale about prayers
in the Al-Aqsa Mosque. In that document reference
is made, for example, to an article in the Israeli da=ily
newspaper Ma’ariv on 22 July 1969, in which the Iate
Chief Rabbi of Israel is quoted as talking abu~ut
reconstructing the Temple in the court yard’ of AlHaram Al-Sharif. I have here a photostatic copy of
the article referred to in Mu’ariv. Here it is. I consider
myself a fairly respectacle. scholar of the Hebrew
language. If anybody here can find such. a statement
in this article, I should be most grateful; I just cannot
find it.

82. That, therefore, is the situation today.
83. In the meantime, no change has occurred in the
status quo, which has been maintained by the Government of Israel since 1967, whereby the Government
does not permit Jewish prayer on the Temple Mount,
and the Israeli police-Jews, Moslems and Christians-in addition to the Moslem police responsible
for the Temple Mount area, prevent such prayer from
taking place.

87. Now this would be comic, as would the entire
proceedings here based on a false charge about a
decision in an Israeli court that was never made, if it
were not so tragic, pointing as it does to a calculated
attempt by means of falsehoods to incite Moslem
feeling throughout the world and to invoke racial,
religious and human hatred of the basest kind,

84. I can readily appreciate that the representatives
of Pakistan, Libya and Saudi Arabia are perhaps
incapable of comprehending a situation whereby
courts of law are independent of the executive. I can
understand that a situation is incomprehensible to
them whereby a court of law in Israel will not be
dictated to by any outside body, including the Government of Israel-let alone this body. I do not expect
them to know better. From where should they know
better? But here you have a clear situation whereby
the interests of the Moslems are being protected by the
Government of Israel. Why then seek to attack the
Government of Israel for protecting Moslem interests?
The reason is that this false allegation has been preferred against Israel for political reasons, in an attempt
to disrupt the harmony and successful coexistence of
Jew and Arab in Jerusalem, which has become a
model for the world. This is being done by certain
Arab Moslem countries in an atmosphere of blackmail
and pressure which is irreconcilable with the faith
and beliefs of tens of millions of Moslems throughout
the world.

88. Since I am dealing with. a Saudi Arabian
document, I have here yet another example of Saudi
Arabian literature, which is most revealing in this
context. I am referring to a.document issued by the
Royal Consulate General of Saudi Arabia in.New York
containing this map in which the State of Israel does
not exist-wishful thinking, I suppose-and in which
the Persian Gulfghas become the Arabian Gulf--again,
perhaps, wishful thinking.
89. Israel is accused of the attempted alienation of
the indigenous Arab population from their history,
civilization and culture by “Israelization of educational
programmes and curricula”. That is a lie. The reverse
is true. All Arab schools in Jerusalem teach only the
curriculum laid down by the Jordanian Department
of Education, apart from the church schools,.which,
as opposed to the situation obtaining during Jordanian
rule from 1948 to 1967, are free is set their own
curriculum. I should add, as a point of interest, that
approximately 5,000 Arab teachers in the West Bank
teach only the Jordanian curriculum and are considered
by the Jordanian Government to be Jordanian civil

85. On this-occasion might I, as the representative
of acountry 10per cent of whose citizens are Moslems,
12

I

servants, and their s,aiaries are in fact paid not only
by the Government of Israel but also by the Govemment of Jordan,

wu@ over the Cave: the waqf-the Moslem custodian-holds the keys to the C.&ve, and its personnel
continues to be responsible for the daily opening and
closing of the Cave, as well as for its maintenance. .

90. The allegation about-measures designed to compel
the Arab population of Jerusalem to leave their homes
and property is utterly false. The only Arabs removed
in the Old City of Jerusalem were those who had
occupied Jewish homes in the Jewish quarter after
the fighting in 1948. They were obliged to return
the property to their rightful owners and were indeed
compensated in order to assist them in finding new
accommodations.

95. The orderly conduct of Modem prayers has in no
way been interfered with, nor has the public call to
prayer been tampered with in any way. It is untrue
that, as was alleged here, praye.rs for the ‘Moslem dead
have been forbidden or restricted in any manner, and
funeral services continue to be officiated in the large
Hall of Isaac and Rebecca. The only change made
has been one requiring Moslem funeral processions to
leave the Cave by the south-western gate in order to
spare the feelings of Jewish worshippers praying in
the Abraham and Sarah Hall.

91; The letter of 19 March refers to mass arrests
in the West Bank, and we have heard moving words
in this regard from representatives who have-preceded
me in speaking here%Let me put the entire picture
into its correct perspective. We are talking of a total
of arrests in the West Bank in the past month of
48 persons,

96. Moslem religious teachers and personnel of the
Cave have in no way been molested. On the contrary,
they have been, and continue to be, accorded the
respect due to them, and all the assistance necessary
to carry out their duties has been made avtilTable to
them.

92. Finally, we come to the utterly preposterous
accusations concerning “suppression of Islamic and
Christian heritage and institutions’*. This is -just
malicious nonsense, as anybody who will take the
trouble to visit Jerusalem can find out for himself.
There has never been such an impressive expansion
and development of religious life in the city for ail
faiths as has occurred over the past few years.

97. Israel is proud of its record in respect ofthe holy
places of all faiths. Israel policy will continue to adhere
strictly to the fundamental principle of free accessfor
prayer and worship by all believers of all faiths to all
holy places.
98. This allegation about a shrine which is visited
daily by hundreds and sometimes thousands ofvisitors
from ail over the world is patently untrue. It is so
obviously a repetition of the tactic of the big-lie, and
yet is so sinister in all its horrible implications,
designed as it is to incite millions of people who are
ignorant of the facts. It is but another example of the
level to which we have been dragged down in this
Organization by those who are rapidly taking control
and turning it into a centre of uncontrollable ‘hate and
irreconcilable division.

93, Perhaps nothing could more readily illustrate the
utter baselessness-of this debate than the remarks of
the Jordanian representative on the Al-ibrahimi
Mosque, which is an utter travesty not only of facts
but of history. We are referring to the Tomb of the
Patriarchs in the city of Hebron, known to the Jewish
people as the Cave of Machpela. The Cave of Machpela
is a Jewish holy place, housing as it does the tombs
of the Jewish patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
and their respective wives, Sarah, Rebecca and
Leah-a fact convenieflly- ignored’by the Jordanian
representative. For. the benefit of any representatives
who may not be particularly familiar with the Bible,
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were Jewish and were the
early Jewish patriarchs. The story of the acquisition
of the land and the tomb by Abraham is told in
chapter 23 of the Book of Genesis.

99. So much for the baseless~lliegations,in the documents referred to. I will not-engagein a time-consuming
refutation of everything that has been said. I leave it
to the members of the Council to draw their own
inference from what has already proved to be false as
to the remainder of the allegations.

94. The Jordanian Government’s record in respect
of holy places under its control surely denies it any
moral standing in. such issues. Jewish. access to the
Cave of Machpela or the Tomb tif the Patriachs in
Hebron was- forbidden by the Jo:rdanian authorities,
The overriding. p,rinciples guiding Israel’s policy
regarding all the holy places have. been, and are, to
guarantee free access to members of all faiths and to
ensure orderly conditions of-worship to niembers of
every religion. This principle applies also to the Cave
of MachpeIa, and the sanctity of that holy shrine is
strictly observed. Nothing has been done to minimize
in any way the responsibility exercised by the Moslem

100. We have listened to the representatives of
Jordan and Egypt. For 19 years. the Jordanians controlled the W&t Bank and,the Egy tians controlled
the Gaza Strip For 19-lye:arsthey&a if ,it in--$,he?r
power
to do eve-rything. that they want fsarel~to do today.
Why did they tibf do it? Were there fis‘- PaIestinian
Arabs between 1948 and 1967.in flie: West Bank or
Gaza? I ask those who were discussing this problem.
For 19 years two Arab States had it in their power
to do exactly that. Why did they not do it? Why in
the course of 19 years was not even a local central
administration set up in the West Bank by the Jordanians, or in Gaza by the Egyptians? Why-in the 19years
13

1

before 1967 did not the Palestinian Arabs in the territories administered by Israel today achieve what
they have achieved under Israel as far as the control
of their domestic affairs is concerned?
101. Let us look at the situation in the West Bank
under Jordan. I quote from a document from that
period:
“In January 1966 the Jordanian authorities arrested 200 persons. In April they arrested 2,000
persons in the West Bank. In May, mass demonstrations took place in East Jerusalem, Hebron and
Ramallah. The police used force, closed down
schools, arrested hundreds of persons. In July,
disturbances and mass demonstrations broke out
in Nablus. The Jordanian police used tear gas,
12persons were wounded, and 250 arrested. November saw a series of stormy disturbances and clashes
between civilians and police and army forces, with
numerous casualties. On 21 November shop and
business strikes broke out in the Ramallah area. The
army was called in to intervene and employed
tanks. The Jordanian authorities imposed a curfew
and closed all the schools. Similar events occurred
through November and December in most other
towns. On 24 November the Jordanian army again
employed tanks and tear gas. Twenty demonstrators
were killed and many more wounded. On 8 December a general business strike was put down by force
by the police and the Jordanian army. On 13January
1967 the population of Nablus rose up. Barricades
were put up in the streets. The Jordanian army had
., .to surround the city and suppress resistance by
force.”

is marked by complete calm and an absence of any
form of disturbance, while the incidents that are taking
place are happening in the West Bank. The reason is
that, in the pursuance of the enlightened and liberal’
policy which Israel has applied in the territories
administered by the Government of Israel, free and
secret elections are scheduled to be held in the West
Bank on 12 April.
105. The nature of the situation- in the West Bank
being what it is, those elections could -well prove toybe
a tour de farce for the first time amongst Arabs on
the Palestinian issue. The PLO by its very nature-a
grouping of terrorist organizations which rules by the
muzzle of the Kalashnikov rifle and the assassin’s
bullet-cannot possibly entertain free and secret
elections. That is not how its leaders- attained. their
presentpositions. Accordingly, they are endeavouring
as they did four years ago, immediately before the
previous elections, to arouse opinion, to incite, to
inflame passions in order to head off the elections, the
results of which might be somewhat embarrassing
for them and which might well bring to the fore a new
Palestinian Arab leadership of responsible nature. They
have not succeeded in disrupting elections in the past.
They will not succeed this time.
106. At this Council table on 12 January 11870th
the representative of the PLO already
launched an attack on these elections. This is what is
behind these disturbances and. that is- why they are
taking place in the West Bank and not in G.aza,Here
is a blatant attempt by that organization to. disrupt
orderly elections and to prevent the creation of. any
alternative grouping amongst the Palestinian Arabs
which might give hope for a movement in the direction of peace. The Government of Israel will not be
deterred from its policy of preventing that- disruptive
organization from attempting to bring chaos to the
West Bank. They will not succeed, I assure the
Council, in trying to do in the. West Bank what. they
attempted to do. in Jordan in the bloody days. bf
the; so-@led Black September in September 1970 or
what they have succeeded in.doing in-the tragedy of
Lebanon.

meeting]

If you are interested in more, then I recommend,
Mr. President and members of the Council, that you
read the chapter, “Hussein Versus the Palestinians,
1964-1972”, in this biography of King Hussein.
102. Why is it that the major pitched battles carried
out by the PLO have been waged against Arab Govemments and Arab authority-in 1970, in the so-called
Black September, against the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan, and this year as a major element in the
destruction of the Lebanese State?

107. These disruptive elements-about which the
President of Egypt said only a few weeks ago that. he
does not know what they want, which, despite the fact
that the representative of Jordan supports them with
such moving fervour in this building, are not allowed
to show their faces in Jordan and which are in the
process of becoming an instrument of.Syrian policywill not be allowed by the Government of Israel to
perpetrate their nefarious designagainst the constructive approach to the problem of the Middle East and
of the Palestinian Arabs and will not be permitted by
us in any manner to try to move towards the achievement of their aim of destroying the State of Israel.
Let that be clear beyond all measure of doubt.

103. And now to the disturbances in the West Bank.
The incidents in the West Bank are a result of
demonstrations by youngsters who have been incited
on the basis of false propaganda, such as the fairy
tale about prayer in Al-Aqsa, to throw stones and riot.
The bulk of the population in the West Bank is not
involved in these events, and even today, as I sit here,
some 70,000 Arabs from the territories administered
by Israel came over to Israel, as they do every day,
to work.
104. Today Israel is administering the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip. Some representatives will doubtless have noted that the situation in the Gaza Strip

108. I think that it is time that the world awoke to
the inherent destructiveness of the Arab purpose in
14

:

the,world today. The Lebanese crisis highlighted this
situation. An Arab nation has been torn apart, and yet
the Arab world with its Arab League and Arab summits
was entirely incapable of doing anything, because it
was torn and disunited and working at cross-purposes
at all times. What has happened in Lebanon today
should be an object lesson to the world about the socalled unity of the Arabs. Is it not time that the
world, instead of Iooking at propaganda, looked the
facts in the face? Look at the Arab world today:
Arabs slaughtering Arabs in Lebanon, Arabs slaughtering Arabs in Oman, and Arabs facing Arabs in
battle array in the Sahara, on the Algerian-Moroccan
border. For five long years in recent times Arabs waged
a bloody war against. Arabs in Yemen. Arabs struggled
in mortal combat in the streets of Amman in a PLO
endeavour to destroy the Hashemite
Kingdom
of
Jordan but a few years ago. Tens of thousands of
Egyptian Arabs are being expelled these very days from
Libya by Arabs. But that is not the only negative
aspect of their inherent make-up. In addition to
destroying each other, they are incapable of tolerating
the presence of any other element in their area.
109. One cannot ignore the attitude of the Moslem
Arabs to various cultural entities in the Middle East.
Look at the. fate of the Syrian Christians in Iraq and
of the Copts in Egypt. One has but to contemplate
the sombre and gfim fate of the Kurds in Iraq.
Hundreds of thousands of blacks were slaughtered
and oppressed in southern Sudan. And then we saw
and in fact are witnessing a major move to eliminate
the Christian community from Lebanon and thus to
realize Yasser A&at’s
avowed aim-to
quote from
a speech of his in Libya last year-that
“there will
be no presence but the Arab presence in the area”.
Add to all this the fate of over 800,000 Jews who
lived in Arab countries and have had to leave them in
the last 25 years.
110. 8 @4?2, when the Jewish community accepted
the Uniteti Nat?ons,.&mion
dividing what- was then
Palestine into two &rtes, one Jewish- and the other
Arab, the Arab States rejected it and chose instead
to try to destroy the infant State of Israel by force
of arms. In the subsequent fighting, the Jordanian
Army seized the eastern half of Jerusalem and the
historic walled Old City, which contains religious
shrines sacred to Christians,.Jews
and Moslems. For
the next 19 years uniil 1967~Jerusalem remained a city
divided, cut in half by barbed wire and-ugly walls. For
19 years the Jordanian rule in the east-em half of the
city constituted’ a record of deliberate desecration of
Holy Places and confpfete disregard for an intemational agreement to provide free access to religious
shrines. It is a record of hundreds of holy scrolls and
books reverently preserved for generations’plundered
and burnt to ashes; of synagogues razed to the ground
or converted into hen-houses and stables filled with
dung-heaps, garbage and carcasses. It is a record of
tens of thousands of tombstones torn up and used
as building materials for public lattines and army

barracks; of graves gripped open and bones scattered
to the four winds and an asphalt road cut through the
pitiful remains to provide a short-cut to a new hotel
built incongruously
on top of the sacred Mount of
Olives.
111. In 1949 Jordan signed an Armistice Agreement
with Israel.’ Article VIII prescribed “free access to
the Holy Places and cultural institutions and use of the
cemetery on the Mount of Olives”. The Jordanian
Government never honoured its undertaking. For the
first time in centuries Jews were completely barred
from the Old City of Jerusalem and its Holy Places.
They had no access to the cemetery on the Mount of
Olives or any free access to their cultural institutions
on Mount Scopus. The functioning of those institutions
stopped until June 1967. Moslem residents of Israel
were prevented by Jordan from visiting Islam’s Holy
Places in East Jerusalem.
112. The Jordanian Government was not content to
divide the city in two and ban any and all movement
of Israelis-Jews
and Moslems-to
the part which it
had annexed by force. It began systematically
to
eliminate every trace of the city’s Jewish past. The
Jewish quarter was laid waste. Fifty-eight synagogues,
some of great antiquity, were destroyed or desecrated.
Synagogues that were not destroyed were used by the
Jordanians as toilets, stables and hen-coops. In the
cemetery on the Mount of Olives, hallowed to Jews
for thousands of years, 38,000 of the 50,000 tombstones
were tom up to pave roads, build fences and install
latrines.~I myself found the graves of my grandparents
and my great-grandmother
on the Mount of Olives
in June 1967 desecrated, their tombstones destroyed.
For 19 years Jerusalem was bisected by barbed wire
and concrete barriers. In May 1967 the Temple Mount
which we are discussing today became a military
camp for the Jordanian National Guard.
113. During its occupation of East Jerusalem, the
Government of Jordan forbade Jewish entry and set out
to Arabize the city and erase its Jewish identity;
it took action against the Christian inhabitants as well.
In 1958, the Parliament
in Amman ,passed a law
requiring all members of the Brotherhood of the Holy
Sepulchre to adopt Jordanian citizenship. Since ,the
fifth century members of that Brotherhood
had
invariably been Greek. In 1965 Jordanian legislation
was passed restricting the development of Christian
institutions by cancelling their right to acquire land in
or near Jerusalem. In I966 Christian schoois were
compelled to close on Fridays, the Moslem day of
rest, Christian education was restricted, and privileges
previously enjoyed by Christian religious institutions
were abolished.
114. During the entire period, as these foul acts of
desecration were being perpetrated against places holy
to the Jewish people, the world remained silent. There
was no Security Council meeting when Jewish synagogues were burnt and Jewish graves were defiled,

.
.

when Jewish shrines were closed off. Indeed, small
wonder, when one considers the one-sided pattern of
discrimination against ‘our people which characterizes
the deliberations in this Organization. I can only
repeat the words of a distinguished predecessor of
mine:

all denominations-Armenians,
Copts, Orthodox,
Wins, Roman Cathohcs andProtestants. TO all these
people Jerusalem is a city in which they work and
live, raise families and acquire their education. The
unique and the common are deeply mingled in the life
of the people of Jerusalem, and it is, the first time in
history that Jerusalem has reached such a level of
harmony and peaceful coexistence among its various
communities.

“I heard not one expression of dismay across the
entire human scene when Jordan destroyed ancient
synagogues in the Old City in an orgy of hate.“4

119. In view of Jerusalem’s special~n~iversalsignificance, it was only natural that many distin@&hed
personalities from all over the.worid should volunteer
or be sought out to give advice on the city’s future
character. Seven years ago, Mayor Teddy Kollek
decided to give form. and organizatibn to this idea,
and he invited some 70 outstanding international
personalities-mainty non-Jews-&o join, as members
of the Jerusalem Committee, a wor1d.advisor-y council
concerned with the beautification and restorajion of
the city. The Committee’s first- meeting took place in
1969, and its second session was held in June 1973.
Let me quote from the last report of that Committee:

This is what Abba Eban, Israel’s Foreign Minister,
told the General Assembly on 12 July 1967. He went
on:
“No United Nations organ expressed any dismay
when Jordan, for twenty years, refused any access
to the oldest and most revered of all Holy Places:
the Western Wall. Nor was there any expression of
dismay when tombstones on the Mount of Olives
were uprooted to build walls in secular buildings.“4
115. The city of Jerusalem is a city of unique character. It is a holy city sacred to millions of members
of the three great religions, and its holy shrines and
traditions are the heritage of mankind. It is this unique
character of Jerusalem that makes all the considerations affecting it so difficult to limit and delineate
-the demographic and the urban, the cultural and the
legal, the historical and the religious, the aesthetic
and the economic, the parochial and the international
are all inextricably associated in the city of Jerusalem.

“... In a world of distressiug, frictions and intolerance, Jerusalem observes and encourages religious
and communal freedom, full accessto its holy places
and shrines of worship, a deeg respect for the
cultural and historical heritage of allits citizens, and
beyond that, for all mankind. Attempts to break
the peace through acts of terror or civil disturbance
that have recently occurred- or may recur. should
not deflect or deter the responsible guardians of
this universal city from the continued policy and
practice of ever-increasing intercommuna1 cooperation.

116. In the course of history Jerusalem has known
many rulers. But only for Jews has it been the capital
of the nation living in our land. At all other times
Jerusalem was ruled by foreigners who treated it as a
provincial town. The Jews of Jerusalem today are the
inhabitants with the tongest unbroken historical
association with it. The story of Jewish attachment to
Jerusalem under alien domination is that of an
unremitting struggle to preserve a Jewish presence in
it, never allowing the link to be broken.

4‘
..*

“The Committee would like-to acknowledge the
successful efforts. made in the field o,f education.
Everywhere we observed the building of new
schools, appropriately located.;.servin all ethnic and
religious groups. Especially does- tae Committee
applaud the action within the educational system of
Jerusalem, permitting schools,, Christian and
Moslem alike, to allow their students to choose a
cui‘@~~lumthat gives them.the.oppo-rtunity ofchoice
to continue their education in Israeli uuiverslties
as well as universities in Arab countries.

117. Although the Jordanian Government destroyed
the ancient Jewish quarter in the Old City and barred
Jews from entry even as tourists, thus preventing
them from worshipping at what I have described as
Judaism’s holiest place, Jerusalem today is an open
city-pen
to all its citizens, Jews, Moslems ‘and
Christians, and to members of all faiths from all
nations. It is open even to those who claim to be
Israel’s enemies. To date, millions of tourists from all
over the world, including hostile Arab States, have
visited Jerusalem and have enjoyed freedom of access
to and worship at their respective Holy Places.

“The Committee finds it necessary to express its
convi_ction that Jerusalem. is and should remain a
united city, humane and universal. In the views of
the Committee, those at presem respousible for
administering the city have proved th.emselves
conscious of the trust to serve the best interests
not only of-its inhabitants but ofall mankit@

118. But Jerusalem is more than a conglomeration
of holy places. It is a city, a living and breathing
entity, a human community engaged in all the traffic
and commerce of everyday life. It is a home for over
215,500 Jews, 61,600 Moslems and 11,500Christians of

“Firially, the Committee calls upon the.peoples
of the world and on all international orgamzations
to recognize their responsibility to assist those
16

engaged in planning and executing- the restoration
and development of this universaleity, Jerusalem,
by intensifying their interest and concern and
providing support for this important work.”
[S/l2020,

\

125. Let us not- allow the purveyors of hate and
discrimination whose diatribes have become the
common parlance of this Organization to deflect us
from continuing on the road towards peace in the
Middle East, with the inspiring model of Jerusalem
as it is today as our example. May the prayers of
Jews, the call of the muezzin and the pealing of the
church bells resound above the majestic mountains of
Jerusalem and combine in a prayer for peace in the
City of Peace.

annex.]

120. Finally, in the past 2,000 years the city of
Jerusalem has not known a more enlightened administration than today’s, dedicated to the principles of
human tolerance and peaceful coexistence between
the various communities which comprise the human
mosaic of that unique, immortal and beautiful city.
Our Jewish sages said, “Ten measures of beauty were
given to the world; nine of them belong to Jerusalem’*.

126. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and
to make a statement.

121. Under Mayor Kollek’s dynamic and imaginative
leadership-and here I should mention in parentheses
that he received more votes in the Arab section in
East Jerusalem than any Arab mayor before him had
received in that part of the town-the city has become
a place of beauty in which the cultural, religious
and aesthetic mingle together to give Jerusalem its
peculiar and unique character. Since the days of King
David, when the city was established as the capital
of our nation, it has continued to be the centre of
Jewish life, hope and yearning. Three times a day for
thousands of years Jews have prayed, “To Jerusalem
thy city shall we return in joy”. For thousands of
years, Jews have re-echoed the Psalmist’s oath, “If
I forget thee, 0 Jerusalem, may my right hand f&get
its cunning”.

127. Mr. PETRIC (Yugoslavia): Mr. President, I am
gratified to have this opportunity to greet you in your
capacity as President of the Security Council for the
month of March as well as representative of Benin, a
friendly African and non-aligned country which, like
my own, is lending assistance and support to peoples
and liberation movements that are fighting for freedom
and independence.
128. We also welcome the arrival of Mr. Scranton in
his new capacity as the United States Permanent
Representative, and we hope to have fruitful cooperation with him.
129. The most recent aggressive and repressive acts
of the occupation forces of Israel in the West Bank,
in Jerusalem and in other occupied territories are
directed against the Palestinian population living in
those territories, with the aim of drastically altering
their demographic structure. The changes that the
Israeli occupier is trying to introduce into those territories, concerning their demography and administration, in the domain of the economy and in the field of
religion, constitute a short-sighted and hopeless
continuation of Israel’s annexationist policy. The
annual reports of the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Population of the Occupied Territories, as well as the
reports of the International Red Cross, testify to a
constant worsening of the situation of the civilian
population as a result of the prolonged occupation
and the policy of annexation pursued by Israel through
the establishment of Israeli settlements in the Sinai,
on the Golan Heights and also in the West Bank;
through the constant intensification of mass persecutions and arrests, administrative detentions. and trials
by military courts; through the persecution of intellectuals, collective punishment, the destruction of
houses, the closing down of stores and forcible
transfers of population; through failure to respect
the religious feelings of the population and through
the illegal exploitation of the natural resources of the
occupied territories. The deliberate destruction of
Quneitra, in spite of the passage of time, is still fresh
in our minds and constitutes a warning.

122. I offer no excuse for our presence in Jerusalem.
I owe no apology. We are there as of right-a right
that has been hallowed by our Bible, a right which
has been sanctified by our history, by our sacrifice,
by our prayers and by our yearnings, a right which
has been strengthened and vindicated by virtue of our
creating the only liberal administration giving complete freedom of worship to all faiths which the city
has known for the first time without any restraint
whatsoever in 2,000 years.
123. Before the capital cities of the countries represented here-with the possible exception of Chinaexisted, Jerusalem wassthe capital city of the Jewish
commonwealth. While wild herds roamed on the sites
of what are today the great capital cities of the world,
the prophets of Israel were walking in the streets of
Jerusalem and prodaiming in their immortal words
the great principles of humanity to mankind for the
first time. When many of the great civilizations of
today were but primitive societies, the judges of Israel
were dispensing justice in Jerusalem on the basis of
one of the most advanced and enlightened codes of
law in history.
124. We are proud of Jerusalem and all that it stands
for. We are proud of the trust we hold in respect of
the two other great religions in our capital city. We
are proud of the manner in which we carry out this
trust before history. It is all there in the open for
everyone to. see.
17

130. The latest repressive acts of Israel have once
again revealed in their true light the real and shortsighted objectives of Israel in the Middle East, which
are well known and condemned by the huge majority.
Like all invaders and oppressors, Israel has been
trying to present its presence in occupied Arab
territories as a guarantee of its own security until the
achievement of peace, and its mission in these territories as something that is “in the interest of the
peoples of the region” or as something aimed at
“preserving peace and order, which is in the interest
of the people of the occupied territories”.
Actually,
the contrary is true. Israel has the intention of annexing
these territories; it desires an imposed “peace” on the
condition of recognition of its war booty. Ideas about
a “cuitural mission” and the preservation of “peace
and order in the interest of the population”
have been
used by al1 colonial and conquering Powers in the past,
and such propaganda is still vividly remembered by
all the countries that experienced occupation during
the Second World War.

occupation of Arab territories, as it. is also a basic
condition of its own security. It is weil known that no
people that enslaves other peoples canitself be free;
133. We feel that this time we should-draw the attention of those who have always sided with Israel to the
grave responsibility
they will bear for all that may
occur if Israel persists in its arbitrary behaviour in
the occupied territories and if no serious efforts are
made to establish peace on the basis of Israel’s withdrawal from all the Arab territories occupied since
1967 and on the basis of the impIement8tion
of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.
134. We cannot subscribe to the attitude which
consists in ignoring the problem of Palestine. We
cannot condone attempts at boycotting the consideration of this question, attempts at pushing it aside or
relegating it to the periphery of ef%rts to establish
peace in the Middle East. Has is not yet become
clear to everyone that such stands cannot contribute
to the consohdation of the initial and partial results
achieved so far, in the same way as we are convinced
that a way out of the- situation cannot be sought in
artificial attempts to reach an illusory solution of the
problem of Palestine through procedural or some other
frameworks, which have proved to be totally ineffective?

13 1. The current situation shows once again that the
Security Council and the international
community
should take urgent action in order to compel Israel
to withdraw from all the Arab territories occupied
since 1967 and to implement the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people in accordance with the General
Assembly resolutions which recognized and defined
those rights. Only in such a way is it possible to
establish a just and lasting peace and security for all
the countries and peoples in the region.

135. In this concrete case, the Security Council-must
condemn Israel for the acts perpetrated by it recently
in the occupied territories and with regard to the civilian
population. Besides, the Council should demand that
Israel put a stop immediately
to the oppression of the
civilian Arab and Palestinian population by its occupation forces, that it desist from mass arrests, curfews,
administrative
detention and trials by military courts,
from the persecution of intellectuals, collective punjshments, destruction of houses, forcible transfers of
population and closing down ofstores and commercial
establishments. Further, the Council should condemn
the Israeli policy of the establishment of any settlements in the occupied territories. The Council shouId
brand such practices as illegal and fix. a time-limit for
Israel to withdraw those settlements unconditionally
and to pay compensation
for the damage inflicted
thereby upon the population of the occupied territories.

132. It should, at long last, be clear to Israel and to
all that the Palestinian question constitutes the very
core of the problem of the Middle East and that,
without its solution on a just basis and without the full
implementation
of the inalienable
rights of the
Palestinians to selfdetermination,
independence and
their own State in Palestine and of the right to return
to their homes for those who were forcibly expelled
from them and who wish to do so, there can be no
peace and no solution in this region, which has been
the object of an acute and most dangerous international
crisis for so many years. Israel should realize that
there is no force that can annihilate the Palestinian
people and eradicate. it from the soil of Palestine and
the Middle East through the use of any method of
de~mographic or cultural denationalization,
ensiavement or forcible expulsion or the holding of people
in a state of constant terror and fear. The Palestinian
people has proved in a convincing and lasting manner
that it wishes to achieve its freedom and to establish
its homeland and that, in fighting for these aims, it
does not shrink from any sacrifice. It has also proved
that any people which is prepared to make maximum
sacrifices for the defence of its being, its freedom, its
dignity and its independence and an equal place among
the peoples of the world cannot be defeated. Israel
should realize that the occupation and annexation of
foreign territories could never be a basis for peace.
It is in the best interest of Israel to relinquish its

136. However, the Council should- not be content
in doing only that. During the debate held in the
Council in January many positive elements and trends
emerged. Unfortunately,
Israel, in keeping with its
known intransigence,
boycotted that. debate of the
Council, while the constructive action of the Council
was interrupted by the veto of a permanent member.
137. What is now happening in Jerusalem and:
throughout the West Bank provides proof that the real
development. of. real events in. the rea1 troubIed-,area.
does not wait for anyone’s tactical. and political
schemes or time-tabies, nor for the interests that find
everything else more important than to come genuinely
18

to grips with real problems. If the crisis in the Middle
East and the attempts to deny the rights of. the
Palestinian people have taught us anything, it is that
any failure to solve this problem is bound to lead to
war. Al1 the factors-.-the Security Council, the United
Nations and the international community as a wholemust exert, as a matter of urgency, a concerted
effort aimed at inducing Israel to cease its obstruction’
to the undertaking ofaspeedy solution of this question
on the basis of the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council. In this regard the
principles of the vetoed draft resolution of nonaligned members of the Council {S/11940] still represent a valuable contribution toward the, successful
solution of these problems.
138. Mr. AKHUND (Pakistan): Mr. President, the
reasons which impelled the delegations of Libya and
Pakistan to ask you to convene this meeting of the
Security Council were explained in our letter to you
of 19 March [S/12017]. It was not ,our intention that
on this occasion the Council should go over the ground
covered in the recent debate on the Middle East and
the Palestine question, although of course what has
been happening in recent days in cities and towns of
the occupied West Bank and in Jerusalem cannot be
divorced or viewed in isolation from the larger context.
There would be no clashes occurring in the West Bank
and Jerusalem if Israel’s occupation had ended and
peace established in the Middle East.

which consists not only of the mosque proper but of
a large open courtyard, and in Islam an opencourtyard
is an integral part of the praying area. This is a mosque
which is held in veneration by 600 million Muslims of
the world. To Muslims it is one of the three most
holy places in the world, and in Al-Aqsa they have.
prayed undisturbed and unmolested for 1,400 years.
The resentment of the Israeli magistrate’s ruling will
be understood by right-thinking people of every faith.
141. I come to the matter of the ruling of the
Magistrate and the decision of the Supreme Court.
The representative of Israel spoke with disdain of the
capacity of the Pakistani representative to understand
the proper judicial procedures which prevail in Israel.
The representative himself is a general, but I am
sure that he has on his stafflawyers who, ifthey care to
do so, can study the legal procedures-and laws under
which our country is governed, and I am sure they
would reassure him about my capacity to understand
how the laws of a country run.
142. Be that as it may, the decision rendered by the
Israeli Supreme Court overruhng the magistrate,
despite its tardiness, is a good thing as far as it goes.
But, as one of the speakers said this morning, these
matters cannot be left to the judgement, good or bad,
of judges of the Israeli occupation.
143. Actions which inflame religious sentiments
might in ordinary circumstances be treated as acts of
intolerance, or of arrogance or of folly. However, we
are not concerned only, or even mainly, with the
religious aspects of the present situation but with the
larger issue of Israel’s presence and intentions in
Jerusalem and the West Bank and in other occupied
territories. If there is to be peace in the Middle East,
then Israel will have to withdraw from all the Arab
territories it occupied in 1967, and this requires above
all, if not first of all, withdrawal from occupied Jerusalem and the restoration there of the TOO-year-old
Arab sovereignty.

139. My delegation remains convinced that the principles laid down in the draft presented to the Council
at its January meetings [S/119401,for which regrettably
we could not obtain the unanimous support of the
permanent members, contain the essential and
interlinked erements for a settlement which would
protect and restore the. legitimate rights and interests
of the peoples and parties concerned., and on the basis
of which necessary negotiations c,anand must be held.
The basic question is the universal- recognition and
speedy implementation of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people. My delegation remains convinced
that a peaceful settlement in the Middle East on the
basis of the principles o.utlined in that draft resolution
is attainable and that the time has come to make a
decisive effort towards that end.

144. Jerusalem is indeed a beautiful place. It arouses
the sentiments and emotions of people all over the
world. But it cannot be awarded on emotional, sentimental or esthetic grounds to IsraeI, It is a city sacred
to the followers of the three great world religions
-Judaism, Christianity and Islam. That the followers
of each must have access to their respective holy
places at all times and in all conditions goes without
saying, and such access must be provided for in any
peace settlement.

140- We shall have to return to these questions when
the Council once again takes up the issue of the Middle
East and Palestine. Our objective today is more
specific. The representative of the Palestine Liberation
Grganization has given an account [1893rd meeting]
of what has happened in the West Bank generally,
and in Jerusalem in particular, in the wake of a ruling
given by the local magistrate which had the effect of
permitting Jews to pray in the premises of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque. This, I would say, is not a “damnabIe lie”
nor a mischievous attempt to inflame religious feelings
but is a fact because, as the representative of Israel
said himself, the,mosque is situated on what he calls
Temple Mount and what we call Al-Haram Al-Sharif,

145. However, because of its special status, and
because Israel has declared its intention to annex the
occupied portion of the city and has taken a variety
of actions to that end as well as measures to change
its demographic and cultural character, the General
Assembly and the Security Council found it necessary
to adopt resolutions and decisions dealing specifically
with Jerusalem. As early as 4 July 1967-only a month
19

after Israeli troops entered the city-the Assembly
called. upon Israel to rescind measures which it had
taken~andto desist from taking any action which would
alter the status of JemsaIem [resolution 2253 (ES-V)].
Ten days later, in another resolution, the Assembly
deplored the fdlure of Israel to implement the previous
resolution and reiterated its call to Israel [resolution 2254 (ES-V)] .

146. Subsequently the Security Council, reaffirming
that acquisition of territory by military conquest is
inadmissible, called on the Israeli authorities to desist
from measures to change the status ofJerusalem and to
rescindtho.se already taken, and deplored and strongly
censured all such measures. Resolution 298 (1971),
in its paragraph 3, confirmed
“in- the clearest, possible ferms that all legislative
and .administmtive actions taken by Israel to change
the status of the City of Jerusalem, including exproptiation of land and properties, transfer of populations and legislation aimed at the incorporation of
the occupied section, are totally invalid.**
147: The Security- Council rksolutions were adopted
witlioutid&sent and are, as everyone knows, binding
on~all.Mtmber States under Article 25 of the Charter.
Israel has nevertheless consistently ignored them and
has continued in all’ sorts of ways-open as well as
insidious-to bring about a change in the legal status
and other characteristics not only of Jerusalem but
of other cities and towns in the West Bank as well
as of the Golan Heights, Ixi short, it has sought and
is seeking to turn occupation into absorption.

number of resolutions on the specific question of
Jerusalem, but these resolutions have- remained.
unheeded, and after what we heard ffm the Israeli
representative a moment ago, it is all@ more necessary to remind the parties that these resolutions remain
valid.
_. .

151. However, we cannot be ccmtent with. this. nor
can we confine the matter to tlie issue of the statusof Jerusalem. What has been happ+@ig in Jerusalem
and in other parts of the occupied’We.sf‘Bank must be
viewed in the larger context. f’he New York Tir22es
of.this morning points out in its.editorial that
“The real significance of. these incidents is: to
demonstrate the time-bomb nature of perpetuating
Israeli military rule over a million alienated Paiestinians-a political anomaly that: is. unsati’sfao
tory”-a euphemism, I should think-“over- the
long run to Arabs and Israelis alike.”
152. My d&gz$ion believes that: the. Council must
act to defuse. the time bomb by calling for an end to
the decade of military. occupation by IsraeLI use
again the ianguage. of, The New York Times. Peace
will not return to-the Middle East unless and-until all
the terrltoriesaccupied since 1867, including the Holy
City of Jerusalem, are vacated b Israel. No MiddleEast settlement wiII be just, viab Te ar..durable @@XL
the legitimate national-tights of.the PaJestinian p<opie.
are recognized and translated into reality. Whate?!er
the means or mechanisms adopted to achieve these
ends, it has to be. recognized .that t.he mo.vement in
that direction. must be initiated now and the process
of negotiation must be accelerated,

148. This morn&we heard the representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization tell us in detail
what this has involved for the local inhabitants of the
occupied territories. It should surprise no one that in
the exprop.riation of their lands and in the forcible
establishment of Jewish settlements in their areas the
local inhabi@nts.see.arepetition of the pattern by which
they were ejected from their homes and properties
after the United.Nations decided to establish a Jewish
State in parts of Ptilestine.

153. In the view of my delegation it is the primary
task of the Security Council to e.ncourag$t-heapro@e,cts
of pea_cer which, notwithstafRlii¶g. the bitter and
emutiof@ thiags we have @ear21taday, are not nonexistetit, Oth&&e, the thre.@ of war is certa.in to
increase w&B the- passageof tir@& Th:e-gresent turmoil
is a wa&ng signal whlcfi shoUld.not I& ignored,
154. I& PESIDE~T {inrPrprt?lMion&ofrom FreKch):
The next speaker is the represent‘ative of Saudi
Arabia. I-now ask him to tari6 a seat at the Council
table and to make his statem&.

149. The Israeli representative made mock of the
crisis which prevails today in the West Bank and its
cities; He clismisseaqhe Uprising as a Ibt of teenagers’
demonstratfons. He thougtt it was comic that the
Security Council was meeting to discuss this issue.
The afarm and desperate anger ivith which the inhabitants of the o‘ccupied territories have reacted
can be measured from the.fact that curfews had to be
declared in almost all major cities df the West bank
and Jerusalem andcthat fet’trsalem, in the words of a
newsreporter-fiot;a “damn8bie lie” from this deiegatiopbut the Daily News, which is tlot tmsympathetic
to‘ Israels’was-saturated,with Israeli paratroopers”.

155. Mi. BAROODY (Saudi Arab& Mr. President?
I am in$eetl heartened to see a strti of Benin assume
the Presidency of the Security Council, since not too
long ago #iis country was no more than-a mere cbloniti
Territory in Africa. It was- not in vain that a. littl‘e
over two decades ago a few of as initiated the ci-&boration of-the principle of self-determination into a.fi@
fledged right a.fid- finally succesed&l in having th%
priffXn$&i~ rlglit spelt out in t$e, tWp Ihterna_ti:snai1
CoioenaM~ on Human Rights. Hen=* it behoves QS
to congtatulate you and, et@&, ourselves in tEie,
emergence of erstwhile African Tetifories, incl@lirig
your country, as sovereign States Members af th‘e:
United Nations.
.. .

150. So in the&cumstances what shauid the Council
do? The Coundi has, as I said, already adopted a
20

156. I should like to seize this opportnnity to welcome
into our midst the new representative of the United
States, none other than Mr. William Warren Scranton,
whose reputation as a wise, cool and collected gentleman of notable origin has preceded his advent to this
Organization.
I still recall excerpts of his report on
the Middle East after his visit to that region a few
years ago. Mr. Scranton then suggested something to
the effect that the United States should adopt a more
even-handed Middle Eastern policy and not necessarily
espouse one nation over some other. When Mr. Scranton returned to the United States after that trip, he
further added: “We are interested in Israel and its
security, but it is important to point out to the Middle
East and to people around the world that we are
interested in other countries in the area and have
friends among them”. I wiI1 expatiate on Mr. Scranton’s statement later in my statement, and Mr. President, if you happen to .be busy, I will ask-looking
around me and seeing what the atmosphere is-to
resume my statement tomorrow, but do not think
that I am not going to make the bulk of it tonight.

Joshua, before King David, when our Jews-the
Semitic Jews, not the Khazar Jews-came
to the
land of Canaan from what was then western Mesopotamia and is today western Iraq. Jerusalem-known
as
Uru Salim, or Uru Shalim in Arabic-had
been
populated by people who had come from the Arabian
peninsula 2,500 years before Joshua stormed Jericho
and then took Jerusalem. It was a Canaanite city, and
the Canaanites and our Jews all came from what you
would call the northwestern
part of the Arabian
peninsula.
161. Mr. Herzog said something about lies being
contained in the letter of the Saudi Arabian representative. He did not dare mention the name Baroody,
because it is known that Baroody never tells lies; he
may be wrong and, if so, he stands to be corrected,
but he does not tell lies. I feel pity for Mr. Herzog
because I think that, as a Jew, he has been brainwashed
by the Zionists.
162. Mr. Herzog spoke of the Jew Abraham.
Abraham was a patriarch who lived in Ur of the
Chaldees. The word “Jew” came into being during
the days of Abraham’s son Jacob, when he moved with
his sons to the land of Canaan. The whole story is
in Genesis. The fourth son of Jacob was named Judah,
and that is where the word “Jew” came from.

157. But at this stage I would not like to let the
opportunity pass without referring to the automobile
accident which hurt our good friend and colleague,
Ambassador Yakov Malik, and his good spouse. Although I am a monarchist and I believe that Mr. Malik
is a Communist, and we may sometimes find ourselves
poles apart in our respective Governments’
policies,
this has not deterred either one of us for the last
quarter century or so from developing friendly personal
relations, although there is not what is called detente
between Saudi Arabia and the Soviet Union. However,
it is humanism that, binds us, as it should bind people
of all ideologies. We should not have a relationship
that is spurious, and we never did, thank God. I wish
to tender through: my good friend, Mr. Richard
Ovinnikov, occupying the Soviet seat, my best wishes
for the speedy recovery of Mr. and Madame Malik,
and my hope that it will not be long before the former
resumes his duties amongst us.

163. For the information of the Israeli delegation-I
see one member of the delegation sitting here; I do
not know why Mr. Herzog could not stay here and
look me in the eye, although, of course, it is his
privilege to leave the room if he wishes to-1 would
say this. These people were called “Habiru”.
The
word “Hebrew” is derived from that word: the people
who had donkeys instead of camels for transporting
their crops and their goods from one place to the
other. Some people think that the word comes from
“Habara”,
an ancient Semitic word, but that is not the
case.

158. I come now:‘to the pith of the whole question.
I do not want to cite incidents and catalogue what
happened in the year 1967 or the year 1947--or, for that
matter, in the year 1922, when I was a youth of 17,
the year when it dawned upon us that the erstwhile
colonial Powers had ‘put us under mandate, a form of
colonialism in disguise.

164. Abraham was a patriarch. He had not one wife
but many, many wives, as was the custom of the
patriarchs of yore. He had many wives and concubines,
for that matter. A concubine also begets children;
many of them beget many children. This is what would
be called in the United States a “common law marriage”. Now, many of Abraham’s wives and concubines were Canaanites and related to the Arameans,
from whom Jesus descended.

159. The representative of Israel said that King David
had founded the first capital of Judaism. That is true.
But I wouId refer him to a book by the late Mr. Robert
Feiffer, a professor of the Old Testament at Harvard
University.
I think. that that book would enlighten
him. I shall paraphrase, from memory, parts of that
book in order to present the historical facts.
..
160. Mr. Herzog referred to King David as a prophet.
Of course, King David was a prophet of the Jews, a
son of Solomon. But I would go back to the days of

165. Who does Mr. Herzog think he is fooling? He
comes from Ireland, and perhaps from Poland, from the
Khazars of the northern tier of Asia. Those were the
ancestors of this gentleman called Mr. Herzog. He does
not know anything about our area. There was no
quarrel between our Jews and us. They spoke Arabic;
they ate the same food and worshipped the same
God. The only difference was that they did not recognize Jesus Christ, Jesus of Nazareth. They thought
he was a false Christ. They are still waiting for their
Christ; that is their privilege.
21

166. And where did political zionism begin? Among
our Jews? No. I hate to say this to our SecretaryGeneral, but it began in Vienna. Mr. Theodor Herzl
was of Hungarian origin. The Austro-Hungarian
Empire was a good commonwealth. They partitioned
all those empires, like the Ottoman Empire, and look
what that got us into. Herzl was a Hungarian Jew.
He was delegated by a Viennese newspaper to go to
Paris and report on the Dreyfus case. I do not have to
remind anyone here of what happened in Paris towards
the end of the last century, when Dreyfus was sent
to Devil’s Island and then brought back.

either Christians or Moslems.” So they were converted
to Judaism. And their forebears had never laid eyes
on the land of Palestine.
171. ,These are facts; this is not Baroody inventing
things, as did our colleague Mr. Herzog. And you know
what happened when the British and the French were
losing the war in 1917: it was the Zionists who railroaded this country, the United States, into the First
World War, in 1917. Mr. Woodrow Wilson-I did
research on his work, when I lectured for one year at
Princeton in 1943-was an isolationist, like the father
or uncle of Henry Cabot Lodge. It was the Zionists
who railroaded this country into the, First World War,
because Balfour saw that there was no victory in sight:
the Germans were more efficient in war, it seems,
than the British. And then the Balfour Declaration
came into being.

167. Herzl decided that there could be no life for the
Jew in Europe, that he should have a land of his own.
I have done research about Mr. Herzl’s family. I could
not find out anything about his male forebears. I do not
know about the women. Of course, the Jews put the
emphasis on the mother as the important partner in the
marriage. That is why, when a Jew marries a Gentile
they have almost a funeral at home, because the
mother is important. That is their privilege; they are
entitled to their rituals.

172. Why am I repeating all this? To show you the
genesis. Those Khazars, those converted Jews among
whom this ideology grew, had no title to Palestine
even on spiritual grounds. It iS not the ideology of our
own Jews. We -respect spiritual Zionism. Zion is the
mountain where, allegedly, King David was buried.
So they held what you call territorial Zionism, Zionism
based not on the spirit but on territory. And, ironically,
after the destruction of the Templi: in 70 A.D. by the
Romans, many of the Jews became Christians. Even
St. Paul, as you know, was a Jew, and he became one
of the greatest apostles of Christianity. Who was
St. Peter? They-were all Jews-r
Arameans; they
were all related, the same Semitic people-but the
forebears of those Khazar Jews, who were converted
to Judaism in the eighth century, ,had never laid eyes
on Palestine. And when, across this table, none other
than Mr. Abba Eban used to say, “God gave us
Palestine”, I said: “Since when is God in the real
estate business? Since when? Show us the title deed
and the seal thereon.” And you British and Americans-because, after all, it was after 1947-when did
God give you a power of attorney to give populated
land to Khazars who hailed from eastern and central
Europe and whose forebears never laid eyes on
Palestine? He fails to mention all’this.

168. In any case, Herzl was most likely a Khazar,
and his ideology gained credence among the Khazars.
He wrote The Jewish State in Paris. If you go to the
Rue St. Honore in Paris and take a left turn into the
street which leads to the back of the Ritz Hotel, you
will see a plaque-at least I think it is still there; I saw
it about 30 years ago-saying that that is the place
where Herzl did his writing. He said that the Jews
should have a home of their own; otherwise they would
be persecuted. It is a fact that some Jews were
persecuted in Europe. But Christians persecuted
Christians, even before Protestantism came on the
scene. What about the Inquisition? That was the age of
religious intolerance. I say that in fairness to the
Christians.
169. As a home for the Jews they thought of Uganda;
they thought of Argentina. And before the war there
were negotiations between Hitler and the French about
making Madagascar a haven for the European Jews.
Hitler did not want them, for some reason or other.
That was his business. He killed himself. We shall not
go into the history of Hitler now. We do not want to
digress.

173. All right, what about Christianity? There are a
billion Christians; there are 700:.million Moslems.
Jerusalem is as sacred to them, if not more so, as it
is to the Jews. Pope Urban II, in- 1087, initiated the
first Crusade, and then there were other Crusades.
They failed. We, the Moslem nations-we Arabstried to use the Caliphate in order to have supremacy
over Moslems who were not Arabs. We failed because
people want to have their own irationality, their own
customs, their own traditions-+ghtly or wrongly;
I do not know.
Ir,

170. In sum, who were the adherents of that ideology
of Zionism? The eastern European Jews and the central
European Jews that were converted to Judaism in the
8th century A.D. They lived in what today is southern
Russia, at one time called Bessarabia. Then, when
there was a confrontation in the eighth century between
Islam and Christianity-Byzantium and Islam-they
said: “Let us have detente” -just as Mr. Kissinger
today has detente with the Soviet Union. “Let us not
fight each other for the time being, and in order not to
upset the balance of power we will not let these
tribes” -pagan tribes which settled in the first century
A.D. in what today is southern Russia-“become

174. Now it is the turn of the Khazars, who use a
noble religion, which is Judaism,, as a motivation for
political and economic ends. T&y wiil fail, and I feel
sorry for them. This is the beginning of the end;
22

they do not see the writing on the wall. The only
way they can survive amongst us is by adjusting
themselves and then adapting to the area. They cannot
antagonize 120 million Arabs and 700 million Moslems.
How do I know? I happen to be the President of the
Islamic Conference, and I know what is happening in
the Moslem world.. When you mention the word
“Palestine”,
rightly or wrongly, they will not accept
the idea of Jerusalem being under Jewish suzerainty.
We do not judge of their merits or demerits. And here
come those Khazar Jews who used-again
I repeatJudaism as a motivation for a political and economic
end; they say: “God gave us Palestine, and the New
Testament of you Gentiles derives from the Old Testament”-because
Jesus said: “I did not come to
reverse, but to complete, what came before”.

was called Uru Saiim. Salim means peace-the
land
of peace. It is hallowed by the Jews, the Christians
and the Moslems. Why should 16 million or so Jews
have suzerainty over Jerusalem, or Palestine for that
matter? Because of their religion? There are three
monotheistic
religions. If we go by the so-called
democratic yardstick, the majority should be there.
Why should they be there? They have no place there.
I feel sorry for them. As human beings there is nothing
wrong with them. I do not discriminate between Jew
and Gentile. They are all European colonialists. But
this is passe.
178. The motivation
used to be religion during the
Middle Ages; then came the Bourbons, and the vassals
of the Pope became independent;
then it became
nationalism,
especially after the French Revolution;
and then it became ideological-and
representatives
see how sometimes our Communist friends, without
naming them, throw mud at each other. Motivations;
but this is passe; you cannot use religion as a motivation for a political end.

175. I am a student of comparative religions, particularly of the religions of our area. This is a hoax.
And this is not the first time that those European
colonialists, whether they are Jews or Gentiles, have
perpetrated
a hoax. Do you not know what the
British said about the Germans during the First World
War and in the post-war’era-that
the Germans had
Belgian babies for breakfast, and that they threw the
Belgian babies up in the air and caught them on their
bayonets. And when I was in England I was told
that after the First’World
War the Foreign Secretary
had to apologize to the Germans about what was
labelled
“war propaganda’.‘.
So do not believe
everything.

179. Does this gentleman mean to tell me that he
believes in that eloquent serpent that gave Eve the
apple which she took to ‘Adam when they were ‘in
Eden? That is all right,‘because we lived in tribes in
those days. There had to be allegories, parables. If
one studies the Bible, the Old Testament and the New,
it is all poetic, in parables.
180. Many gullible Christians, here and elsewhere,
are fundamentalists,
and I respect them. I respect
fundamentalists.
They take the letter, and “the letter
killeth”.
They believe everything. Tell me, did Noah
also have a microscope when he took male and female
into the ark? That is all mentioned in the Bible. There
were such small creatures that he,could not see whether
they were male .or female. They had no microscope
then ‘and they had no time. .And there are certain
people today in the twentieth century who believe in
every .word in the holy books. It is the moral, the
pith. You talk about religion; it has been ritualized,
and so has democracy been ritualized.

176. This gentleman may be brainwashed himself.
I do not say he is”trying to lie, nor do I talk as he
does of “lies”. I thought we were through with such
appeliations during’ the last session. Our “professor”
was here: I liked him; he was not a bad sort, but
he used words such as “the big lie”. You know whom
I am referring to: Moynihan. We are not used to such
things in our part of the word. If somebody calls you
a liar in public, you hit him. What is the idea of calling
it a “big lie” and t‘obscene” and certain other things?
We do not accept,‘these things. There are 144 nations
represented here. They may be misled, but Mr. Herzog
certainly does not know what he is talking about.

181. I& us come to the truth: Baroody tells you the
truth as he knows it. Do not go back and say “God
gave us Palestine”.
They took exception because we
said that those European Zionists are behaving in a way
that may be equated with racism. So were our British
friends before they lost the empire. I lived amongst
them in the 1920’s and 1930’s. They had their noses
up. Now they are so nice without the empire. They
thought they were a superior race, the Anglo-Saxon
race. And if we only knew. I did not know there were
Celts, the people. of Norfolk, “the capital of William
the Conqueror, and the Celts from which our friend
Mr. Richard is descended. We have no such thing as
race; it is the attitude that is racial. There is no such
thing as “Jewish blood”, “Arab blood” or “Russian
blood” --;unless you want it for transfusion, in which
case one labels it .A,. B, C, D as the case might be.

177. And we, theyArab world, are to accept that the
Palestinians should be scattered to the four comers
of the world. Why? The Palestinians are in our area.
Forget that they are Arabs. What did our American
friends do here to the Red Indians? Suppose some
Red Indians came.and said they had a sacred mountain
here in Manhattanithat
Murray Hill was a sacred
mountain-would
yo’u give it back to them, my good
friend Governor Scranton? I do not think’you would.
You are so good that they call a place in Pennsylvania
after you. You would not give it to the Indians now.
And these people say, “because we were there
2,000 years ago”. ‘I have done research. Both Israel
and Judah were there only for several hundred years.
The Canaanites had been there before our own Jews,
the Oriental Jews, took Jerusalem-2,500
years. It
23

182. This is superiority: “the chosen people of God”.
Is God a discriminator? God forbid. “Chosen people of
that
God” -1 know I must tell those Zionists-means
God chose prophets from the area. But there is another
prophet from the area called Jesus, son of Mary-I
am
talking about the monotheistic
religions,
not the
polytheistic-and
yet another called Mohammed,
the
Moslem prophet. Maybe we did not have industries,
but we happened to produce wise men when you
Europeans were barbarians. And we too were barbarians before we produced those men. There is
nothing wrong with being a barbarian. I wish I were a
barbarian-and
you, too, because we would not act
with semantics and sophistication.

who started terrorism in the Holy Land of Palestine?
The Zvai Leumi, the Haganah, the Stem Gang-what
were they?
187. Three years ago I saw a young man near
Madison Avenue. He said, “Good morning, Ambassador Baroody.”
I said, “Good morning. Who are
you?” He said, “I am an Israeli.” I said, “What are
you doing here?” He said, “I emigrated. I want to
become an American.‘* I said, “Why?” He said, “We
have had enough. Those people are tenacious, and
they think-“.
I said, “Who do you mean by ‘they’?:.’
He said, “The Zionists. I am no longer a Zionist.
I want to be an American.”
Do not think I am making
up this story. I said, “Where ‘were you born?” He
said, “There. My uncle was one of those”+ither
the Stem Gang or the Zvai Leumi-“and
he has
come here also; he is’in Michigan”.

183. Do not try to fool anyone, Mr. Herzog. You are
fooling yourself. Seek acceptance in the area. I was
talking about this subject 53 years ago, probably
before you were born, although I do not know how
old you are. Seek acceptance in the area, adjust and
adapt, and you will see the people of the Middle East
accept you with open arms. And they are the real
people of the land. They were Jews-I do not kno-w
whether this man was a Jew before. Ethnically, many
embraced Judaism, and then Byzantium began to lord
it-over
whom? Over the people of the land. Again,
Byzantium
used Christianity
as a motivation
for
political and economic ends, and people got fed up.
So when a new religion came they embraced Islam.

188. You have no future if you do not adjust and
adapt. There have been Alexander the Great, the
Seleucids, the Romans, the Byzantines, the Mongols,
our brothers the Turks. And then, after the First
world War, our British and French Mandatory Powers.
And where are they now? Crumbled. Where is the
British
Empire?
Where is the French Empire?
Crumbled. And you think you are going to survive
there, by the might of the United States? The United
States has a .$90-billion deficit in its budget. Why should
it be involved?

184. And for your information,
Sir, we have some
families who are more Arab than any Arab that are
descended from the Crusaders. We assimilated them.
Do you not think that we can assimilate those Eastern
and Central European Jews who converted to Judaism?
If they want to assimilate they will not give us indigestion. But they are causing us indigestion by the way
they are acting as if they are the lords and as if God
gave them Palestine. That is the hoax.

189. I am talking frankly, around the table, in an
unorthodox manner. I do not believe in writing a text.
190. They built houses from tombstones. But you
destroyed the houses of Palestinians whenever someone was accused-before
the judge could pronounce
him guilty or otherwise. You destroyed the houses of
the living, and you are talking about a few vandals
who may have removed tombstones? Good Lord.
You blew up the King David Hotel. You slew Count
Bemadotte and Lord Moyne. The Palestinian Arabs
learned violence from you. They were peaceful. It is
a land of pilgrimage. A land of pilgrimage is usually
inhabited by peaceful people, because they make
money by being peaceful. So we again return to money.
“Peaceful”!
You demolished houses. What did you
do? Good Lord, what did you not do?

185. Mr. Herzog mentioned
Lebanon. I tell him,
“I come from that part of the world. Do not poke
your nose in. If you do so, you will find it is a
hornets’ nest.” What created this trouble in Lebanon
but the partition of Palestine?
186. I do not want to be hard on our British and
American friends. But what right did our British and
American friends have to partition the land there
and transport people from one place or another? It is
sad that they were persecuted by Hitler, but why
should the people of Palestine pay the price? Why did
they not give them part of Texas or Australia? And
why did not those who support them tell them that
the people of Palestine have the inalienable right of
self-determination?
Those Palestinians are scattered
all over the world, and they have caused ferment
among the youth not only of the Arab and Moslem
world but of the whole world, even the Japanese. It
was some Japanese youths at Lod. I felt sorry for
those who died, and I felt for the Japanese who killed
them. After all, we do not believe in terrorism. But

191. There was a hopeful note at the end of
Mr. Herzog’s statement. He said he hoped that one
day-1 am paraphrasing-the
muezzin would pray in
Jerusalem and the Christian bells would chime and the
Jew would worship in the synagogue. Yes, that is
possible, if you seek acceptance bythe Arabs-120 million, from the Atlantic to the Persian Gulf. If one
draws a line from the Atlantic, at Morocco, to the
confines of China, one has a mass of Moslem countries. They are one in their reverence for Jerusalem.
And you want to challenge them. You play on the
emotions of the wealthy Jews and you rally numerically
the other Jews who want to identify themselves- with
24

their country of birth and adoption, saying, “You are
Zionists; you are Zionists.” Leave them alone. They
are happy. I know many Jews who are not Zionists.
They are very happy. They want to be left alone. You
do not leave them alone in your newspapers. You say,
“We are a small people*‘, and the like. Well, live
accordingly. Your religion is between you and your
conscience. Do not make a political issue of it otherwise, you will perhaps push this world into a conflict,
because you have influence everywhere in the
Western world and even in the Eastern world, in
the socialist world. I have heard that many Jews in
the Soviet Union would like to be left alone, but you
do not leave them alone. You say, “Come to Israel;
you are Israelites”- while those Palestinians live
outside their own land.

“What?” “See those Jews in Syria” on the CBS
news. How come I do not know them? Maybe God
is shedding light on the minds of those working in
the mass media controlled by the Zionists. You brainwash-not people in high positions, but yourself, until
finally you end up believing yourself. I feel sorry for
you.
194. And let God be my witness: if at any time the
Jews, as a minority, become the scapegoat in any
country and I am alive, I shall be among the first to
defend them as human beings. We have no hatred.
But you talk with hatred. You talk as though you are
exclusive-the chosen people of God.
195. I think I must go to the Tunisian reception
tonight, otherwise I would keep you until 10 o’clock.
I have a lot of material I have not used. But in
the event of the gentleman from Israel’s asking for the
floor, please list my name immediately after his,
Mr. President, and I shall refute what he says in
the hope that I may shed some light-historical,
political and social-on the matter and that he will
see that light. And then, as he hopes, Christian,
Gentile and Moslem can live in peace and harmony
with the Jews, who are our brothers in humanity.

192. By what yardstick of justice is this done? You
will fail, and miserably so. The United States will
get tired of you. But I will not get tired of you. I shall
keep trying to tell you to seek acceptance again and
again and again. And I think you will be happy. Oh,
how happy! You are very adept in trade and industry.
You were foolish to ask for a flag and a land. You
would have permeated the whole Arab world, you
Jews, had you gone there without a flag, because you
would have had the receipts.

The meeting

193. From the days of the Caliphs the Jews controlled
the industry and commerce of Baghdad. And you
malign those Iraqi Jews. When the chief rabbi went
to the synagogue in the days of the Caliphs, the royal
guard was sent to accompany him out of respect.
And as for the Syrian Jews, yesterday my son said,
“Come and see, Dad, come and see.” I said,

rose at 7.50 p.m.
Notes

1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, p. 287.
* A/AC.183/L.S, p. 13.
’ Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year, Special
Supplement No. 1.
4 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fcfth Emergency
Special Session, Plenary Meetings, 1550th meeting, para. 100.

25

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les libtairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Infortnez.vous aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous P : Nations Unies, Section
des ventcs, New York ou Genh.
KAIC IIOJIYYHTb

RBAAHHIi

COMO

PUBLICACIONEZS

CONSEGUIR

OPPAHEi 3AqHR

OG’bEANHEHHhIX

DE LAS NACIONES

HAUHTi

UNIDAS

Las publicacioncs de Ias Naciones Unidas esdn en vcnta en librerias y casas distribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Midas, Secci6n de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00400

83-60801-August

1984-2900
