S/PV.8951

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8951st meeting

Thursday, 20 January 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Juul. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Norway)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2021/1090)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-23516 (E)
*2223516*

Colombia

S/PV.8951

20/01/2022

also strongly encouraged to wear a mask at all times,
including while delivering remarks.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

I now give the floor to Mr. Ruiz Massieu.

The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council
(S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2021/1090)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Colombia to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Emilio José Archila, Presidential Adviser for
Stabilization and Consolidation of Colombia.

Mr. Ruiz Massieu: I thank you, Madam President,
for the opportunity to present the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia (S/2021/1090) and to update the
Council on recent developments.
(spoke in Spanish)
I am honoured to once again be in the company
of the Presidential Adviser for Stabilization and
Consolidation of Colombia, Mr. Emilio José Archila,
whom I thank for his continued support to the work
of the United Nations Mission. I am also pleased to
be joined by Ms. Luz Marina Giraldo, an outstanding
leader in the reincorporation process, who sadly lost
her husband — also an ex-combatant — to violence
in 2019. She is a fine example of economic, social and
political reintegration and her presence in the Council
today is crucial.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. Carlos Ruiz
Massieu, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia; and Ms. Luz Marina
Giraldo, former combatant of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo,
signatory to the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace and a
leader in reintegration initiatives.

(spoke in English)

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

It is important to carry that momentum forward
into a key year that holds new opportunities for
consolidating peace. In March, Colombians will cast
their votes for a Congress that, for the first time, will
include representatives from the 16 special transitional
electoral districts for peace. More than 400 candidates
are running to make the voices of those in regions
historically affected by poverty and conflict heard. All
of them are recognized as victims of the conflict, half
of them are women, and many of them are indigenous
and Afro-Colombians. This is a historic opportunity,
envisioned in the Agreement, that must be protected in
order to widen Colombia’s democracy.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/1090, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
Recalling the Security Council’s latest note by
the President (S/2017/507) on its working methods,
I wish to encourage all speakers, both members and
non-members of the Council, to deliver their statements
in five minutes or less. Note 507 also encourages
briefers to be succinct and focus on key issues. In that
spirit, briefers are further encouraged to limit their
initial remarks to seven to 10 minutes. Everyone is
2/23

As highlighted in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2021/1090), the fifth anniversary of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace provided an opportunity to
celebrate its achievements, acknowledge the persistent
challenges and recommit to its comprehensive
implementation. The visit of the Secretary-General
reaffirmed the commitment of the United Nations to
the success of the peace process, for which the support
of the Council has been clearly instrumental.

While political parties and organizations move
forward with their campaigns, authorities are taking
22-23516

20/01/2022

Colombia

steps to ensure peaceful and participatory elections. In
late December 2021, the Government informed of its
strategies to ensure the security of the more than 2,800
candidates running overall in these elections, as well as
the general conditions for Colombians to take part in the
election. An enhanced implementation of the security
guarantees provisions of the Agreement is critical for
these elections, especially in regions prioritized for
implementation which, regrettably, continue to be hit
by violence. For example, the Comprehensive Security
System for the Exercise of Politics should be put into
action in order to protect parties and movements across
the spectrum. Ensuring security and protection for all
candidates is essential, in particular for those running
for the special electoral districts that I mentioned
earlier. We trust that all political actors will conduct
their campaigns in an environment of respect. I
take this opportunity to invite them once more to
engage in initiatives promoting non-violence and
non-stigmatization in the electoral process.
I am glad to report that the National Council for
Peace, comprised of Government and State institutions,
as well as civil society representatives, has recently
launched the much-needed policy on reconciliation,
coexistence and non-stigmatization, provided for
in the Agreement. I trust that that policy, which can
contribute to non-repetition and reconstruction of the
social fabric, will be adopted and implemented swiftly.
Political reintegration is at the core of the peace
process. As voters, party members, local office
holders or members of Congress, men and women who
laid down their arms are now active participants of
Colombian democracy. The upcoming Congressional
elections will be yet another opportunity. I call on
the authorities to ensure their political rights and
their protection, especially in the light of persistent
insecurity and stigmatization.
During the past five years, the socioeconomic
reintegration of more than 13,000 accredited former
combatants has also advanced through a myriad of
initiatives. With support from the private sector and
the international community, Government entities have
played a major role through the provision of financial
and technical assistance for productive initiatives. For
former combatants settled in both the original and the
new reintegration areas, access to land and housing
needs to be accelerated so that their efforts can prosper,
including their joint work with host communities that is
so important for long-term reconciliation.

S/PV. 8951

We must remain vigilant and focused on the threats
still facing ex-combatants. While I acknowledge a
reduction in the number of killings compared to the
previous year, every single death is a blow to peace and
every effort needs to be taken to protect each former
combatant. That means enhancing their individual
security as well as securing, in a broader sense,
conflict-affected areas where illegal armed actors
continue to take advantage of the limited presence of
the State in parts of the country. The recent transfer of
the former territorial area for training and reintegration
of La Macarena, as a consequence of the deplorable
actions of illegal armed actors, illustrates that point.
Initiatives undertaken by former combatants and host
communities are being targeted by illegal armed actors,
who view the Agreement’s implementation as a threat
to their illicit interests.
The goal must be to prevent the need for anyone
to relocate due to violence. Nevertheless, the joint
efforts of the Government, former combatants,
local authorities, State entities and the international
community were instrumental in allowing former
combatants from La Macarena to finally move without
more severe consequences. Such efforts will remain
indispensable for guaranteeing that they can continue
pursuing their reintegration with dignity in the new
area. I trust that such collaboration will also lead to
progress in the relocation of other reintegration areas
facing similar risks, and that authorities will guarantee
security for the communities that are left behind.
I also call for greater support for the surviving
families of the hundreds of former combatants killed.
During his visit to Colombia, the Secretary-General
expressed his condolences to Luz Marina Giraldo, who,
through her foundation Sin Olvido, works for the rights
of the partners, sons and daughters of former members
of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) who were slain during
their reintegration process.
(spoke in Spanish)
The effects of the actions of illegal armed groups
and criminal organizations continue to be felt in
various areas, in particular in those prioritized for
the implementation of the peace agreement. Recently,
actions by the Ejército de Liberación Nacional and
dissident groups of the FARC-EP led to a considerable
deterioration of the security situation in the Arauca
department, affecting local communities and former

22-235163/23

S/PV.8951

Colombia

combatants residing in the area. Similar to the example
of La Macarena, this is another example of the urgent
need to strengthen comprehensive State presence.
Similarly, the approval and implementation of the longawaited policy to dismantle illegal groups are essential.
Between yesterday and today, two additional acts of
violence were reported — a car bomb in Arauca and an
attack on a military patrol in Antioquia.
I again condemn the actions of illegal armed
actors against communities, civilian institutions and
security forces and reiterate my call for them to respect
humanitarian principles. Acts such as the recent murder
of Breiner Cucuñame, a minor who was an indigenous
environmentalist and member of the Cauca Indigenous
Guard, should compel collective action to stop the
senseless violence. That call has particular relevance
in a year in which the country faces the challenge of
holding peaceful and participatory elections. It must
be stated very clearly that the spirit of the final peace
agreement is precisely that there can be no justification
for violence in today’s Colombia, or any alternative to
dialogue in resolving conflicts.
(spoke in English)
Indeed, 2022 will also be a critical year for
the transitional justice system created by the peace
agreement. The Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed
as Missing continues the overwhelming task of finding
thousands of persons disappeared during the conflict,
thanks mainly to information provided by actors who
took part in the conflict. The Truth Commission is
preparing to deliver its final report, which Colombian
society can use to collectively reflect on its past and
spare future generations from violence.
In turn, the work of the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace is advancing, with a view to ensuring that victims’
rights are upheld through the contributions of those who
took part in the conflict. The Special Jurisdiction for
Peace is expected to issue its first sentences later this
year. As that moment approaches, the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia continues to prepare
its verification of restorative sentences, in line with
the mandate entrusted by the Security Council. I thank
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and the Government
for their constructive cooperation in preparing for
the successful implementation of this key part of the
process. The backing of the Security Council for the
transitional justice system remains as important as ever.
4/23

20/01/2022

As the Secretary-General pointed out during his
visit, five years into its implementation, the peace
agreement is setting down ever deeper roots. The period
ahead will be crucial for the parties and Colombian
society to redouble their efforts and continue following
this road map for healing the wounds of conflict and
overcoming its causes.
The President: I thank Mr. Ruiz Massieu for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Giraldo.
Ms. Giraldo (spoke in Spanish): I send
greetings to the members of the Security
Council, the representatives of the countries
who are with us at this meeting and all other attendees,
and in particular greetings full of hope and dreams of
peace for the Colombian people. I thank all members
for allowing me to be at this meeting.
Through my voice, I would like Council members
to hear the voices of the signatories of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace and their families, who day
after day wake up and look at the sun with a prayer
for peace, calling for strength and encouragement to
continue in the arduous struggle for the building of
peace, despite the adversities we face daily.
I come on behalf of Camila, Daniela, Esperanza,
Rosa and all the women who have been widowed by the
loss of their husbands and partners, who were social
leaders, former combatants who were killed, signatories
or included in the peace agreement. I also come today
on behalf of the sons and daughters of peace. I am
referring to the girls and boys who were born in the
framework of the dialogue, as well as those who were
born in the midst of the confrontation and who now, at
last, are part of the family. But I come especially on
behalf of the children of peace who lost their parents
because they were social leaders or signatories to the
agreement; on behalf of the victims of this armed
conflict, which we want to bring to an end but which we
have not been able to end; those who fled in terror from
the scenes of armed confrontation, as is happening
right now in Arauca and in the Yari savannah; those
who continue to leave their homes to protect their lives;
those who, faced with the scourge of war and economic
ruin, have no other way out than to suffer the abuse
of an exclusionary system; those ex-combatants
who, after believing that a peace process would lead
Colombia out of war, are now victims of a forever war;
22-23516

20/01/2022

Colombia

and those peasants and social leaders who die without
being part of the war. I fight tirelessly for them. They
are the reason why I am here.
When we review the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
we discover in that 310-page document, the word
“family” is mentioned more than 92 times. That is no
accident. On the contrary, the Colombian State and we,
ex-combatants, agree that we have a common interest
in mutual recognition without any distinction and in
guaranteeing the supremacy of inalienable human rights
as a foundation for achieving harmony for individuals
and families. The dream of having a family made up
of fathers, mothers and children who did not fight was
precisely what led us to abandon the armed struggle
forever.
When we went to war, we carried on our backs field
baggage full of opposition to the inequality that was
everywhere in Colombia. Today, as we weave peace,
we carry on our backs the historic responsibility of
generating reconciliation, coexistence and tolerance,
even though we now directly endure the inequality that
we always emphasized and that led us to confrontation
in the first place. Our commitment to building a lasting
peace and to restitution for the victims of the conflict
means that every day we live in society and every
step that we take in the implementation of the peace
agreement, we must not forget or make invisible all
those we harmed in the war and for which we will be
deeply sorry until the end of our days. Therefore, we
are now committed for life to ensuring that the violence
that made us suffer will never return among us.
The implementation of what was agreed on requires
an indestructible commitment on the part of us all,
because equality and the protection of pluralism must be
guaranteed without any discrimination in order to ensure
and make effective the adoption of positive measures for
groups that are marginalized or discriminated against,
with a territorial, differentiated and gender focus.
Indeed, it is stigmatization, polarization and social
discrimination that have prevented us from reaching
the goals of the social rule of law and our children and
young people from having effective access to public
services, such as higher education, health-care systems,
comprehensive and inclusive social security systems,
including the financial system and the job market,
despite the fact that, within the framework of this great
agreement, equality, forgiveness and reconciliation
were enshrined as fundamental principles.

S/PV. 8951

But the harsh reality irrefutably demonstrates that
there is a generalized rejection, an emptiness directed
not only towards us, but also towards our children — the
children of peace — who are not responsible for what
happened during the conflict, and even less so the
children of social leaders who were assassinated during
the implementation of the agreement.
That is why I call on the Colombian nation to ensure
that the unions and the private sector associations, the
comprehensive social security systems, the financial
system, the education sector and the civil, labour and
family judges do not forget that the transitional system
that will lead us to peace with legality requires from
all of us an enormous commitment to ensuring that
our widows and children of killed ex-combatants receive
differentiated yet equal treatment, so that they can have
access to some minimum guarantees, such as access
to higher education, effective health-care systems, the
job market, the financial system and the comprehensive
social security systems and rights, for example, the
right to a survivor’s pension or a basic income, even in
cases where the family units or de facto marital unions
of the ex-combatants did not reach the threshold of
two years of cohabitation, owing to the premature and
violent death of the father or mother.
I call on the Government of Colombia also not
to forget that the word “family”, which is repeated
92 times in the agreement, means that it is the epicentre
not only of society, but also of all of us who have laid
down our arms to faithfully create democracy. The
word “security”, cited in the agreement, not only refers
to the means and mechanisms capable of dispelling the
risks we run, but must also, according to what has been
agreed, be conceived as a democratic value and from
the perspective of humanism, which should inspire
action by the State.
Today we recall that the agreement is made up
of a series of agreements, which are nevertheless a
comprehensive whole, in which the territorial focus
applied should prevent us from suffering displacements
in the regions and territories in order to flee from
forced disappearances, murder, threats and the lack
of opportunities.
The widows and orphaned children in the postagreement period are a special population for whom a
robust plan with a differentiated and gender focus must
urgently be drawn up to prevent them from falling into the
trap of poverty, so that they will never be objectified or

22-235165/23

S/PV.8951

Colombia

be victims of any stereotype of gender violence
or discrimination.
For that reason, the family must be a
comprehensive part of the concept of security
and cannot remain a dead letter written 92 times
in the agreement, and neither can the women,
girls, boys and leaders who are being killed or are
suffering for that reason continue to be considered as
figures by a technocracy that believes that the killing
of social leaders and its impact on the families are
merely the cost of an agreement that they have tried
to tear to shreds through the violence that continues in
the territories.
The peace that we seek and that we all want is in
our hands, because, as my husband used to say, peace
is born in our souls.
I have suffered war. I have grown up in hope
and love. We signed our Peace Agreement in 2017
in the Mariana Páez territorial area for training and
reintegration, which led us to dream of seeing our
Colombia become a territory without war. I went
there holding the hand of my dear partner and spouse,
Alexander Parra. We signed our commitment to peace
as a couple lighted by love. Our eyes met there in a
sustained moment of passion, tenderness and dreams of
peace, far from the anxiety of confrontation. We hoped
that peace would give us the possibility of reuniting with
our family and our children — the possibility of loving
each other and expressing and translating into reality
our ideas and convictions free of the anguish of combat,
bombings, hate and persecution. Yet, unfortunately, the
war reached him, and that is why I have come before the
Council today.
Lastly, today is an important day, and I would
like to thank the United Nations Verification Mission
for its work. It has played a key role in guaranteeing
the implementation of the agreement. I also thank the
guarantor countries and the Norwegian presidency
for this invitation. I take this opportunity to ask the
international community, from the bottom of our
hearts, not to leave us alone.
The President: I thank Ms. Giraldo for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I extend my thanks
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ruiz Massieu for his briefing and, as ever, for his work
6/23

20/01/2022

and that of his team. I also thank Luz Marina Giraldo
for sharing her important personal perspective with
the Council as a former combatant and now an active
participant in the reintegration process. I also welcome
Presidential Adviser Archila, whom I thank for joining
us today and for his tireless efforts on behalf of peace in
the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
As
the
Secretary-General’s
latest
report
(S/2021/1090) notes, the fifth anniversary of the signing
of the peace agreement, in November, was an important
opportunity for all stakeholders in Colombia’s peace
process to reflect on the historic progress achieved to
date and to take stock of the challenges that remain.
The United Kingdom was proud to play our part
in the commemorations, with our Minister for the
Americas joining the events in Antioquia, alongside
the Secretary-General and President Duque. Following
those commemorations, we now look ahead to the
next five-year implementation period. It is important
to maintain momentum towards realizing the full
promise of the agreement and ensure its continuous and
comprehensive implementation, including through the
upcoming election period.
The transitional justice system continues to be
vital to that process, and 2022 will be a crucial year
for its three components to deliver on their mandates.
We reaffirm our ongoing support for their important
work. We look forward to seeing the final report of
the Truth Commission, and the first sentence is to be
handed down by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
Those will mark an important milestone in Colombia’s
reconciliation process and securing justice for victims.
We welcome the preparations undertaken by the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
in readiness to assume its mandate to verify the
implementation of the sentences handed down by the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
The Secretary-General’s report notes a reduction in
the number of killings of former combatants from 2020
to 2021. While that downward trend is positive, we
all agree around this table that one such killing is one
too many. We express concern at the increased threats
by illegal armed groups, which have resulted in the
relocation of former combatants and their families from
former territorial areas for training and reintegration.
22-23516

20/01/2022

Colombia

We remain concerned by the persistent killings
and threats targeting social and environmental leaders,
human rights defenders, women leaders and those from
indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities. Just this
week we were shocked and saddened to learn the tragic
news that an indigenous environmental activist aged
just 14 years old was killed.
We urge the Colombian Government to continue to
step up its efforts to increase protection and security
and improve State presence in conflict-affected areas
and to strengthen the institutions that can investigate
and prosecute the criminal actors responsible for
that violence. We also reiterate the need for all
institutions to act on the early warnings of the Office of
the Ombudsman.
As we look ahead to the elections, we call on all
political stakeholders to take steps to ensure that they
will be peaceful and inclusive. In particular, we are
hopeful that the 16 congressional seats for victims will
provide a new opportunity to increase their voice in
legislative processes and peace implementation.
The parties to the agreement have shown what can
be achieved in five years through constructive dialogue
and cooperation. We cannot take for granted the gains
achieved thus far. We must protect and build on them.
The United Kingdom remains fully committed
to working with the Colombian Government and
other partners and stakeholders as they work towards
securing a lasting peace.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I want to start by
warmly welcoming Presidential Adviser Archila to the
Council. It is good that he is joining us here today; he
is very welcome. I express my renewed appreciation
also to Special Representative Ruiz Massieu and his
team. In addition, the powerful words of Ms. Giraldo
to us today will not be forgotten, and, in response to
her last point, neither will she, and I thank her very
much indeed.
I also wish to congratulate the parties to the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace for standing together in November
to commemorate peace and the impressive results of
five years of communal effort. Above all, I want to
congratulate the Colombian people for their continued
commitment to peace, justice and reconciliation.

S/PV. 8951

Today I will focus my intervention on three
important and interconnected aspects of Colombia’s
ongoing journey to sustainable peace.
First, the year ahead will see important advances
in transitional justice. We stand with the institutions
as they deepen their work on truth, justice and
reconciliation in a manner that is centred on victims
and survivors. In particular, we acknowledge the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace and look forward to the
final report of the Truth Commission. The healing
engendered by truth and reconciliation is essential to,
and will offer a foundation for, an inclusive, stable and
lasting peace for all Colombians.
Secondly, ahead of the upcoming elections and
forthcoming transition, we cannot overstate the
importance of the ongoing implementation of the
peace accord being recognized as a non-negotiable,
non-partisan common value. We urge the continued
prioritization of the comprehensive implementation of
the peace agreement, including through the adoption
of urgent legislation in its support. There is no time
to lose.
The creation of the transitional electoral districts
for peace is an important moment as well as, we believe,
a truly powerful expression of self-determination for
victims and survivors. We are pleased to see 202 women
stepping forward in those districts. That is encouraging.
Recognizing just how complex the process can
be, we welcome the Government’s support for those
new districts. We also encourage the Government and
all relevant stakeholders to intensify their efforts to
ensure the smooth functioning of the elections and the
safety of all participants. We further recommend that
the Government convene the high-level mechanism to
that end.
Thirdly, we continue to be concerned at the
unacceptable levels of insecurity in too many areas
of Colombia. Threats and intimidation by those who
profit from insecurity and crisis cannot be allowed
to undermine democracy and imperil the hard-won
building of long-lasting peace. We condemn in the
strongest terms the recent attacks on Colombian
security forces by illegal armed groups.
We categorically condemn the killing of 10 more
former combatants, including indigenous woman leader
Maria Muñoz, who had already endured the killing of

22-235167/23

S/PV.8951

Colombia

20/01/2022

her husband just last June, and the killing of a further
34 human rights defenders.

highlight the progress made but also the challenges that
remain. Allow me to review a few aspects.

The shocking killing last Friday of a teenage
indigenous environmental activist, Breiner David
Cucuñame, a 14-year-old boy, is really a travesty.
The continued targeting and killing of human rights
defenders and former combatants simply cannot be
countenanced. Such brutality must be addressed, and
impunity ended.

First, elections are approaching and with them the
risk of increased tensions. It is therefore important that
the authorities do everything possible to ensure that the
elections are held in a safe and inclusive manner. This
includes ensuring the security of polling places and
the candidates, particularly in the 16 electoral districts
for peace.

It may sound cliché to say that the comprehensive
implementation of the peace agreement will not provide
all the solutions required to end insecurity. However, it
does have the power to address many of the contributory
challenges. The agreement can act as a road map
to address many outstanding issues of concern and
ensure State presence in historically neglected areas.
Above all, it provides much-needed space for continued
dialogue, fundamental to ensuring a sustainable and
peaceful future for all Colombians.

Secondly, the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court closed the preliminary examination
on Colombia, active since 2004, which is very
encouraging. It commits Colombia to continuing
its own investigations, and we welcome the steady
progress of the Comprehensive System of Truth,
Justice, Reparations and Non-Repetition in this regard,
especially in cases 01 and 03. We encourage all parties
to engage in the process of establishing the truth.

In conclusion, I recall the Secretary-General’s
words following his recent visit: the international
community has a moral obligation to ensure that this
inspirational peace process is successful. As Colombia
now moves to the next phase of implementation, Ireland
reiterates its continued support as a partner in peace.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would also like to begin by thanking Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz
Massieu for his briefing. I would also like to acknowledge
the poignant testimony of Ms. Luz Marina Giraldo and
the presence among us of Mr. Archila, Presidential
Adviser for Stabilization and Consolidation.
A few weeks ago, we celebrated the fifth
anniversary of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, and
this agreement is a historic achievement. Colombia has
set an example for the international community. After
half a century of deadly conflict, the former guerrillas
laid down their arms and became a political party.
Today 13,000 former combatants are working to build
peace on a daily basis. The Special Jurisdiction for
Peace and the Truth Commission are paving the way
for the reconciliation of an entire society and placing
victims at the heart of the process.
The fifth anniversary is an opportunity to take
stock of the implementation of the agreement and to
8/23

Thirdly, the continuing violence in Colombia is
the main obstacle to peace. Several hundred former
combatants, human rights defenders and social leaders
have been assassinated since 2016, as was noted. Each
of these assassinations weakens the implementation
of the peace agreement. It is therefore important to
strengthen the presence of the State in remote areas
and to strengthen the institutions that can investigate
and prosecute criminals. We call on the authorities
to convene the National Commission on Security
Guarantees with greater frequency and to implement
the policy of dismantling armed groups.
Fourthly, winning peace requires, of course, viable
and just socioeconomic opportunities for all. There
has been progress, which we welcome. More could be
done on rural reform and access to land and housing.
It is important to allocate significant and appropriate
budgets to these areas. The chapters of the agreement
that deal with inclusiveness and women’s issues are
essential in this regard and must be implemented. In
general, the institutions under the agreement are built
for dialogue and need to meet more often.
The peace agreement is gradually taking root, and
we want it to become irreversible, which is why we
believe that its full implementation is the best guarantee
of this.
Madam President, you may rest assured that France,
as well as the European Union, will continue to give its
22-23516

20/01/2022

Colombia

full support to all those in Colombia who are mobilized
on a daily basis in favour of peace.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos
Ruiz Massieu for his updated report (S/2021/1090). I
also thank Ms. Luz Marina Giraldo for her moving
testimony. I welcome the presence among us of
Mr. Emilio José Archila, Presidential Adviser for
Stabilization and Consolidation.
Five years after the signing of the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace, which opened up great prospects for
peace and gave Colombia a better political and economic
dynamic, we note that the dialogue between the parties
to the agreement continues to be the reference point for
its implementation, despite the persistent challenges,
the effects of which have been aggravated by the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
This year marks a turning point in the
implementation of this historic agreement for Colombia,
with the organization of the second elections since it was
signed, to be held in March, for the legislative elections,
and in May, for the presidential elections. We note with
interest the establishment of the institutions permitted
by the agreement to allow for the proper development
of these elections, including the transitional electoral
tribunals designed to guarantee the transparency of
the process. We encourage the actions that are being
taken on the ground to promote the participation of all
populations, including ethnic minorities, particularly in
regions that were excluded because of armed conflict.
We welcome the encouraging results of the
innovative transitional justice system created by the
agreement. This system is proving to be a promising
foundation for lasting reconciliation and peace. The
recent agreement signed between the Colombian
President and the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court marks the commitment of the national
authorities to pursuing the implementation of this
important component of the peace agreement, in close
cooperation with the United Nations.
With respect to the comprehensive rural reform
component, which is one of the key pillars of the Final
Agreement, my delegation commends the significant
investments made by the Colombian State — over
$2.6 billion for rural programmes for numerous projects
representing 58 per cent of the total provisions in this
sector. We encourage the Colombian Government to

S/PV. 8951

move forward with the expected reforms, particularly
in the area of land tenure. These reforms have a key
role to play in accelerating the reintegration of former
guerrillas and in ensuring their economic conversion.
My delegation is concerned about the resurgence of
acts of violence and crime that continue to be reported
in certain localities and that are hindering progress in
the implementation of the agreement, to the detriment
of the population in localities where endemic violence
is already a factor of fragility. These acts mainly target
political leaders in the ranks of former combatants, and
in particular minorities and people of African descent.
In recent days there have been reports of the killing of up
to 100 human rights defenders. It is therefore essential
that the security of former combatants be strengthened
in order to consolidate the implementation of the Final
Agreement and avoid the insecurity resulting from the
massive displacement of people fleeing the violence.
With that in mind, we support continued dialogue
between the parties within the framework of the
National Reintegration Council in order to resolve
the practical aspects that will allow for the effective
reintegration of former guerrillas, including the
judicial mechanism for resolving land disputes, reform
of the agreement, reform of the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace in Colombia, and reforms of the land restitution
process. We call on the two dissident FARC-EP groups
and their leaders to lay down their arms and participate
actively in the peace process.
We express our appreciation for the gender
approach taken in the peace agreement and encourage
Colombia’s efforts aimed at providing adequate
responses to the problems related to implementing
gender-related provisions and to increasing women’s
participation in the implementation of the agreement.
We must take urgent action to put an end to sexual and
gender-based violence committed against women and
girls by ex-FARC-EP members and public security
forces and to address the continuing very high femicide
rate. Such acts are unacceptable, and we call on the
authorities to take firm action against the perpetrators.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my country’s
full support for efforts thus far to implement the peace
agreement and hope that the momentum generated
during the process will be amplified as a result of the
inclusivity and good faith of all parties.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Let me begin by
expressing our deep appreciation to Mr. Carlos Ruiz

22-235169/23

S/PV.8951

Colombia

Massieu, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his update today, as well as to Ms. Giraldo,
who has shared heartfelt testimony. I also welcome
Mr. Archila, Presidential Adviser for Stabilization and
Consolidation of Colombia, to the Council.
It is a particular honour to take the floor to comment
on the implementation of the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace in Colombia. As a neighbouring country, Brazil
commends the Colombian people for the remarkable
job they are undertaking of healing old wounds and
cementing a path of peace and prosperity to unify the
whole country. Peace in Colombia is an achievement
of its society. The Colombian decision to involve the
United Nations in monitoring the implementation of
the peace agreement and the transparency the country
has been showing along the way are a testimony of
Colombia’s commitment to peace. On the Council’s
side, strict adherence to the mandate is necessary to
foster trust between the international community and
the parties in Colombia.
The Security Council has indeed been playing
a very important role in increasing confidence that
peace is possible and will be duly implemented. In
our view, the Council cannot lose view of that aspect
in its involvement in the dossier. This exemplary case
should be seen as providing the Council with tools and
principles that it may have recourse to in its future
work. Among the lessons learned in Colombia is that
the Council can be a catalyst to bring parties to the table
and that without the due involvement and ownership of
the parties to the conflict, there are fewer chances of
enduring peace — even with years of military presence
on the ground.
As mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2021/1090) and emphasized by the Special
Representative Ruiz Massieu, and of which Ms. Giraldo
has given eloquent testimony, peace has indeed taken
root in Colombia. As we approach a new presidential
election, Brazil is confident that the agreement has
succeeded in instilling institutional stability and that
its implementation will therefore remain a priority for
Nariño Palace during the incoming Administration.
The report further stresses that the root causes of
conflict in Colombia need to be properly addressed
so that Colombian society can truly turn this page. In
that regard, we are pleased that Colombia has shown
willingness to enhance social policies in previously
10/23

20/01/2022

neglected areas, which were strongly affected by
decades of conflict. Although much remains to be
done, Brazil is confident that Colombia is on the
right path. Of the 15 years envisaged for its complete
implementation, only five years have elapsed since the
agreement was signed.
Colombia has already shown and consistently
demonstrated its political will to advance and increase
the presence of the State where needed. For example,
it has invested $2.6 billion so far in rural reform and
crop replacement. Brazil is fully cognizant of the
socioeconomic, geographic and logistical problems
the Colombian Government faces in order to reach the
totality of its territory, as we share many of the same
challenges in reaching the population throughout our
own territory. Brazil is sure, however, that Colombia
has the knowledge, means and resources to overcome
the challenges.
It is also worth mentioning that Colombia and the
International Criminal Court signed a cooperation
agreement that defines mutual responsibilities related
to transitional justice — the first agreement of its
kind between the Court and a State party. Brazil
trusts Colombian efforts to guarantee the safety of excombatants, strengthen its policies regarding women,
indigenous populations and Afro-descendants and
ensure the due functioning of the transitional justice
system, with which we are sure the Colombian
Government will keep cooperating fully.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): At the outset, let me join
others in welcoming the participation of Mr. Archila,
Presidential Adviser for Stabilization and Consolidation
of Colombia, in today’s Security Council meeting. I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ruiz Massieu for his briefing. We appreciate his
involvement and contribution to the ongoing process in
Colombia. I also thank Ms. Giraldo for her briefing.
This is the first time we are meeting since
November 2021, the fifth anniversary of the historic
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. We join others
in congratulating the people of Colombia on the rapid
strides they continue to make on the path to peace and
development since the signing of the agreement to end
the conflict and forge a lasting peace.
The progress made in the implementation of
the agreement, especially in the past three months,
is reassuring. As Colombia heads for congressional
22-23516

20/01/2022

Colombia

S/PV. 8951

elections in March, the enactment of the law creating
16 special transitional electoral districts for peace has
provided an important opportunity for historically
excluded populations to participate in the elections.
It is also heartening to see that a record number of
202 women candidates have filed their nominations
for the elections. We are pleased to see that political
alliances have included the implementation of the peace
agreement within their policy priorities and agenda
platforms. It is also encouraging to witness renewed
activism in the legislature, with ruling coalition
members and opposition presenting draft bills on issues
related to the implementation of the peace agreement.

and Culture, Ms. Meenakshi Lekhi, to Colombia in
September, has further contributed to strengthening
and expanding India-Colombia bilateral ties. As a longstanding friend and partner of Colombia, India will
continue to stand in solidarity with the people and the
Government of Colombia.

The first indictments from the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace, new convictions by the Special Investigations
Unit and continuing protection measures by the
National Protection Unit reflect the progress made in
the sphere of transitional justice. That has been duly
recognized with the closure of International Criminal
Court’s preliminary examination on Colombia, active
since 2004. We are hopeful that these developments
will permit increased support for the peace process,
including for the reintegration of former combatants.

Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I thank Special
Representative Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his informative
briefing on the recent developments in Colombia
and for bringing further clarity to the SecretaryGeneral’s latest 90-day report on the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia (S/2021/1090). I also
thank Ms. Luz Marina Giraldo, former combatant of
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) and a leader in
reintegration initiatives, for her useful perspectives on
the situation in Colombia, which will no doubt enrich
the Council’s deliberations. It is also a pleasure to
welcome the participation of His Excellency Mr. Emilio
José Archila, Presidential Adviser for Stabilization
and Consolidation of the Republic of Colombia in
this meeting.

The implementation of the peace agreement
and the reintegration process have maintained an
overall positive trajectory. For that, we appreciate the
Colombian Government for its strong commitment to
giving effect to the provisions of the peace agreement.
However, there are still certain aspects of the peace
agreement that face impediments in implementation.
The disputes between illegal armed groups, including
various Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo dissident groups over territorial
control and strategic illegal trafficking routes, remain
a concern. Those disputes have aggravated violence,
particularly in areas affected by the conflict, and this
needs to cease completely.
Threats, killings and subsequent displacement of
cooperative members is having disruptive effects on
the reintegration initiatives. It is reassuring that the
Colombian authorities are taking suitable measures to
implement the security, housing and land guarantees
enshrined in the Agreement.
For India, Colombia is an important bilateral
partner in Latin America. The visit of Colombia’s
Vice President and Foreign Minister, Ms. Marta
Lucía Ramírez, to India in October, preceded by the
visit of India’s Minister of State for External Affairs

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that,
while the peace process in Colombia continues to be
a source of inspiration, the international community
needs to continue with its responsibility to support
the Government and the people of Colombia in their
journey to consolidate and sustain peace.

Two months ago, the people of Colombia and the
international community marked an important milestone
in their worthy search for a durable and sustainable
peace. The commemoration of the fifth anniversary
of the signing of the historic 2016 Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace opened a positive chapter for all Colombians and
cements further their commitment to ensure that the
peace process takes deep root in Colombia.
The valuable lessons learned over the past five years
should reinforce our conviction that peacebuilding,
peace consolidation and genuine reconciliation can
be achieved in incremental steps and with determined
efforts. There are no magic wands. Ghana therefore
commends the Government of Colombia, the leaders
of the Comunes party, the heads of the transitional
justice system, civil society leaders, victims of the
armed conflict, former FARC-EP combatants, State
institutions, academia and the international community,

22-2351611/23

S/PV.8951

Colombia

20/01/2022

as well as the wider Colombian society, for actively
engaging in the peacebuilding efforts.

campaign period should be devoid of divisive acts that
are conducive to violence.

We are pleased to observe that the Colombian people
are using State structures and institutions to foster
dialogue and build trust among themselves. Strong,
vibrant and inclusive State institutions, as we know,
have the enduring capacity to safeguard the interest of
citizens and are well placed to protect the rights and
dignity of all persons, especially vulnerable persons
and minorities. It is critical for all actors involved in
the Colombian peace process to recognize that they
have a shared responsibility to not only consolidate
the peace, but to ensure that all Colombians without
exception enjoy the tangible benefits and dividends of
the peace agreement.

Fifthly, we are concerned that, even in a postagreement period, indigenous and Afro-Colombian
former combatants, including civilians, still suffer the
consequences of violence. We want to state that there is
no alternative to a complete cessation of hostilities. We
strongly call on all dissident groups and other illegal
armed groups to abandon their armed struggle and
embrace dialogue by joining the peace process without
any pre-conditions to avoid taking the country back
into needless conflict.

In the months ahead, the support of the Council
will be vital in addressing the lingering challenges
and risks to the Colombian peace process, which for
many remains fragile. The full and comprehensive
implementation of all the provisions of the Final
Agreement will be critical. There should be no room
for cherry-picking, which could be counter-productive
and derail the successful implementation of the Final
Agreement
In that regard, first of all, Ghana urges the
prioritization of the gender provisions of the agreement.
The parties to the Final Agreement must work together
to protect the participation and enhance the role of
women leaders involved in the peace process. Women
leaders in Colombia act as peace facilitators and
collaborators and are not a burden to the process.
Secondly, the economic and social reintegration of
indigenous and Afro-Colombian former combatants,
including all vulnerable groups seriously affected by
the armed conflict, must be accelerated.
Thirdly, there must be full cooperation and respect
for the transitional justice system as a key guarantor for
lasting peace and reconciliation.
Fourthly, we encourage the Colombian Government
and, indeed, all actors to ensure inclusive political
participation and progress on all institutional and
democratic reforms, as they constitute a veritable way
to build a stable and lasting peace. The upcoming
congressional and presidential elections this year
provide yet another unique opportunity for Colombians
to help drive forward their democratic aspirations. The
12/23

Lastly, we urge the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia and the entire United Nations
country team to continue leveraging their respective
mandates and programmes to support peace
implementation efforts, including on matters of
reintegration, security guarantees, transitional justice,
rural reform and alternative livelihoods.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We welcome the first participation of
Ms. Luz Marina Giraldo, a peace process participant
and a signatory to the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, as
well as that of Mr. Emilio José Archila, Presidential
Adviser for Stabilization and Consolidation, in
this meeting.
We thank the Head of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, Mr. Carlos Ruiz
Massieu, for presenting the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in the country (S/2021/1090)
and for his assessments.
The reporting period covered a landmark occasion,
namely, the fifth anniversary of the signing of the
historic Final Agreement. We will never tire of repeating
that the agreement not only brought a long-awaited end
to half a century of internal armed conflict, but also
ensured that the peace process enjoyed the support
of the international community, including the United
Nations Secretary-General and the Security Council.
For the long-suffering Colombian people, there
was a good chance for gradual post-conflict recovery.
Secretary-General Guterres’ visit to Colombia last
year further reaffirmed international support for the
Final Agreement. As a polite guest, during his trip
the Secretary-General focused primarily on what had
been achieved in the five years since the agreement
22-23516

20/01/2022

Colombia

was signed. However, it is no secret to members of the
Security Council that the bulk of the Government’s
work in implementing its commitments still lies ahead.
That same conclusion clearly follows from the report of
the Secretary-General.
Traditionally, problematic issues include the security
of the civilian population, including human rights
defenders and participants in the peace process, and
their economic, political and legal reintegration, as well
as agrarian reform and crop substitution programmes.
The most acute issues, of course, concern security.
As a result of attacks by illegal armed groups, another
12,000 people were forced to leave their places of
permanent residence during the reporting quarter. In
the past year alone, there have been 56 massacres with
222 victims. Since the signing of the Final Agreement,
303 signatories to the peace process who had laid down
their arms have been killed. Have those responsible for
such terrible crimes been brought to justice?
What we find rather worrisome is that according
to the report, of the 13,000 defendants in the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, three quarters of them are former
combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo, while only a quarter are
from State security forces.
We must acknowledge that the totality of those
unresolved complex issues allows for only a cautious
assessment of the results of the implementation of the
Final Agreement on its fifth anniversary. At the same
time, we note that some progress has indeed been
achieved in a number of areas of the peacebuilding
process. In that context, we express our full support for
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
as well as for the guarantor countries of the Final
Agreement, namely Cuba and Norway.
At the same time, we cannot but agree with the
conclusions of the report of the Secretary-General in
that the peacebuilding process in Colombia remains
in jeopardy. One of the key problems identified by
the Secretary-General is the deep-rooted factors
causing divisions in Colombian society. Those must
not be overlooked by Colombians in order to avoid a
recurrence of internal conflicts.
We cannot repeat enough that genuine peace cannot
be achieved in the country without the inclusion of all
major actors. In that context, the scant information in
the report regarding the lack of negotiations between the

S/PV. 8951

Government and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
is unsatisfactory. The Colombian parties must begin
to seek paths towards dialogue without preconditions
and on the same basis as the previous negotiations
process with the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia. This means that the talks must be initiated
and conducted regardless of conflict’s modalities, as
though there were no conflict at all.
As usual, we recall that the normalization of
relations with neighbouring Venezuela could also help
to achieve sustainable peace and stability in Colombia.
That, inter alia, is needed to combat the crime
surge in border areas and could provide some insurance
against possible incidents with dangerous consequences.
In conclusion, I would like to address the upcoming
elections in the country this year — parliamentary
elections in March and presidential elections in May.
Preparations are well under way and form the backdrop to
the entire report. We have taken note that some political
players have included the issue of the implementation
of the Final Agreement in their election manifestos.
However, it is not enough. It is important that the
United Nations convey to all election candidates and
political forces the importance of strictly implementing
this historic document.
Colombians, independently and without external
interference, must exercise their democratic right to
choose the leaders of their society. However, we urge
potential candidates for key State positions to recall
that the global community will form its own opinion of
them by assessing, first and foremost, the importance
and feasibility of their peacebuilding programme. That
is their primary responsibility to Colombian society.
The imperative for any Government must remain
the scrupulous implementation of obligations under the
final peace agreement. Replacing the agreement with
unilateral programmes that have not been agreed upon
by all participants in the peace process could lead to
backsliding and have negative long-term consequences.
As a permanent member of the Security Council, Russia
will continue to provide support to the Colombian peace
process to make it sustainable and irreversible.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the Head
of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for his valuable briefing. I

22-2351613/23

S/PV.8951

Colombia

20/01/2022

would like also to welcome the Presidential Adviser
for Stabilization and Consolidation of Colombia,
Mr. Emilio José Archila, and Ms. Luz Marina Giraldo
to today’s meeting.

former combatants who play a critical role in achieving
peace. Progress can be made by implementing the
security guarantees and gender provisions noted in the
peace agreement.

We commend the delegation of Norway for using
advanced technology to provide Security Council
members with a deeper understanding of the situation
on the ground. We encourage similar initiatives that
serve international peace and security.

Lastly, addressing persistent threats and violence
against community leaders, former FARC members and
members of political parties must remain a priority so
that efforts to achieve lasting and comprehensive peace
in Colombia are not undermined.

As we have heard today, Colombia has achieved
tangible progress in the implementation of the
historic peace agreement with the r Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP). We recently marked the agreement’s fifth
anniversary and reviewed the progress made so far
to support the peace process in Colombia. However,
several challenges remain. I underscore the full support
of the United Arab Emirates to the Government and the
people of Colombia in their quest for sustainable peace.
The United Arab Emirates also affirms its support
for the United Nations Verification Mission and its
important role in Colombia.

Despite the decrease in the number of killings in
2021 as compared to the previous year, the Secretary
General’s report (S/2021/1090), notes that acts of
violence persist and can severely threaten Colombia’s
chances for reconciliation and reintegration of
previous combatants. Acts of violence include recent
clashes in the Arauca region. Therefore, efforts must
be strengthened to prevent the recurrence of such
acts of violence, including improving early-warning
mechanisms. The United Arab Emirates commends the
measures taken by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace to
advance the implementation of security guarantees and
provide better protection for former combatants.

With regard to maintaining progress for lasting and
sustainable peace in Colombia, we would like to focus
on three priority areas.

Support for Colombia must not be limited to the
political aspect, but it is important to include support for
humanitarian and development aspects, particularly in
the light of the repercussions caused by the coronavirus
disease. That would preserve the progress made by
Colombia towards promoting peace and stability. We
look forward to more progress in cooperation with
Council members.

First, the necessary and secured conditions must
be created to ensure that the upcoming elections in
March and May are successful and inclusive and that
constructive dialogue among the parties be ensured. In
that context, we note the adoption by the Government
of Colombia of the recent law to include 16 special
transitional electoral districts for peace. That has
facilitated broader participation by Colombians in the
elections across the country. We also commend the
steps taken by the Government to develop a range of
prevention and protection strategies to ensure safe
elections. Those steps will undoubtedly help protect the
sustainable and comprehensive implementation of the
peace agreement.
Secondly, national strategies must continue to
guarantee the inclusion and participation of women
and youth. The broad participation of young Colombian
voters in municipal youth council elections provides
them with a stronger voice in their communities. In
turn, that strengthens their role in making decisions
about their future. However, crucial steps must be taken
to protect women in Colombia and promote their full,
meaningful and safe participation, especially women
14/23

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me welcome Mr. Emilio
José Archila, Presidential Adviser for Stabilization and
Consolidation of Colombia, to today’s meeting.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his briefing and
Ms. Luz Marina Giraldo for her insights. We appreciate
the work and contribution of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia.
Last November, Colombia marked the fifth
anniversary of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
That landmark act of courage and wisdom represents a
true commitment of hope and inspiration, not only for
Colombia. It set an example of how true commitment
can produce concrete and genuine results. We welcome
the visit of the Secretary-General in commemorating
that benchmark to show the strong support of the
22-23516

20/01/2022

Colombia

United Nations, which Colombia rightfully chose to
involve, and to take stock of the implementation of
the agreement.
No one has any doubt that building peace is a long,
complex and always demanding road. The briefers
pointed out several difficulties. However, we believe
that the efforts and progress made by the Government
and the people of Colombia thus far deserve due
recognition and our praise. The agreement outlined a
clear path to deal with the root causes of the conflict,
heal the profound wounds caused by more than
five decades of conflict and prevent atrocities from
recurring. The transitional justice system put in place
ensures justice for victims and survivors. We see it as an
important investment for lasting peace. In that context,
we welcome the work of the Truth Commission, whose
mandate was extended by the Constitutional Court
until August 2022, in order to continue to deal with
individual responsibility for crimes committed during
the conflict. We support that process.
As we heard today, many challenges lie ahead.
We must redouble efforts to counter violence against
communities and individuals participating in the
transitional justice process. State authority must
be fully established and strengthened where it is
challenged by dissident groups of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo.
More must be done, such as the successful action taken
against the Clan del Golfo, to break any links between
illegal armed groups and criminal organizations for
social, territorial and strategic control, which aggravate
violence against civilians, including former combatants,
hinder implementation and governance and alter the
lives of entire communities. Ensuring accountability
remains essential for the overall success of the security
guarantees provisions of the Final Agreement.
Authorities in Colombia must continue making
full use of their institutional toolbox of constructive
dialogue with various parties to sustain progress
in addressing challenges in efforts to put an end to
conflict and build lasting peace. There is no alternative
to continued engagement and continued dialogue,
especially in the context of the National Reintegration
Council regarding key issues, including security, land
and housing, productive projects and the other priority
concerns of former combatants. As we heard, political
reintegration remains essential.

S/PV. 8951

We would like to highlight the importance and role
of women in peacebuilding. We were happy to hear
from Ms. Giraldo — a leader in reintegration initiatives.
The fact that 64 per cent of women former combatants
participate in productive projects is both testimony to
the gender-based focus in the implementation of the
agreement and highlights the undisputed role of women.
(spoke in Spanish)
Colombia has shown a concrete example of how
to bring a terribly long and bloody conflict to an end.
Today it is showing what is needed to build peace
through reconciliation, reintegration, justice, investing
in people’s lives and building a common future together,
in peace and security. Colombia and Colombians
should be proud of their achievements, and we support
their efforts.
We hope that the upcoming elections in May will
bring another boost to the successful implementation of
this crucial process for the Colombia of today and the
Colombia of tomorrow.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, Mr. Carlos Ruiz
Massieu, for his briefing, and I extend my appreciation
to the members of the Mission.
I also thank Luz Marina Giraldo, civil society
representative, for sharing with us her experience as
a former combatant and peace advocate and for her
heartfelt testimony. We also acknowledge the presence of
Mr. Emilio José Archila Peñalosa, Presidential Adviser
for Stabilization and Consolidation of Colombia, and
we are also grateful for the virtual reality experience of
the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
That brings us closer and more directly to what is
happening on the ground.
In the words of the Secretary-General, the signing
of the peace agreement is an example of how “societies
can heal the wounds of war and bring about development
opportunities to those most in need” (S/2021/1090, p.
17). The recent visit by Secretary-General António
Guterres to Colombia, in the framework of the fifth
anniversary of the agreement, reflects the commitment
of the international community to support Colombia in
this process.

22-2351615/23

S/PV.8951

Colombia

Mexico, my country, welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2021/1090) and, while sharing
his optimism for the future, we join in his call for the
Government and relevant entities to spare no effort in
the full implementation of the Final Agreement. We
agree that progress is needed on all points, including
the pending provisions on security guarantees and
an increased presence of the State to unleash the
transformative potential of the agreement.
Without detracting from the progress made over
five years, work must be done on the challenges ahead.
Violence is the main challenge to peacebuilding, in
particular in view of this year’s electoral processes.
The security of those participating in the elections must
be a priority, including in the 16 special transitional
electoral districts for peace.
At the same time, attention must be paid to the
victims of displacement, and we are particularly
concerned about the more than 25,000 children in
that situation. We trust that this year the Commission
for the Follow-Up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement will improve
its coordination and dialogue with the ethnic peoples
and with the gender body, and that the specific needs of
the indigenous, child and Afro-Colombian populations
will be addressed. The peace process will remain
incomplete if the 42 gender indicators, which are still
pending, are not met.
Mexico also stresses the importance of the
Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparations
and Non-Repetition. As we await the sentences about
to be handed down by the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace, we reiterate that the transitional justice system
in Colombia should serve as an example for other
processes in the rest of the world. The acknowledgement
of responsibility, the corresponding convictions and
clarification of past actions may be painful processes,
but they are necessary to build the future to which all
Colombians aspire.
Lastly, in the framework of the elections process
and with full respect for the robust discussion and
debate that are a part of democratic society, Mexico
reiterates a call for strengthening the implementation
of the peace agreement in order to achieve sustainable
peace for our kindred people of Colombia.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu for
his briefing, and I welcome the participation of His
16/23

20/01/2022

Excellency Mr. Emilio José Archila, Presidential
Adviser for Stabilization and Consolidation of
Colombia. I also thank Ms. Luz Marina Giraldo for her
insightful presentation. We commend her leadership in
the integration initiatives.
We recognize that Colombia has given itself one
of the most comprehensive and bold peace agreements
since the founding of the United Nations. I congratulate
Colombia’s leaders for the innovative ways in which
they have cooperated with the United Nations and the
Security Council in delivering the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace. Multiple presidents have been involved
and, even when they have not agreed on specific and
important means of consolidating the agreement, they
have been united in their sense of duty. The people
of Colombia must be commended most of all for the
decades of suffering their endured with resilience and
their continual insistence that they retained a common
destiny as Colombians.
Our hearts reach out to the victims and survivors.
They are the moral glue that the peace requires to hold
and grow into harmony and unity. Their patience, their
insistence on accountability and their willingness to
forgive where it is possible are the shining lights of
their country’s peace process.
Mr. Archila can be assured of the immense respect
his country draws in New York for its insistence
that peace is possible and can be claimed, defended
and sustained.
This past Monday, the world celebrated Martin
Luther King Day. That towering figure of fairness,
courage, justice, anti-racism and anti-colonialism left
us many profound sayings. One particular passage,
delivered just four days before his assassination, in our
opinion, is particularly relevant to Colombia. In that
passage, Martin Luther King said,
“We are tied together in a single garment of destiny,
caught in an inescapable network of mutuality. And
whatever affects one directly affects all indirectly.
For some strange reason, I can never be what I
ought to be until you are what you ought to be.”
This single line — “I can never be what I ought
to be until you are what you ought to be” — is like
an anchor to the rock of truth, despite all the gales of
politics, convenience and even cynicism that blow when
peace beckons, threatening to uproot it.
22-23516

20/01/2022

Colombia

Since we joined the Council, we have continually
urged for determined implementation of the “ethnic
chapter” of the Final Peace Agreement. We have done
so conscious of the unfortunate centuries of suffering
by African peoples as they were ripped from their
villages and towns and loaded onto ships crossing the
Atlantic. To this day, we bear witness to their continued
marginalization and impoverishment in the Americas.
The African Union has proclaimed the descendants
of Africa, wherever they may be, to be the sixth region
of our continent.
Colombia, unlike many other countries to which the
African diaspora belongs, has taken a bold step in the
direction of fairness, equality and justice. We admire
its Constitution’s embrace of multi-ethnicity and its
guarantee of respect for the language, cultures, property
and well-being of all ethnicities. That is the foundation
of the ethnic chapter of the Final Peace Agreement.
Our concern, as we celebrate significant milestones
on this fifth anniversary of the Final Peace Agreement,
is that the implementation of the provisions of the
ethnic chapter continues to be disproportionately slow
compared to other chapters, as recently reported by the
Special High-level Forum of Ethnic Peoples.
We appeal to the Government of Colombia to
prioritize the implementation of the chapter’s provisions
and to spare no effort in addressing the historical
injustices suffered by those communities, on the
understanding that a nation derives its strength from
diversity and that whatever affects one always affects
all, even though indirectly.
We are encouraged by the continued progress in the
Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparations
and Non-Repetition, which remains pivotal in ensuring
justice, reconciliation and sustainable peace for the
victims. We encourage all parties to continue to fulfil
their responsibilities to the victims by fully supporting
the work of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace as well as
the Truth Commission.
We call on the Government and other armed
groups, including the Ejército de Liberación Nacional,
to engage in dialogue so that the whole country can
move forward together towards peace and prosperity.
Finally, as the country prepares for the upcoming
national elections, Kenya wishes the people of Colombia
well and urges all stakeholders not to lose sight of the
prize of peace and to remain committed to the process

S/PV. 8951

so as to consolidate the gains made. I reiterate Kenya’s
full support for the people of Colombia and to the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ruiz Massieu for his briefing and to welcome
Presidential Adviser Archila to this meeting. I also
listened attentively to the statement made by the civilsociety representative.
Last November, Colombia solemnly commemorated
the fifth anniversary of the signing of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace. The agreement put an end to
the more-than-half-a-century-old conflict in Colombia.
Not only is it of great significance to peace and stability
in Colombia and Latin America as a whole, but it also
exemplifies efforts to resolve conflicts and rebuild
peace through dialogue and negotiation.
China welcomes the positive progress achieved in
the Colombian peace process and highly commends the
efforts made by all parties in Colombia to implement
the peace agreement.
Colombia will hold legislative and presidential
elections in March and May this year, respectively. The
relevant political parties and presidential candidates
have included the further implementation of the peace
agreement in their campaign platforms. The Communist
Party has endorsed 41 legislative candidates, including
former combatants.
China supports Colombia in advancing preparations
for the elections in an orderly manner. We hope that
the elections will be held without incident and that all
parties concerned will continue to work hard after the
election to consolidate the hard-won gains of peace and
jointly address the difficulties and challenges in the
implementation of the agreement in a continued effort
to comprehensively move the peace process forward.
We note with concern that the frequent clashes
between illegal armed groups vying for territorial
control in some parts of Colombia not only seriously
threaten the safety of the local people but also disrupt
the peace process. We welcome the Colombian
Government beefing up military deployment and the
security presence in remote areas that lack effective
control and cracking down on illegal armed groups and
organized crime, with a view to effectively protecting
civilians and former combatants.

22-2351617/23

S/PV.8951

Colombia

The former combatants’ social reintegration and
their enjoyment of peace and development dividends is
crucial to the realization of lasting peace. We appreciate
the efforts of the Colombian Government and the
National Reintegration Council in providing support
to former combatants in terms of housing, employment
and land distribution.
It is hoped that the Colombian Government will
overcome the difficulties related to the coronavirus
disease, help ex-combatants tackle economic and social
challenges, carry on with rural reform and scale up
development and crop-substitution programmes so as
to eliminate the root causes of violence and conflict as
soon as possible.
The peace process in Colombia has made remarkable
progress, yet the people of the country still need robust
assistance from the United Nations and the international
community in their journey to build peace. China will,
as always, support the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia working in accordance with its
Council mandate. It is hoped that the Mission will
step up coordination and cooperation with the United
Nations country team, sustain its vigorous support for
the implementation of the peace agreement and make
greater contributions to comprehensive peace, stability
and development in Colombia.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative Ruiz Massieu for his
briefing and for the ongoing efforts of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia in supporting peace
in that country. We welcome Presidential Adviser for
Stabilization and Consolidation Archila to the Council.
I also thank Ms. Giraldo for her intervention.
Colombia has made demonstrable progress in its
efforts to implement the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
and we have seen important steps taken during the past
year. Sixteen seats for victims of the conflict have been
established in Colombia’s House of Representatives.
The Special Jurisdiction for Peace issued indictments
against the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia (FARC) and Colombian military officials for
war crimes and crimes against humanity. The Special
Jurisdiction for Peace has also received information
and acknowledgments by members of the FARC and
the military that they engaged in atrocities and abuses.
Five years into the accord, more than 13,000
former FARC combatants remain committed to
18/23

20/01/2022

peace. Their commitment has been complemented by
the Government’s provision of economic and social
benefits, as the majority of those ex-combatants are
now able to access Government and financial services:
99 per cent are enrolled in Colombia’s health-care
system, 95 per cent have bank accounts, and more than
30 per cent have enrolled in educational programmes or
vocational training.
We also note that the Office of the Prosecutor
at the International Criminal Court (ICC) closed
its preliminary examination into Colombia. As the
ICC’s preliminary examination had been open since
2004, those actions by the Prosecutor demonstrate
increased confidence in Colombia’s transitional
justice institutions.
On 30 November, the United States announced
the lifting of its terrorist designation of the FARC.
However, we remain vigilant against those who threaten
Colombia’s peace and refuse to lay down their arms.
Accordingly, the United States has designated Segunda
Marquetalia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo, composed heavily of
FARC dissidents who have abandoned or rejected the
peace process, as terrorist organizations.
While we laud the progress that Colombia has
made to date, we must also acknowledge areas for
improvement. Gender provisions continue to be
implemented and financed at a slower rate than other
parts of the peace agreement. Ethnic communities
face a deteriorating security situation, with
indigenous communities and Afro-Colombians being
disproportionately victimized by the violence. More
broadly, progress on the implementation of rural
economic plans and rural security has been slow.
While we understand that the full implementation
of rural economic plans will take years and significant
and sustained investment, inadequate security and
judicial protections have threatened land reform,
voluntary coca substitution, and landmine clearing.
Inadequate security and judicial protections have
threatened land reform, voluntary coca substitution and
landmine clearance. Those efforts are vital to the longterm success of the peace agreement. We encourage the
full utilization of the various forums created to support
agreement implementation, including the Commission
for Monitoring and Verification, as well as gender and
ethnic forums.
22-23516

20/01/2022

Colombia

By working together, the Government and the people
of Colombia can ensure the protection and promotion of
human rights for Colombia’s most vulnerable groups,
address the ongoing urgent need for rural development
and made continued progress in ensuring justice and
representation for the victims of the conflict. It is vital
that Colombia succeed in these efforts, and we know
that with renewed effort such success is possible.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Norway.
We thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ruiz Massieu for his briefing. We are also
pleased to hear from Ms. Luz Marina Giraldo, who has
provided the Security Council with valuable first-hand
testimony on the key issues related to implementation
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. I also welcome
Emilio Archila, Colombian Presidential Counsellor, for
joining us today.
Allow me to start by congratulating the parties and
the United Nations for the historic commemoration of
the five-year anniversary of the peace agreement. The
events showed the support the agreement enjoys in
Colombia and served to further consolidate its position
nationally and internationally.
Women, peace and security is a priority we share
with Colombia. Implementing the agreement’s gender
provisions is essential to ensuring lasting peace. We
acknowledge the work done and encourage the parties
to step up efforts to ensure women’s full, equal and
meaningful participation.
We remain troubled by the high levels of violence
suffered by ethnic communities, human rights
defenders, social leaders and former combatants of
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo. We strongly condemn the recent
killings of human rights defenders Luz Marina Arteaga
and 14-year-old Breiner David Cucuñame. This
sadly once again demonstrates the need for enhanced
security guarantees.
While the number of ex-combatants killed has been
reduced compared to the previous reporting period, no
effort must be spared to sustain and reinforce this trend.
Violence undermines people’s faith in the agreement.
I would also like to draw the Council’s attention to
the security situation during the upcoming elections.
We are especially concerned about the candidates

S/PV. 8951

running for the 16 seats allocated to the victims, and
we call on the Government to implement its prevention
and protection strategies to guarantee safe elections.
We are pleased that the parties are taking steps
to make better use of the Commission for the FollowUp, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation
of the Final Agreement, and we encourage the
Commission to engage frequently with other entities
like the Women’s Special Instance and the Special
Instance for Ethnic Peoples. Likewise, we are pleased
to learn that the number of former combatants who
participate in productive projects increases steadily and
to know of the efforts made to ensure the sustainability
of these initiatives. Furthermore, we encourage the
parties to make more effective use of the National
Reintegration Council to reach agreement on such key
issues as access to land and adequate housing. We also
urge the Colombian Government to continue its efforts
aiming at guaranteeing the effective reintegration of
young adults.
The Special Jurisdiction for Peace also continues to
make progress, and the recent recognition by members
of the armed forces for their responsibilities for
crimes committed during the conflict is an important
step forward — one that is essential for the victims.
Similarly, we are pleased that the United Nations
Mission and the Special Jurisdiction for Peace have
agreed on the composition, objectives and functions of
the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism in order
for the restorative sentences to be issued. This is vital
for the legitimacy of the Special Jurisdiction. We would
also like to commend the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
for its special focus on children.
In the observations section of his report
(S/2021/1090), the Secretary-General reiterates his call
on the Government to spare no effort in comprehensively
implementing the agreement. He calls it a missed
opportunity if we fail to unleash the agreement’s
transformative potential and overcome the deep-rooted
factors underlying Colombia’s cycles of violence.
We could not agree more. The Security Council may
rest assured that Norway remains committed to
accompanying Colombia in its efforts to ensure that the
peace agreement is comprehensively implemented.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

22-2351619/23

S/PV.8951

Colombia

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the Presidential Adviser for
Stabilization and Consolidation of Colombia.
Mr. Archila (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I greet
the members of the Security Council, especially the
new ones, and thank them for their continued support
to the peacebuilding process in my country. I thank
you, Madam President, in particular for convening this
meeting, and I thank Ms. Luz Marina Giraldo, formerly
known as Yesenia, in particular. I am pleased, Madam
President, that you chose a person as illustrative as Luz
Marina to inform the Council about the reintegration
process in Colombia.
Luz Marina has had the legal guarantees required
under the process. Luz Marina was incarcerated when
the process began, at which time she left jail. Throughout
the process she has been assisted by a lawyer paid for
by the Colombian State, which is an example of the
political guarantees in place. Marina ran for municipal
council in her hometown and today she is a candidate
for the Congress of the Republic of Colombia.
For three years, we have provided assistance to
Luz Marina to help her raise her children. She has
two children. Following the death of Luz Marina’s
husband, they received assistance from the Colombian
Institute for Family Welfare. Both are students. One is
studying engineering, and the other wants to be a social
communicator and has been accepted to the University.
Luz Marina has received full economic support
from the Government, contrary to what was provided
for when our Government came into office. Under our
Government, the amount of financial support provided
has been expanded.
Luz Marina has led three productive projects.
Today, like 13,000 other former combatants, she
participates in the Colombian pension system, and like
almost 13,000 former combatants, she participates in
the Colombian health system. Luz Marina has received
support for her housing, which was not contemplated
in the agreement or in subsequent legislation. President
Duque Márquez included it in the national policy, and
now Luz Marina owns an apartment.
Luz Marina has also been a beneficiary of the
education guarantee. Like half of the former combatants,
20/23

20/01/2022

Luz Marina has, in just three years, attended university
and obtained two graduate degrees.
She has also been a beneficiary of our efforts
to provide protection. The unfortunate death of her
husband and the deaths of 70 other incarcerated
convicts have allowed us to keep in jail the material
and intellectual drivers of the conflict.
Let me reiterate, on behalf of President Iván Duque
Márquez and the Colombian people, our gratitude to
the Secretary-General for his recent visit to Colombia
and for the witness he bore to the commitment and the
multiple actions of our Government to make progress
on a truly stable and lasting peace.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2021/1090), and we thank Special Representative
Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his briefing today and for his
commitment to our country.
I appreciate the statements we have heard from
members of the Council.
The year 2021 was a one of definitions for
Colombia. At our request, the Security Council renewed
the mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia by adopting resolution 2574 (2021), which
extended the mandate to include the monitoring of
compliance with sanctions issued by the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace.
In addition, on his visit, the Secretary-General was
able to witness progress in the implementation of our
policy of peace with legality, which is to say progress
in compliance with the peace agreement. By order
of the Constitutional Court, each Government has a
free hand to implement the agreement in accordance
with its other policies, including those related to legal
guarantees, political guarantees, support for victims
of the work of reintegration, voluntary substitution of
illicit crops — which became successful after three
and a half years of enormous efforts — and developing
a territorial approach through comprehensive rural
development, in which multipurpose cadastral and
land registration has made progress without having
any precedent on which to rely. At the end of the term,
we will have registered 50,000 land titles, which is
equivalent to what has been done over the past 16 years.
We have also made progress in humanitarian demining.
All of those advances have integrated cross-cutting
gender and ethnic perspectives.
22-23516

20/01/2022

Colombia

The Secretary-General visited one of the territorial
areas for training and reintegration and noted our focus
on the security of ex-combatants and their families
and the leadership that has enabled the private sector
and the international community to focus their efforts.
We are fulfilling all of the guarantees offered in this
model, which is unprecedented because we extended
the period and ensured a minimum to provide them
for the 13,000 ex-combatants. At the conclusion of his
visit, the Secretary-General acknowledged to President
Iván Duque Márquez the historic advances in each area
of implementation and declared that the prospects for
peace dividends in Colombia were very promising.
I take this opportunity to reiterate, on behalf of
President Duque Márquez, that we will continue to
honour the agreement, as we have been doing, guided
by our vision and policy of peace with legality. The
President continues to believe that this is a unique
opportunity to resolve the structural difficulties that we
should have confronted decades ago, with or without an
agreement. To that end, we have followed the guidelines
of making explicit our political will, to conduct robust
long-term planning and to deliver achievements that
will make the process irreversible, as the Russian
Ambassador stated. And we should succeed.

S/PV. 8951

with the agreement. The agreement did not guarantee
the identification of all drug trafficking routes, or the
deactivation of the cartels that have been operating in
Colombia since before the signing of the agreement, or
those operating in other countries, but have an impact on
Colombia. With regard to the previously existing illegal
groups that have always fed off the drug trade and other
illegal economies, which are, among other dreadful
things, the main perpetrators of the murders of social
leaders and others, we are working to address that issue
in parallel to the implementation of the agreement.
Arauca is an example of that, as noted by Mr. Ruiz
Massieu. In Arauca, it is members of the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional who are having an impact, carrying
out attacks. The relevant department, comprising seven
municipalities, is handling investments of $450 million.
The four municipalities with development programmes
with a territorial focus alone manage investments
of $125 million. For those municipalities, that sum
corresponds to 100 years of investment, were it not for
the implementation of the agreement.
Last week, President Duque Márquez met with his
entire Cabinet last week, and I am scheduled to meet, on
25 and 26 January, with all the agencies responsible for
the implementation of the policy of peace with legality.

The implementation duration is 15 years. In other
words, the next three Administrations must continue
along the path charted by our Constitution. This
Administration is responsible for approximately 26 per
cent of the implementation, and we have far surpassed
that level in all relevant indicators. Nevertheless, I want
to underscore what Special Representative Gilmore
said, that the foundation has been laid so that we can
continue to build on what has already been built.

With regard to reintegration, Colombia continues
to be an inspiration in terms of implementation, as the
Secretary-General has termed it. One of the areas in
which that is so is the process of reintegration of more
than 13,000 demobilized men and women, having
enshrined in our national development plan that we
will support each and every one in all guaranteed areas
until these have reached an appropriate level for their
reintegration into society.

I am pleased that the Council, like us, appreciates
the importance of the visit of the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, as it served as
an affirmation regarding Colombia’s preliminary
examination and as recognition that the Colombian
institutional framework has met international standards
and is sufficiently transparent.

As of December 2021, three and a half
years in to our Administration, we can speak of
achievements that make this reintegration process
irreversible — 70 per cent of reintegrated people are
economically self-sustaining, that is to say, more than
9,000 ex-combatants. Obviously, the sustainability of
those productive projects, in some cases, depends on
people having legal ownership of the land. In order
to ensure the sustainability of the projects from a
business perspective, we have invested and embedded
$20 million in the form of technical assistance. Almost
4,000 projects are receiving that support.

The Council and the Secretary-General’s report
touch upon other forms of violence. We reiterate that,
although what we are doing what is necessary for the
implementation of the agreement, and that is, without
a doubt, a great step forward, we should not deceive
ourselves by insinuating or believing that those sources
of violence are due, in any way, to non-compliance

In addition, almost 60 per cent now have access
to the education they sought, and 77 per cent are

22-2351621/23

S/PV.8951

Colombia

linked to work programmes. More than 88 per cent are
covered by health care and social security, including
psychosocial support. That level of coverage cannot be
found anywhere else in Colombia.
Along the same lines, the Government has made
a voluntary commitment to provide housing for that
population through various means — loans, subsidies
and home improvement funds, for those with homes,
in addition to the investment of $2.2 million in housing
benefits for the approximately 1,800 people on the
territorial areas.
It is also worth noting that, since 2019, when the
former territorial areas for training and reintegration
were set to legally conclude, we carried out a sound
and detailed analysis of each area. Many such areas, we
concluded, could not continue to exist, some of them
for security reasons, as their location was envisaged
only for the short term. That is the case for the areas in
La Macarena and El Yarí. There was no surprise there,
no unexpected threat. That is not our plan. In that case,
we had been recommending those relocations. Both of
the relocations were negotiated and agreed upon. All
State entities participated and security considerations
were taken, including biosanitary and physical
security measures. In both cases, the final locations
were acquired by the Colombian Government, and the
housing and productive projects are beginning and, in
our view, are successful relocations.
Political participation is an essential guarantee,
both for those being reintegrated and for the
victims. Members of Congress and Comunes party
representatives have been carrying out their functions
as party representatives. We note that this year’s
elections are not our first elections. We have already
held some local elections, which were some of the
most peaceful elections in the past 60 years. Thanks
to the special protection we provided the candidates of
the Comunes party — formerly the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia party — none were
killed or kidnapped, and neither did any withdraw
their candidacy. We are now using that experience to
plan the security and protection of the Comunes party
candidates and, obviously, the 16 seats, which, in
accordance with enacted legislation, are guaranteed for
the victims and their representatives, as is the will of
the Colombian people.
For the Colombian Government and all State
entities, the security of ex-combatants and their families
22/23

20/01/2022

has always been, and will continue to be, a priority.
As the President has said and as I have reiterated, the
sole objective of all the efforts we have made is for
there to be zero threats and zero deaths. Every single
death causes us great pain, and not one of them can
be justified.
Thanks to those efforts — and in its worth putting
it into context that Colombia has gone through many
disarmament processes — the present disarmament
process is the one in which we have witnessed the
fewest such adverse effects. Precisely half as many
ex-combatants in the reintegration process have been
affected. And that decrease was not just for the past
year, but for the past three years.
Nevertheless, we must continue with those efforts,
as it is not as a result of the instructions or precautionary
measures issued by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
that such work began. The work that has been going
on for as long as President Duque Márquez has been
in office. For those more than 60 special measures,
we have the largest pro rata budget in the National
Protection Unit as compared to the rest of the protected
populations. The measures taken by the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace in that regard were not for the
adoption of further measures, but to finance those that
had already been decided upon.
We have a deep respect for transitional justice and
its independence. From day one, victims have been
the cornerstone of our policy of peace with legality.
Guaranteeing their right to truth, justice and reparation,
as well as non-repetition, is a governmental and a
national purpose.
The Government of President Duque Márquez
remains steadfast in its allocation of the necessary
resources for the functioning of the three components
of the transitional justice system and ensuring progress
is made in the clarification of crimes under the
jurisdiction of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. That
is something that all Colombians desire and in which
we have great confidence. To that end, we have already
been working with Mr. Ruiz Massieu and the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace on an operational road map to
monitor sanctions.
In relation to the issue of women and peace and
security, we have gender provisions in each of the
chapters of the implementation process. There are
3,265 women included in the reintegration process,
almost 80 per cent of whom are already involved in
22-23516

20/01/2022

S/PV. 8951

Colombia

productive projects. Many of those projects also offer
care spaces — environments that allow mothers to
participate in productive activities without sacrificing
their caretaking duties.
I recall the Council’s visit to Cartagena with the
United Nations Peacebuilding Fund. That model is one
in which we comply with the standards set because it
is led by three United Nations agencies focusing on
women and children, as well as the United Nations
Development Programme.
Of the 51 gender indicators in place, 57 per cent
have already been met or show significant progress.
The average record of compliance on the gender front
stands at 47 per cent, while taking into account that it is
part of a 15-year implementation process. Without any
prior legal obligation, our Government established a
peace and gender earmark so as to know exactly which
resources are being allocated in that regard.
Furthermore, beyond the provisions of the Final
Agreement and its implementation plan, we have made
significant achievements in our women’s equity policy,
where we have drawn up a road map of what we must
do over the next seven years.
Finally, I would also like to highlight that we
continue with our robust implementation of the ethnic
chapter of the agreement, promoting 97 commitments,
14 of which — nearly 14 per cent — have been
completed. At the end of last year, the President was
recognized by the National Indigenous Organization
of Colombia. That was the first time a public entity or
official has been recognized for their contribution to
the development of a peaceful resolution to the conflict.

We have noticed that the report of the SecretaryGeneral mentions aspects that do not fall within the
scope of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia’s mandate, one such aspect being the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional, which is of great concern
to us all. For that reason, I cannot fail to lament the
events that took place in Arauca and in Cali a fortnight
ago. In addition to other serious terrorist acts on the
part of that organization, those incidents once again
demonstrate the lack of willingness of the group
towards achieving peace.
I am immensely grateful for the comments made
during this meeting as a representative of my country,
a member of the Government and a spokesperson of the
President, as well as in my personal capacity.
As the Secretary-General said, we continue to bet on
building peace in Colombia. With our accomplishments,
we are showing the world that conflicts and violence
can be resolved not only by signing agreements but by
implementing them with political determination, with
strict planning and a focus on results. I invite members
of the Council, as the Ambassador of India and others
did, to continue supporting us on our journey, including
in the face of the change of Government that will take
place in August. Let us continue to build on what has
already been built.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

22-2351623/23
