TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR
th
MEETING: 5 OCTOBER 1971

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 588) . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . .

1

Statement by the President . . . . . . . , . . . , , . . . . . , , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , .
Adoption of the agenda . . , , . , . . . . . . . , . . . , , . . . . . . , . . , . . , , . , . . ,
The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the President of the Security
Council from thk representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
the Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of),
Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabor?, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Liberia,
the Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar,Mall, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco,
the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia (S/l 0326);
(b) Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia (S/l 0330) , , . . . . , . . .

S/PV.l588

1

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND EIGHTY-EIGHTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 5 October 1971, at 4.30 p-m.
President: Mr. Guillermo SEVILLA SACASA (Nicaragua).
fietent: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 588)
1, Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressedto the
President of the Security Council from the representatives of ‘Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Came.
roon, the Central African Republic, Chad, the
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya,
Liberia, the Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, the Niger,
Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, the
Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and
Zambia (S/10326);
lb/ Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia
(S/10330).
Statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Nicaragua feels honoured today to be assuming once again the
Presidency of the Security Council. The Council may
remember that we were gratified to preside over this same
body last July.
2. Since this is the first meeting we are holding in the
month of October, I am happy to extend a greeting to you
all, distinguished members of the Council, while at the same
time reiterating my feelings of highest regard and cordial
friendship. I hope that I can rely on the samegenerous and
able co-operation and assistance that you so kindly rendered to me last July in order that we may make fruitful
progress in our work,
3. I am happy to convey to Ambassador Nakagawa of
Japan, our most distinguished colleague, the sinceretharh
and congratulations that he deserves from us all for the
especially intelligent skilful and tactful manner in which he
exercised his presidential duties during the month of

September. The manner in which the Ambassador of Japan,
of whose outstanding capacity and international experience
we have ample proof, discharged his duties fully met our
expectations.
4. It being my intention to move forward as far as possible
in our consideration of the probIem before the Council this
afternoon, and desiring to co-ordinate our activities with
those of the General Assembly, we have convened this
meeting this afternoon.
5. I thank you all for your attendance, and once again
reiterate my full confidence that a solution will be found to
all the problems that are of concern to the international
community, a solution which, naturally, calls for good faith
and a lofty conscience.
6. I wish to apologize to members for opening this
meeting one hour later than the scheduled time. I was
negotiating on certain matters connected with my duties
and am convinced that members will understand the
reasons for this involuntary delay. Thank you very much.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
the Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of), Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Liberia, the
Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Somalia, the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda,
the United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and
Zambia (S/10326);
(b) Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia
(S/10330)

7. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with previous decisions taken by the Council
during its consideration of this question, I shall proceed to
Invite those deIegations participating in this debate to take
the places reserved for them in the Chamber, on the
understanding that they will be invited to the Council table
whenthey wish to speak.

8. I invite the representatives of Ethiopia, South Africa,
Liberia, Guyana, Chad, Nigeria and Mauritius to take the
places reserved for them in the Council Chamber. I also
wish to invite the representative of the Sudan and the
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia to
take a seat at the Council table.

14. In the view of my delegation, in respect of a situation
such as this-a truly unique situation-there can in any
event be but one specific solution, a solution that would be
out of the question in other casesinasmuch as by definition
no other analogous case exists, for this is the last of the
League of Nations Mandates,

Al the ~n~it~~lon
of the &esident, Mr, M. ~hultd (Sudan)

15. However, despite the exceptional nature of this
problem, on which my Government expressedjts views in
detail in a report jt addressedto the International Court of
Justice, the Court set forth a number of general considerations on the jurisdiction of the General Assembly and the
Security Council which go far beyond the question of
Namibia and we refuse categorically to endorse them.

&&dent
of the United Nations
Cmnci~for Namibia, took p&es at the Security Council
table; and fi. T. Mabnnen
(Ethiopia), Mr. H. Muiler
(%tlth .MW,
Mr. J R. Grimes (Liberia), Mr. S, S. RamP&l
(Gt?YanQ/,
Mr. B. Hassane (Chad)j Mr. 0. Atikpo
(Niserial and Mr. R. Ramphul (Mwitiu~}
took the places
reserved for them in the Council mm&r.
aftd Mr. E. 0. O&U,

9. The MESIDENT

(interpretation from Spanish): Before

calling on the first speaker, I wish to inform the Council
that the delegation of l&homey has added its name to the
bst of signatories of the letter addressedto the President of
the Security Council by a considerable number of representatives of African States/S/10326].
10. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET

(France) (interpretation

from French): Mr. President, in keeping with established
tradition, we shall refrain from expressing to you pubbcly
our high regard for you as well asfor your predecessor, but
we wish to assureyou that our silence is not inadvertent.
11. The issue before us is unusual in every respect. This is
brought out by the very presence in our midst of President
MokIar Ould Daddah, whose great ~noral dignity and vision
WC have long admired, as well as by the attendance of an
impressive delegation of eminent African ministers.
12. This question is exceptional first of all because of the
of the debates to which it has given rise in the
United Nations since the very beginning of the Organizatjon. I remember participating myself in these debates
almost 11 years ago in the Fourth Committee on the item
that was then called “The. question of South-West Africa”.
It is exceptional also by reason of the number of
resolutions which have been adopted on it and the variety
of bodies that have been catled upon to give their views on
this question. But it is also exceptional by reason of the
very nature of the Territory under discussion, the Only
Territory in respect of which a Mandate of the League of
Nations wasnot changed into a United Nations Trusteeship.
It is a well-known fact that even though the architects of
the Charter in San Francisco did not write into this
document a strict obligation making it incumbent upon the
mandatory Powers to transform their Mandate into a
Trusteeship, there is not the slightest doubt that meY
intended that such a change would be requested by the
countries concerned.
extent

13. As was expected, all the mandatory Powers, including
ourselves, negotiated Trusteeship Agreements-all except
one, SOU th Africa, which remained deaf to all en treaties.
That is how this anomaly arose-a source of endless and
sterile legal debate: a Mandate of the League of Nations has
continued to exist outside the United Nations Trusteeship
System and, due to the erroneous interpretation Of this
Mandate by South Africa, it has continued to exist outside
the Organizatjon as a whole.

16. We shall merely exercise our normal prerogatives
vis-&vis what is but a consultative opinion and not a
judgement, although some delegations have shown a tendency in the COWS of this debate to regard it as such. This
opinion comes to us not only in the form of a set of
conclusions but it is also accompanied by a detailed
account of the reasoning which led the judges to that
decision. Moreover, alongside the majority opinion, which
contains a number of important qualifications, we find an
account of the dissident opinjons, which obviously did not
prevail but which are no lessworthy of our attention.
17. Having thus
carefully consjdered the advisory
opinion1 as a whole, we feel duty bound to voice our
criticism of its analysis of the powers of the General
Assembly. Thus, we read in paragraph 105 of the opinion:
‘I * . . it would not be correct to assume that, becausethe
General Assembly is in principle vested with recommendatory powers, it is debarred from adopting, in
specific cases within the framework of its competence,
resolutions which make determinations or have operative
design.”
In other words, according to the Court, in the cases
mentioned in paragraph 105 of its advisory opinion, the
General Assembly might not only make recommendations
but also take decisions binding on States on the sole
condition that it keeps within the very vast framework of
questions w*hich it is empowered to discuss. We categorically reject such a view,which would make the General
Assembly the parliament of a world super-State. In fact,
save for the very special instancesof which a complete list
is given, such as the admission or the expulsion of a
Member State (Articles 4 and 6), the vote on the budget
(Article 17) and the drawing up of the rules of procedure
{Article 2I)-cases that are irrelevant to this debate-the
Charter contains no provision, and certainly not in Article
10, investing the General Assembly with the slightest power
of decision.
18. Sirt-&uly, we wish once again to emphasize that the
Security Council is empowered to take decisions binding on
all States. But such decisionsare limited to casesof a threat
1 Legal Consequences
for Slates of the Continued
Presence of
Soutjl
Africa
Qt Namibia
(South West Africa1
rzotwithstanding
Security
Council resolution
276 (1970]? Advisory
Opinion,
I.C.J.
Reports 1971, p. 16.

to the peace, breaches of the peace or aggression.Moreover,
they deal with measures, such as sanctions, which are
necessary to maintain or restore international peace and
security. They do not relate to permanent transfers of
territorial jurisdiction. May 1 add, finally, that in their very
text they must show clearly-and this wasnot the casewith
the decisions taken by the Council in this matter-that they
fall within the framework of Chapter VII of the Charter
and have been adopted as a result of the establishment of
threats to the peace, as required by Article 39.
19. Having mentioned both the exceptional nature of
what is called the question of Namibia, and certain
erroneous Interpretations of our Charter as contained in the
advisory opinion of the Court, my delegation wishesto
stress that the impatience of the whole of the international
community, though, of course, above all that of our
African Friends-is perfectly legitimate In respect of this
problem whose legal vicissitudes continue without the least
progress being made,
20. We must strive to be concrete and constructive. In any
event, that is the position to which my Government Intends
to adhere.
21. That leads us to an observation and a proposal. The
observation is that, above and beyond IegaI controversy
about whether the Mandate is still in force or has been
revoked by the General Assembly, the concept of a
Mandate is repudiated in practice by both parties. South
Africa-which has violated the obligations thereof in a
constant and reprehensible manner, not only through the
enactrnen t of its annexationist legislation and racist regulations but also by attacking the unity of the Territory-has
announced that the Mandate is nulI and void. As for the
General Assembly, it claims to have revoked it.
22. Inasmuch as the two opposing parties are in agreement
that the Mandate does not exist, one would be tempted to
say that the question dealing with the continuance of this
Mandate would no loncrer have anv meaning if there did not
flow from the concept”of a Mandate a cap&I obligation for
South Africa. It is the obligation to negotiate in good faith
with the United Nations for the establishment of an
international rbgbne enabling the people concerned freely
to choose their destiny.

26. President Moktar Ould Daddah stated:
“With the assistance of the Secretary-General,
UThant...
the Security Council should immediately
take the necessary steps to create conditions allowing the
Namibian people freely to exercise their right to selfdetermination.“[1583rdmeeting,
para. 20.1
We shall add nothing to that since that is what Is essential.
We, for our part, are ready to comply with this earnest
appeal by the President of the Islamic Republic of
Mauritania.
27. If South Africa were to fail to abide by its strict
obligation to negotiate with the United Nations for a new
international regime for South West Africa,France would
draw its own conclusions about the illegality of an
administration maintained under such conditions,
28. Based on the above considerations, my delegation will
state its position at the time the vote is taken on the
proposals placed before us.
29. The PRESIDENT (i!lte~refation fiorn Spanish): The
next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chad. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table.
30. Mr. HASSANE (Chad) (interpretation from French):
At the outset, in this modest contribution which I plan to
make to the debates of this Council on the problem of
Namibia, I should Iike to expressto this important body of
our Organization my feeling of gratitude for being given the
opportunity of speaking on behalf of Africa, thus discharging the mandate entrusted to us by the Organization
of African Unity, under the high leadership of its present
President. President Moktar Ould Daddah of the Islamic
Republic of Mauritania, and for the high senseof responsibihty evinced by this Council, enabling us to make heard
the voice of the African victims of the greatest injustice of
our time.
31. The Pretoria authorities claim that it is in the name of
Western civilization and the moral principles which underlie
that civibzation-that is to say, in the name of the
principles of generous Christianity-that they subject the
black populations of Southern Africa to the apartheid
system.

23. This is an obligation which we do not intend to allow
South Africa to shirk, We are prepared, for our part, to
make this known to South Africa. It goes without saying,
however, that a collective effort by the international
community and, above aII, by the countries whose vast
means entail special responsibilities, is highly desirable.

32. Among the voices raised in the world and in the
United Nations against this abject system, which is a true
denial of the quality of a human being, we find those of
representatives of countries which, for the principles of
Christianity and those underlying other rehgions, have the
most worthy and most absolute respect.

24. In truth, this appears to us to be not only the
reasonable course but the only possible course. Whatever
the impatience and the weariness that the obstinacy and-to
speak frankly-the ill-will of Sou th Africa may arouse in US,
we must be no less determined to caIl upon South Africa to
fulfil its obligation to negotiate.

33. As far aswe know, none of the respectable religions of
this world makes man responsible for the colour of his skin,
and it has never been scientifically proved that the colour
of the skin has anything at all to do with the degree of
inteIIigence of a human being. On the contrary, everything
seems to point to the fact that, given similar conditions, all
men are the same. Do the white men of Pretoria have a
sense which other human beings do not have? DO they
reahze that, through their obstinacy, they are about to

25. In the present state of affairs, this is undoubtedly the
only means of safeguarding the prestige of the United
Nations and of preserving the interest of the people whose
fate must remain our principal concern.
3

alienate the last and scarce friends remaining to them in
Africa and in the world?
34. The representatative of South Africa has said in this
Council:
“The South African Government is committed to the
pticW
Of self-determination no less than any 0f.h
Member of this Qrganization; and it is our conviction that
the peoples Of South West Africa wish us to continue to
administer the Territory until they have achieved full
self-determination under our guidance,” 11584th meeting,para 137.1

35. Is he trying t0 tell us that the populations of Namibia
willingly accept to be treated as they are treated at present
by the advocates of the apartheid n?gime,arc ready to
decide that they wish to be kept within a community of
States governed by this system and, therefore, to abandon
any idea of true independence?
36. If this is SO, why does South Africa not agree to
withdraw from the international territory of Namibia to
enable the population of that Territory to prove this desire
by freely choosing ita own representatives who would then,
in all sovereignty, decide to joinSouth Africa?
37. How is it that the Pretoria authorities and the United
Nations cannot agree on the meaning of the expression
“self-determination of peoples”? If this comes from the
difference between the content which the United Nations
gives to this principle and the one given to it by South
Africa, we sincerely believe that it is up to South Africa to
accept the interpretation of this principle given by the
General Assembly and the Security Council.
38. When the United Nations agreed that the Mandate
exercised under the control of the League of Nations
should continue to be exercised by the Union of South
Africa in the name of Hia Britannic Majesty and under its
control, it never had thvidea of entrusting the fate of the
population of this Territory forever to the South African
authorities for them to do with it what they saw fit.
39, The Mandate was created “in the interest of the
inhabitants of the territory, and of humanity in general, as
an international institution with an international objective:
a sacred trust of civiIization,“a Refusal by South Africa to
discharge the obligations pursuant to the terms of the.
Mandate made necessary, and even compulsory, the adoption of General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI), deciding
that the Mandate had come to an end and that South Africa
did not have the right to administer the territory.
40. In addition to numerous resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council de&ring illegal the
practice of the apartheid system in that mandated Territory, in particular resolution 2145 (XXI) of the General
Assembly, putting an end to the Mandate exercised by
South Africa, the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice of 21 June 1971~made necessaryby the
2 See! ~nternutional Status of South
Opinion: I.C.J. Reports 1950, p, 128.

West Africa,

refusal of the Republic of South Africa to heed the
injunction of the Security Council to withdraw from the
international Territory of Namibia at the latest by 4 Otto
ber 1969-confirms the international status of Namibia and
the responsibility of the United Nations for this Territory
and its population. Things could not have been otherwise.
Indeed, it is inconceivable that serious statesmen could,
after 25 years of sterile efforts at persuasion, take such a
serious decision without having first thought about the
consequences which would result therefrom.
4 1. We have such respect for the decisions of our
Organization that we think no politician responsible for the
fate of a people could have the idea of adhering to the
principles of the Charter or of any treaty without having
thought twice. Those responsible for international relations
in our respective countries are not so irresponsible that they
accept to sanction an important decision with so many legal
implications without having tbougbt of the Iegal and
political consequences of the decision which they would
have our Organization take. Our Governments carefully
studied the situation then existing ln South-West Africa.
They carefully studied the way in which the Government of
South
Africa was discharging the mandate entrusted to it
by the United Nations. And it was because they fully
understood the annexationist designs of the Pretoria au.
thorities regarding the mandated Territory in violation of
the right of self-determination of the people of that
Territory that they decided to ask that an end be put to the
exercise of that Mandate over South-West Africa by the
Republic of South Africa. Thus, resolution 2145 (XXI) of
the General Assembly of our Grganization, nomatter what
our critics say, was a result of careful and objective
reflection on the part of delegations fully aware of their
responsibilities under the spirit of the Charter and their
obligation for the maintenance of international peace and
security.
42. If the Republic of South Africa had the slightest
respect for our Organization and the principles of the
Charter-and this respect flows from its position as a
Member State-if it had the slightest respect for the
principIes governing the political Organlzation of which we
are membere Member States among which there are some
which have the same civilization asthat becauseof which it
claims to defend its apartheid system, it would have
respected the spirit of the first resolution stating that it had
failed in its duty imposed by the Charter in discharging the
Mandate for which it wasresponsible and which it had to
discharge honourably, having in mind the fundamental
objective of ensuring the well-being of the populations of
the mandated Territory. It would have spared us the need
to adopt so many resolutions and the need to resort to the
International Court of Justice after the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI).
43. The attitude of flagrant defiancelalwaysshown by that
Member State towards the resolutions of the General
Assembly and Security Council and the arrogance always
shown towards the Advisory Opinions and decisions of the
highest judjcial organ of our Organization are such that we
could have not the slightest illusion about the way in which
it was to react to a just and courageous decision of the
court.

Adtjimry

4

44. We must remind the Council that the resolution
/284 (1970)/ asking for an advisory opinion of the Court
was adopted without opposition, showing that there was a
consensus under which this opinion was deemed necessary
to enable the Council to dischargeits responsibilities.
45. We must also remind the Council that it wastwo years
after having recognized the validity of GeneraI Assembly
resolution 2145 (XXI), and having asked in vain that South
Africa withdraw from Namibia and having set as a deadline
4.0ctober 1969 for that withdrawal, that the Security
CWIC~J decided to ask for the advisory opinion of the
court.
46. Is it nqcessary to remind members of the Council that
the Security Council by resolution 269 (1969) decided:
“that the continued occupation of the Territory of
Namibia by the South African authorities constitutes an
aggressive encroachment on the authority of the United
Nations, a violation of the territorial integrity and a
denial of the political sovereignty of the people of
Namibia”?
Is it necessary to remind members of the Council that the
same Council in resolution 276 (1970) declared
“that the continued presence of the South African
authorities in Namibia is illegal and that consequently all
acts taken by the Government of South Africa on behalf
of or concerning Namibia after the termination of the
Mandate are illegal . . a”.

“Member States, . . are under obligation to abstain
from sending diplomatic or special missions to South
Africa including in their jurisdiction the Territory of
Namibia, to abstain from sending consular agents to
Namibia, and to withdraw any such agents already there.
They should also make it clear to the South African
authorities that the maintenance of diplomatic or consular relations with South Africa does not imply any
recognition of its authority with regard to Namibia.
“ *.. member States” have ‘+the obligation to abstain
from entering into economic and other forms of relationships or dealings with South Africa on behalf of or
concerning Namibia which may entrench its authority
over the Territory.
“In general, the non-recognition of South Africa’s
administration of the Territory should not result in
depriving the people of Namibia of any advantages
derived from international co-operation, In particular,
while official acts performed by the Government of
South Africa on behalf of or concerning Namibia after
the termination of the Mandate are illegal and invalid, this
invalidity cannot be extended to those acts, such as, for
instance, the registration of births, deaths and marriages,
the effects of which can be ignored only to the detriment
of the inhabitants of the Territory.”
50. In reply to the question of the Security Council, the
Court rendered the following opinion in paragraph 133:

47. Thus, members of the Council, your important body is
today concretely confronted with the heavy responsibilities
entrusted to it by the Charter of the United Nations in the
name of mankind.
48. According to us, one of the Council’s main objectives
should be at the end of these debates to ensure the strict
application by all States of its resolutions on this matter, as
well as complete respect for the Opinion which, pursuant to
your unanimous request, the highest international judicial
organ has rendered about the legal consequences for States
of the continuing presence of South Africa in Namibia
despite resolution 276 (1970) of your Council,
49. Pursuant to that request, the Court said the following
in paragraphs 122 to 125 of its advisory opinion:
“ . . . member States are under obligation to abstain
from entering into treaty relations with South Africa in
all cases in which the Government of South Africa
purports to act on behalf of or concerning Namibia. With
respect to existing bilateral treaties, member States must
abstain from invoking or applying those treaties or
provisions of treaties concluded by South Africa on
behalf of or concerning Namibia which involve active
intergovernmental co-operation. With respect to multilateral treaties, however, the same rule cannot be applied
to certain general conventions such as those of a
humanitarian character, the non-performance of which
may adversely affect the people of Namibia. It will be for
the competent international organs to take specific
measures in this respect.

“(1) that, the continued presence of South Africa in
Namibia being illegal, South Africa is under obligation to
withdraw its administration from Namibia immediately
and thus put an end to its occupation of the Territory;
“(2) that States Members of the United Nations are
under obligation to recognize the illegality of Squth
Africa’s presence in Namibia and the invalidity of its acts
on behalf of or concerning Namibia, and to refrain from
any acts and in particular any dealings with the Govemment of South Africa implying recognition of the legality
of, or lending support or assistanceto, such presence and
administration;
(3) that it is incumbent upon States which are not
Members of the United Nations to give assistance, within
the scope of subparagraph (2) above, in the action which
has been taken by the United Nations with regard to
Namibia,”
51. Namibia is not the first nor the only Territory under
niandate which the United Nations has had to help to
accede to national independence, but it is the only one
which has given rise to so much concern in our Organization.
52. It is no secret for anyone that this is due to various
foreign influences of a political, economic or other character which encouraged the South African Government in
maintaining its defiant and contemptuous attitude towards
the world Organization. What is even more disappointing, is
the fact that this encouragement comes from Powers which,
by dint of their importance, are primarily responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security.

5

.I
!I
I
,i

-

53. However, ti our view it is lmportant that the Court
should have specifically mentioned in its Opinion the
obligations of States non-Members of the United Nation,
and should have confrnned that fWdtf8mbo~ St&s muti
act fn conformity with the relevant decisions of fhe Getleral
Assembly and the Security Council and to ,Iend their
8SSisk3W4! to measures taken by the ,Wnlted Nations
conc=ning Namibia. Thus, non-Member States of our
Organization which, until now, felt free to set 8s they
wished towards resolutions of the United Nations cmcerning Namibia, according to 8 policy which was not in
keeping with decisions of this Organization, shall abstain
from doing so in the future and recognize themselves that
they have obligations similar to those incumbent upon
Member States.
54. Many times we have had to critic&z thhe activities of
non-Member States running counter to resolutions of our
Organizations. It is therefore necessary to say that this
compliance or non.compIiance of non-Member States with
their obligations towards Namibia shhall be considered 8s
relevant factors when we have to determine their quali!ications as possible Members of this Organization.
55. By accepting fully security Council resolution
283 (1970) and the legal opinion ofthe Court, pursuant to
resolution 284 (1970) of the Security Council, I declare
that we agree with all orooosals in oarts A and 6 of the
report of the Ad l&c * Sub-Cohmittee on Namibia
lS/IU330].
56. WC have therefore come to ask the Security Council,
on behalf of the whole of Africa, to assume the full share of
its responsibilities as a guarantor of international peace and
security by effectively putting ‘an end to the presence of
South African administration in the international territory
of Namibia, by adopting measures in conformity with the
Ch-k?r.
57. In the search for a solution to the problem confronting the Security C%nc& its first duty ia towards the
population of Namibia. This Council must be constantly
mindful of the fact that this problem has to do with the
fate of this population and that it is the way in which it
discharges its obligations toward that population will
determine the confidence and the hopes for peace that the
international
community-and
especially defenceless
peoples-places in the Security Council and, through it, in
the United Nations,
58. I should like most respectfully to appeal to the
conscience of the permanent memben of the Security
Council ‘and to state that the special position and the
privileges which they enjoy in the adoption of the most
important international decisions are in keeping with the
heavy responsibilities entrusted to them by the internationd community. Therefore, there can be no serious
pretext to justify the refusal to exercise these responsibilities and in these circumstances to take the specifti
measures which are mandatory, especially after the state
ment heard by the Council from the representative of
South Africa /15’84ih meetirig] after .the legal opinion
rendered by the International Court of Justice which I have
just mentioned.
6

59. The PRESIDENT (fnterpntatlon from spsntsh):I call
on the Fore&p Minister of the Su@ri,

‘: ,,,
: ,-,

60, Mr. KNALID (Sudan): Anow me, Mr, Presidenf, at the
outset to fhk you for atrording fne shle opportunity to
address the Security Council on behalf of Africa, together
with my eminent brothers, Mr, &pa
of Nigeria;
Mr, Grimes of Wberia, Mr. Ha&n6 af Ctiad and ‘Mr. Ma
konnen ofEthiopia,
’ I”
1 ,‘_
,
: ,i_:
6 1. The agenda ltem dealing with the question of Namibb
represents to us in Africa not or& a burning political issue
but also a political reality that shames the dignity of every
man and woman in our Continent. It 0 the reality of
apartheid that extirpates from the. hearts of its practitioners
all human virtue. It is the reality of tyranny that knows no
discipline or constraint. It is the reality of our brothers and
sisters being dragged into bloody servitude by the most
dangerous engines of arbitrary government in our times.
But it is also the reality of a coalescing c&is that threatens
to incinerate the whole of southern Africa and, with the
imponderable arithmetic of violence, perhaps the rest of the
Continent.
62. And if we come here, fNe African Foreign Ministers
led by a prominent African Head of State, we do this to
awaken the world to the reality of African concern and
consensus on this question, the question of Namibia. It is
not my intention to elaborate on a case, nor is it my
intention to adduce arguments in suppoti of a cause. The
case of Africa was very ably expounded by President
Moktar Ould Daddah and its arguments very skilfully
marshalled by my learned friends Makonnen, Grimes,
Arikpo, Pratt and Ghalib.
63. But is it really necessary for us to go through this
painful exercise? The Council knows orily too well that in
no other issue before the United Nations have the minds of
all the representativesin this Organizatlon been at one. The
record of 88 General Assembly resolutions and 7 Security
Council resolutions speaksfor itself.
64. This impressive record was crowned by the recent
advisory opinion handed down by the International Court
of Justice. The Court’s opinion, though it does not add new
fmdings or* indictments, represents an important legal
enunciation that completes the estrangement of the South
African @me by all United Nations organs: the legislative,
the administrative and the legal.’ South Africa now stands
condemned in the eyes of the civilized world: condemned
for its transgression of the law of nations; condemned for
its disdain of the principles of the Charter; and, indeed,
condemned for its callous disregard of the Imperatives of
universal wisdom. All the right-thinking elements of international society have since associated themselves with the
findings of the Court, including some of the majorpowers.
And we are confident that others wffl follow suit, for it is
the c8use of jusfice that stands to gain by such a rally. I am
son-y to say that the statement we just heard from the
representative of France does not help us a great deal in t&
particular direction, We too do not want to engage in a
sterile juridical discussion. We can produce a forest of legal
opinions and interpretations regarding the competence of
the Council and the Assembly; that would not help. The

problem is not a juridical one: it is a pohtical and moral
one.
65. Africa ls suffering, both physically and moray, the
impact of South’ African lawlessness; it also dq~fores the
complete helplessness of the faw.enforcing organs of the
United Nations in the face of south Africa’s supreme insult
to this Organization. And it ia a helplessnessmade possible
only through the reticence of mm of the great Western
Powers.
66. Today Africa looks to this Co&il for dedsive action,
It looks to this Council to put into operation the whole
mechanism of redress against an unlawful aggressor, It
looks, in particular, to the big Powers of the West to end all
continuing activities and relations, be they political, military, diplomatic or economic, that would enable South
Africa to continue its unlawful trespass in Namibia or
clothe its presence in that Territory with a semblance of
legality.
67. And in this connexion we give credit to those
countries that have so far respected the edicts of the United
Nations on the arms embargo, on economic sanctions, on
the discouragement of investment and on the cessation of a
consular presence,
68. We do not want to believe that the great Powers which
continue to aid and trade with South Africa can go on
sacrificing moral responsiblity for the sake of material gain
or strategic interests. Rut even if we have to be cynical and
say that, to some, goid is Cod, still those people would be
better advised to think in terms of their interests elsewhere.
There is also more at stake north of the Lirnpopo.
69. We know that considerations of national interests are
major factors in policy formulation. But we also know that
the role of any Power is to weigh national interest against
international responsibility and to weigh material gain
against moral commitment. After all the whole process of
government is, in the last analysis, a weighing of relative
social and moral values.

Namibia towards self-government, that the economk life in
the Territory continues to prosper thanks to his Govemmerit and that education and health services are far more
advanced than those enjoyed by citizens of other African
COUntri~. The whole world knows the facts. His faLsehood
can be stripped nude right here, Falsehood is a scorpion
that stingsitself to death.
,,
73. Mr. Muller talks of self-government for the peoples of
%mibia. What peoples of Namibia does he refer to?
Should we look for the answer in his constantly revealing
references to white and nonwhite population? White and
non-white-that is the sort of adjective that does not exist
in the United Nations lexicon; it does not exist in the
United Nations Trust Territories. The United Nations, if
Mr. Muller needs to be reminded, is simply colour blind.
74. South Africa, in its vain endeavour, seems to be
inspired by the overblown maxim of ancient empire
builders: divide and rule. The reason behind these divisive
methods is to make easy South Africa’s repressive control
of the people of Namibia. We would be taking leave of our
senses if we believed that this policy was one that would
guideNamibia towards self-government.
75. With regard to Namibia’s economy, Mr. Muller has
tried to tabulate an impressive record of achievements in
economic development-thanks to God and South Africa,
or perhaps the reverse. But Mr. Muller did not choose to
relate this impressive development to the realities of life in
Namibia. He did not relate it to the so-called police zones,
comprising the soutbem developed region and two-thirds of
the Territory-occupied, need I say, by whites. He did not
relate it to the underdeveloped, so-called outside, zones
that fit so well the description by Gladstone: “. . . this
waterless waste in South Africa”. He did not relate hisper
cap&r incomesto the slavelabourcontract systemof the
SouthWestAfrican NativeLabourAssociation(SWANLA),
underwhich aNsmibianworkerearnsa wageof sevenrands
a month, comparedwith a minimum wageof 150 rands
earnedby a whiteworker.
76. Mr, Nuller continuesto produce evidence of his
country’s efforts to promote the generalwelfare of the
people of Namibia,The nameof Ovambolandoccus many
timesh his statement.And sinceMr. Muller has a lot of
faith in newsreportsandfeaturesabout South Africa, let
me refer him to one. Let me refer him to what The New
York Timer had to say of Ovambolandin its issueof 23
June1971:

70. Of late we have been told that a ferment within’south
African society might soon result in a change of heart in
that country. I am sure that in listening to Mr. Muller, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa, the other day
/158&h meetirz~, many people were hopefuhy awaiting
evidence of that change. But here he came, not to plead but
to accuse, not to explain but to confuse, not to submit to
judgement but to challenge authority, not to heed the wise
counsel of the world but to defend a repugnant policy that
has justifiably earned the inexhaustible contempt of mankind.

“Clearly aimingat making it into a showcase,South
Africa has over the fast few years appropriatedsizable
funds.. . to give favouredOvambo groupswater, roads,
hospit& and the beginningof smallindustries.”

71. Mr, Muller, with unparalleled audacity, has also come
here not only to challenge the legality of the Court’s ruling,
but also to question the integrity of that great international
legal oracle. To him, the Court’s verdict was a result of
politicat manoeuvres rather than objective jurisprudence.

Thus, what South Africa intends-to hold out a typical
economf&y advancedareaof the Territory of Namibiais
revealedto be nothingbut a window-dressing
designedto
concealthe realeconomicsituationin the wholeTerritory.
We are not therefore to be hoodwinkedinto accepting
South Africa’s propagandaby the sweet reasonableness
v,itJrwhichit attemptsto sellthesehalf-truths.

72. And as for facts, what did Mr. Muller have to tell us,
armed with his home-made statistics? That his Government
is making determined efforts to bring the people of

77. Mr+Muher alsochoseto speakon education-a field in
which me Oovernmentof South Africa hasdisplayedand
7

still displays a deliberate and callous disregard for the
welfare of the pmple of Namibia. It 1san open secretthat
the edwationd policy of Pretoria aims at excluding
non-whites from executive and skilled positions in the
administrative services, as well as the economic and so&
organizatlon of the Territory. As far as is known, there
were in I967 Only five non-white doctors and there is now
one African lawyer-but not a single African engineer,
dentist or surveyor.
78. The South African Foreign Minister has sought to
impress us with numbers of pupils and schools,maintaining
silence on the gross inequity in the treatment accorded to
white and African children as regardseducational facilities,
the number and ratio of school enrolment and completion
of studies, the quality of education dispensed and the
amount of money allotted. In 1970, for example, the
average per c@ta expenditure for white children was
eleven times the amount spent per capita for African
children. In 1969, only 47,000 out of an estimated 102,OCX)
school-age African children were attending school. Even
grimmer statistics may be noted. Of those attending school,
91 per cent were enrolled In lower primary classes,9 per
cent at the higher primary level, and only 0.3 per cent in
secondary classes. This “wastage” is not only a feature of
African education in Namibia, but it is also the result of a
deliberate policy. The system itself is structured to perpetuate such wastage,
79. As far as health services,are concerned, Mr. Muller
again produced statistics from his Government’s books.
Checked against the evidence of those who have lived and
continue to live in the misery of the reserves, those
statistics seem to speak of a paradise long lost. This is what
Katuutire Kaura, a Narnibian witness, told the Ad Hw
Working Group of Experts of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights:
“It is my turn to take you to the outskirts of the
Kalahari Desert, where young men are relegated to early
graves because they happen to have caught a common
cold and there is no wdical clinic around”?
80. Mr. Muller sought to use statistics for hospital beds to
persuade this Council that his country is dispensing proper
medical services.We should have been more impressed if we
had been given the ratio of doctors to patients among
Africans.

by a sense of responsibility. And, In meeting here and
discussing matters with you, we are not urging impetuosity
but are advocating the establishment of the rule oflaw. We
refuse to accept the notion that this Council can remain
helpless in the face of defiance by a Member State, We
believe that all it takes is the will to act,
83. In the face of SouthiAfrlcan intransigence the Council
can no longer continue to be an irresolute author of
decisions. Let us move to endorse the Court’s mling in toto,
Let US reaffi
our past decisions and resolutions. Let us
take measures that will compel States-all States-to carry
out the resolutions of the United Nations, discharge their
responsibility towards the people of Namibia and deny to
South Africa all the help and opportunities that enable it to
continue its aggression, Let us take a further step: let us, as
is indeed our duty, take the necessary action envisaged
under Chapter VII of the Charter,
84. At its 1583rd meeting the Council heard the solemn
voice of the whole of Africa in the speech of one of our
great Presidents-President Moktar Ould Daddah. Today the
Council may wish to hear the voice of Namibia, through the
words of a simple African, Toivo, a teacher and regional
secretary of SWAPO, defending himself at one of the
historic trials in Pretoria. His voice haa since been muzzled
by the repressive machine of South Africa. Toivo is now
serving a 2O-year sentence in the fascist gaols of South
Africa. He had this to say to his judge, or rather to his
inquisitor:
“ .I. 1963 for us was to be the year of our freedom.
From 1960 it looked as if South Africa could not oppose
the world for ever. The world is important to us. In the
same way as all laughed in Court when they heard that an
old man tried to bring down a helicopter with a bow and
arrow, we laughed when South Africa said that it would
oppose the world. We knew that the world wasdivided,
but as time went on it at least agreed that South Africa
had no right to rule us.
I‘ a.. we feel that the world as a whole has a special
responsibility towards us. This is because the land of our
fathers washanded over to South Africa by a world body.
It is a divided world, but it is a matter of hope to us that
it at least agrees about one thing-that we are entitled to
freedom and
t justice”,
Many people like Toivo-millions of people-are awaiting us
back home; and alI of them, like him, are clamouring for
freedom and justice.

8 1. The wind of change that some of the members of this
Council were awaiting and are still awaiting in great
expectation is not yet blowing frori the direction of
85. listening to President Ould Daddah the other day, I
Pretoria. What we were subjected to in this Chamber by the
could not resist the temptation of being carried away to a j
South African Foreign Minjster wasindeed, as mY friend
distant past and far-awayplace-to 30 June 1936 and to the
Mr. Makoraen said, “the incredible spectacle of the arch
Assembly of the League of Nations meeting in Geneva. The
law-breaker of our time posing as the ardent advocate of
international rule of law. /lS87th meeting, par@.104 SO resonance of the fhm and dignified speech of Emperor ,
let us not be diverted by dilatory tactics; let us approach Haile Selassie of Ethiopia claiming justice for his people was
perhaps too strong to resist. What was most resounding in
the problem with resolve.
that speech wasthe Emperor’s closing appeal:
82. I wish to teU this c~und
that, in coming here, we
“Representatives bf the world, I have come to Geneva
were not driven by an impulse of instinctive solidarity but
to discharge in your midst the most painful of the duties
of the Head of a State. What answeram I to take back to
3 A Principle
in Tonnerlt: III-The-~flatiorls
and Namibfa
my people? I’
(United Nations publication, SalesNo.: E.71.1.41,P. 11.
8

That answer W-IS given. YOU all know it: inaction and
abdication of international responsibility. It was not the
Ethiopians alone who suffered from the resuits of that
inaction. Freedom and justice are what we ask for, a
freedom that has long been cloistered and a justice that has
long been unexercised,
86. Let US not once again prove to the world the decay of
in temational virtue.
87. The PRESIDENT (interpretdon from Spanish}: I
wish to remind the Council that at its last meeting, held on
30 September, it agreed that in due time It would accedeto
the request contained in the letter from the representatives
of Bumndi, Sierra Leone and Somalia fS/10346/ and
would extend an invitation to Mr. Nujoma under mle 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure. I believe that it
is appropriate to hear Mr. Nujoma’s statement, in keeping
with the decision taken on 30 September by the Council.
88. If I hear no objection, I shall now call on Mr. Nujoma.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sam Nujomu took
a place at the Council table.

89. Mr. NUJOMA: There are privileges in life that should
be accompanied by particular solemnity. The privilege that
this august body has bestowed upon me as the first freedom
fighter to be accorded this opportunity, is indeed one such
privilege. Aware of the stupendous task that restsuponmy
shoulders today, Mr. President, allow me to express my
most sincere debt of gratitude to you, and through you, to
the distinguished members of the Security Council.
90. This session of the Council has been convened to

93. This time we are not asking for declaratory statements
which have no effect on the illegal occupation forces. On
the contrary, we are imploring this august body to take
concrete and immediate action under Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter. In that Chapter, Article 39 enjoins
on the Security Council the duty of determining the
existence of any threat to peace, breach of peace or act of
aggression, and to take appropriate action,

94. Who can doubt that these conditions are now prevalent? Who can doubt that a case has arisen for the Security
Council to take action asprovided in Articles 40 and 41?
The only people who doubt this are the major Western
Powers. They do so, not because the situation in Namibia
does not threaten international peace and security, but
because they want their agents in South Africa to continue
providing them with cheap labour, which results in enormous profits For their investors. How long will thesepeople
who profess to be the champions of equality, democracy
and free speech pursue their insatiable greed for material
things and ignore the value of human life? How can the
situation in Namibia be described aspeaceful when South
Africa is arming itself to the teeth with the most advanced
weapons of destruction? How does one explain the fact
that the South African army is today fighting in Angola,
Mozambique, Namibia and Zimbabwe? How does one
explain the constant threats made against independent
African States? For instance, Vorster threatened President
Kaunda of Zambia in the following terms: “We will hit you
so hard so that you will not forget it”. Lastly, what is to
become of international law if the countries represented
here can ignore with impunity any interpretation of law
that is not in their favour? Where are the advocatesof ‘law
and order’?
9.5. We welcome the stand taken by the Government of
the United States in accepting the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice as stated by the Secretary of
State, Mr. William Rogers, in the General Assembly.
[195&t+ pletzqj meeting]. We hope the United Stateswill
follow up this responsibility with appropriate measures to
end South Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia.

discuss ways and means of enforcing previous decisions of

the General Assembly, as well as those of the Security
Council, in the light of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice rendered on 21 June 1971.
The International Court gave an unequivocal ruling when it
stated in paragraph 133 of the opinion:
“, . . the continued presence of South Africa in Namibia
being ilIega1, South Africa is under obligation to withdraw
its administration from Namibia immediately and thus
put an end to its occupation of the Territory”.

96. The South African Foreign Minister gave “facts and
figures” on the economic devefopment of Namibia which, if’
one does not read between the Iines, imply that ’ South
African presence in Namibia confers rewarding economic
and other benefits on the black majority and the white
minority alike. Lest the members of this Council and the
world at large be bamboozled, we should like to point out
two very important factors which must be borne in mind
with respect to the situation in Namibia.

91. Discussing this opinion, 7%eNW York Times stated:
“With this historic 13 to 2verdict, the Court has
cleared away the legal and political fog that for years
obscured the status of the former German colony.”

97. First, we wish to make it perfectly clear to the world
that the African majority does not manifestly benefit either
fmancially or materially from the economic development of
Namibia. If there is indeed any benefit at all, it is only
marginal or latent and certainly not on a level with that
enjoyed by the whites. Hence all those impressive “facts
and figures” so dramatically revealed by the Foreign
Minister have no bearing on the economic conditions of the
African population.

Thus the Namibian people and the peace-loving people of
the world have won the legal contest. Now it is UP to the
Security Council to live up to its responsibility.
92. The United Nations is confronting the most determined and most serious onslaught on its prinC$es since
the Organization was set up, Therefore the Security
Council, as an organ which has been assignedthe Primary
EsponsibiIity for the maintenance of international Peace
and security, should and must not fail to take authoritative
and decisive action.

98. Secondly, everything in Namibia, as well as in South
Africa, is geared towardsbenefiting the white section of the
9

,

,

,’
T

.,
~ .~ /.’
~;“,

popu!atidn. Hence any economic pIarming is carried ou&
the interest of the white minority at th6 bxpen*~,~#
Africans. We want thiir fact, to be appreciated fg; @at,j~,@
.*
/ .; “,Sl.&,
91r. Thirdly, Ithfi South i&A
PO&~ Minis
’
Ligures meant ti, pmvh ta &s world how mu
AMcan Government fs daN for $he Africtis
of hospitals, schools, rad& at&low, t&d ~4
clerks, bookkeepers, truck driven ‘and so forth,
meant to show how much Pretoria has done for &, ~4
want It to be perfectly clear to the world that we w+t
independence-and I underline that fact: we want
pendence. We want South AMca to relinquis+ its
occupation of Namibia. We shall never be wooed by roada,
hospitals, schools and so forth, ti long as South Af%oa
remains on Namibian soil. Again, we want the world to
appreciate this fact for what it is.
100. The South African Foreign Minister stated that his
Government ‘is making determined efforts to bring the
peoples of South West Africa toward sclf-govermnent.”
/lSMth meeting, para. 134*J 7% & B gross abuse of the
noble concept of self-determination and a euphemism for
upmiheid or Bantustan or Homeland, I think ft is appre
@ate for me to quote what our people at home had tosay
about Bantustans. Bishop L, Auala and Pastor P. Gowaseb
in their statement to their congregations made the fob
lowjng points:
“The Government, by the application of the Homelands
Pobcy, constitutes the creation and continuation forever
of the division between the races. It is stated that this
policy is intended to lead the races to self-government
and independence. But our small race groups cannot
really be aided by separation. .Ibey wili be isolated and
denied the chance to take a proper part in the develop
ment of the country.”
101. In another incident, a group of students of Ondangua
stated that: “. . . Ovambos would rather suggest to Vorster
and his company to onate ‘Whitestans’ for Gen’nan~,
Afrikaners and English elsewhere,but not in Namibia.”
102. There are factors militating against and, indeed,
precluding the successful implementation of Bantustans.
The economic realities of our time require large expansesof
land and massive populations to provide the base for
markets. Thus, a five-year development plan for Ovarnbo
land, in isolation, is an illusion of hope. It is economically
unfeasible, and therefore politically unrewarding. The social
and economic expectations of the people of this region will
most certainly override the fantasies of apartheid.
103. The spokesman for the white people ofSouth Africa
further stated that “per capita income is amongst the
highest in Africa” [ibid, pam. I43J. Economists have long
admitted that this jumbling of figures in order to arrive at a
so-called per capita income is the most inaccurate way of
measuring the real income of a person. It may OdY
approximate reality in a country where there is an equal
distribution of national wealth. It is completely map
plicable in the case of Namibia, where there is such a
disparity in incomes. Namibians are among the poorest
Africans I have seen, I wish to inform Mr. MulIer that he

,&;

I._

“The system’ [of e&cat&j
?n South west &Ii&.&
dirsCt& in fine with the modem approach $0 schooli$ i&
Africa, the emphasis being on the importance of Af3can
vultures in ti education of African youth;” /Ibid,
paru 1594..

105. There is absolutely no truth whatsoever in Uris
assertion. Indeed, the philosophy of education wMch
governs the education of Africans in Namibia is based on
the notorious policy statement of the late Dr. Verwoerd,
when he wasMinister of Banta Administration and Education, that the
“black child’s education must be geared towards pnparing him for a subservient position in society. , . not to
give false hopes to want to aspire to the position of the
white man, who must remain his master”.
Nothing has happened in the past twenty years or more to
prove that this policy has been scrapped. On the contrary,
there is ali the evidence to prove that education of the
African in Namibia has deteriorated.
106. The Foreign Minister stated, inter alicr, that “The
standard is the same as that of the whites in South and
South West Africa”[lbid.J
107. In Namibia society in all its spheres-the sphere of
education included-is organized on the basis of race
rjis&nination. This is the very basis of apartheid. It is
therefore shocking to hear the representative of the white
section of the society contending-contraIy to the very
phiiosophy of apartheid-that whites and blacks receive the
same education in Namibia. In fact, the assertion implies
that whites ‘and blacks receive the same educational
opportunities in Namibia. What then is Bantu education’?
Mr. Muller conveniently omitted to mention the system of
Bantu education. It was conveniently avoided for very
obvious reasons.The fact is that education for whites is free
and compulsory, whereas the same cannot be said of the
education of the Afticans.
log. II-I the more than 40 years of its maladministration Of
Namibia the white Gove:nment of South Africa has
dismally failed to prepare our people by providing them
with a meaningful education which would enable them to
ain a modern government when Namibia becomes indelendent. Bantu education certainly cannot prepare US to
landle the complexities of modem establishments.
109. That dw not mean that we ourselveshave been idle.
m plea& to state here that SWAF’O of Namibia, in its

IO

short existence, has educated more Namibians than South
Africa has done over the past 50 years. f am proud and
happy to announce’that in the past 10 years, through our
initiative, we have educated 25 engineers, 4medical doctars-including the fist African woman .doctor-7lawyers
and more than 35 holders of university degreesin various
fields. To some, those &ures may appear modest and
jnsignifkant. To us, who have been denied so much for so
lon,g, it is a record of whkh we arejustly proud and which
we am determined to improve upon, Our sincere thanks
must go to atI those countries-both Members and non.
Members of this Organization-whkh generously gave
scholarships for our people to undertake further studies. It
is our hope that they will continue doing so in the future.
110. Mr. Mulier further stated that “it is our conviction
that the peoples of South West Africa wish us to continue
to administer the Territory until they have achieved full
self+determination under our guidance,“[Bld., para. 137,]
111. The truth is that the people of Namibia have never
accepted and will never accept the administration of South
Africa. in this respect we can do no better than cite some
of the recent developments inside Namibia which categorically prove our people’s outright rejection of the South
African Government. Again, for obvious reasons, Mr. Muller
did not mention these developments.
112. As we stated earlier, the people of Namibia enthusiastically welcomed and approved of ffie advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971.
Perhaps the most significant development following the
Court’s advisory opinion has been the position and the
stand taken by the African Church leaders in Namibia. The
Church occupies an esteemed position among our people,
and its leaders are no less esteemed than the political
leaders of our country, most of whom are either in gaol or
detention or in exile today.
113. Two very influential leaders of the Ovambokavango
Lutheran Church and the Evangelical Lutheran Church,
following the Court’s advisory opinion, addressed an open
letter to the Prime Minister of white South Africa on 30
June 1971. That letter is a historic document of farreaching consequences in our struggle for freedom and
independence in Namibia. Copies are being circulated in the
United Nations and, therefore, I am not going to quote it in
lid. However, I shall quote some relevant parts of it for the
information of the Security Council.
“We believe that South Africa in its attempts tc Develop
South West Africa has failed to take cognizance of fiuman
rights as declared by the United Nations in the year 1948
with respect to the non-white population.”
Furthermore, the letter goes on to state:
“The Church Boards’ urgent wish is that in terms of the
declarations of the International Court and in COoperation with the United Nations of which South Africa
is a Member, your Government will seek a peaceful
solution to the problems of our land and will see to it
that the Human Rights Declaration be put into operation
and that South West Africa may become a self-sufficient
and independent State.”

114, The letter wassigned by Bishop Auala and Moderator
Gowascb of the Evangelical Ovambokavango Church and
the Evangelical Lutheran Church of South West Afrka,
respectively.
115. The impact that open letter had’ on the white
Population of Namibia! wasastraumatk 86 it washysterical,
The same impact was felt in South Afrka Lie Prima
Minister of white South Africa, John V&stet, flew ta
Windhoek and had a fouphour confrontatidn with a
delegation of eight led by the two courageous spiritual
leaders. They were threatened and intimidated but they
firmly stood by the open letter they had sent to the Prime
Minister. They also reiterated their stand in rejecting the
condemnation of the local whites, who could not understand their Government’s failure to silence these spiritual
leaders once and for all.

116. Again, let me cite another example of the country.
wide protests against South Africa’s illegal presence in
Namibia. This time, I refer to the anti-Government demonstrations by secondary as well as high school students in
many parts of the country.
117. When the Foreign Minister of the all-white South
African Government addressed the Security Council the
other day, he mentioned the Ongwedtia training institute in
Ovamboland, which he described as “an impressive complex
comprising three institutions in one-a high school, a
teachers’ training centre and a trades centre” [ibid.,
para. 1&I].
118. What the Foreign Minister failed to mention was that
the Ongwediva training institute, since its establishment,
had been nothing but a perennial source of trouble for the
South African occupation authorities. There have been so
many anti-Government demonstrations at this training
institute. The biggest of these occurred after the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice when the
South African Government was forced to close down the
institution. Hundreds of students were expelled because of
this political demonstration in favour of the Court’s
opinion. It was therefore perplexing to hear the South
African Minister talk in such laudatory terms of the
institute, which is indeed the centre of protest for the
young generation of our country.
119. Not only is Ongwediva a symbol of new nationalism
n Namibia, but it was also from there that many students
Mere expelled because they refused to accept the Afrikaans
anguage as a medium of instruction. This came as a
lrofound shock to the South African authorities. Similar
lemonstrations have taken place at the Augustineurn High
;chool at Windhoek, where 70 students were expelled only
ast week.
20. We have cited these important examples to demontrate to the world that, contrary to South Africa’s claim
hat our people wish to remain under its administration, the
eople want an immediate end to South African ride. It is
ecause our people want an immediate end to South
.frican rule that the Court’s opinion was accepted with
lch enthusiasm by our people.

121. We are aware of the claims by the South African
Government that chaos and disorder will inevitably follow
in the wake of its withdrawal. This contention is based on
sheer imagination and has been repeatedly used to cast
doubts on the integrity and ability of the Namibian people.

122. for centuries the people of Namibia of all ethnic
groups have lived side by side in peace and harmony.
Warfare and strife were unknown to them, It was only with
the advent of German colonialism, with its usurpation of
our land and property, that we began to taste the bitter
fruit of discord and conflict. SWAP0 of Namibia therefore
wishes to reiterate that we recognize the contribution that
all people in Namibia, including those whocame as settlers
from Europe, must make to the general well-being and
prosperity of our country. The white people have nothing
to fear as long as they play a constructive role in the
reconstruction of the country.

129, We have just been given information by the SWAP0
representative concemlng a documentary f&n which, he,
said, if I understood him correctly, will prove whom the
people of Namibia will choose-the United Nations or
South Africa. It is in the interest of all delegations that we
should have an opportunity of seeing this documentary f?lm
and what it expresses.I suggest,therefore, that, as a matter
of procedure, we agreeto see this !Jlm tomorrow before the
meeting of the Council. This will enable us to decide for
ours&es its admissibility as documentary evidence in the
subject which we are discussing.
130. The PRESIDENT (interpretatin from Spanish): The
representative of the Soviet Union was kind enough to
allow the representative of Sierra Leone to put forward his
proposal. As I understand it, his proposal that the fdm be
shown before tomorrow’s meeting is acceptable.

131. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

123. Another fallacy ohen proclaimed by Sbuth Africa is
that the economic structure of Namiiia will collapse once
its administration is replaced. Nothing could be further
from the truth; for the interests of Namibians dictate that
the economy must be strengthened and expanded in order
to ensure the well-being of its citizens. The only possible
source of disruption is the South African Government,
which could sabotage the economy of Namibia; there is no
prospect of this happening in any other quarter,

(translated from Rusrinn): I am prepared to defer my

124. I wish to declare, in the name of the people of
Namibia, that unless this august body acts decisively to
S~CWC the withdrawal of South Africa from the international Territory of Namibia, we shall have no alternative
but to continue the armed struggle with greater intensity.
We do not love bloodshed, but when we are dealing with a
Government like that of South Africa, which believes in
violence and bloodshed, we must be prepared to meet it on
its own terms. Our struggle may be long and protracted; OUT
struggle may be bloody and costly in terms of human life; it
is a price we are prepared to pay for our independence.

133. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): It is
quite possible that the representative of the Soviet Union
will not insist, and he may be willing to speak today. First
the representative of the United Kingdom has asked for the
floor, and I now recognizehim.

125. In conclusion, I should be failing in my duty if I did
not express our gratitude to that illustrious son of Africa,
the President of the Isl&ic Republic of Mauritania, for the
moving address which he delivered on behalf of the
Organization of African Unity [1583rd meeting]. May I
also avail myself of this opportunity to extend our sincere
thanks to the five Foreign Ministers who accompanied him
and, through them, to the entire OAU membership.

statement until tomorrow, and perhaps we could see the
film today. That is an alternative proposal I should like to
make.
132. Mr. PRATT (Sierra Leone): I understand that this
film is not long; but considering the hour I would suggest
that we see it tomorrow when we are quite refreshed,
before the Council’s meeting begins.

134. Sir Colin CROWE ‘(United Kingdom): Although
Mr. Nujoma is quite free to offer to show to any member of
the Council any film that he wishes, I wonder whether the
showing of the film is quite appropriate at a formal meeting
of the Security Council, or whether it should be made
available to be seen elsewhere.1 wonder whether a showing
of a fti in the Security Council falls quite within the
understanding on which we heard him.
135. Mr. PHILLIPS (United States of America): On the
samequestion, perhaps a clarification might be in order. If I
understood you correctly, Mr. President, you suggested that
the film might be available for those who would be
interested in seeing it prior to the meeting of the Security
Council tomorrow. On that understanding I think we would
have no objection.

126. I should like to inform the Council that we have in
our possession a documentary fdm called “SouihY West
Africa” which shows conclusively whom the people of
Namibia will choose-South Africa or the United Nationsif and when they are given a choice. We should like the
Council to see this film at a convenient time as material
evidence.

136. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):This
matter is quite simple and I shall try to sum it up. I was
about to call on the representative of the Soviet Union, the
first speaker on my list, when the representative of Sierra
Leone asked for the floor on a point of order. He requested
that the film mentioned by Mr. Nujoma be shown before
the first speaker takes the floor tomorrow.

127. The PRESIDENT (intepretation from SpanM): The
next speaker is the representative of the Soviet Union. The
representative of Sierra Leone wishesto speak on a point of
order.

137. It seems to me that this is a matter of courtesy;
whoever wishes to seethe film may do so. That is what we
have been invited to do. This is not a matter relating to the
meeting itself. The representative of France has asked for
the floor.

128. Mr. PRATT (Sierra Leone): I beg the indulgence of
the representative of the Soviet Union.
12

138. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET (France) (interpretation
French): As I understand it, this is a film which we
are invited to see. Any delegation in the United Nations has
the possibility of inviting other delegations, including those
on the Security Council, to watch a fIlrn. Such a film may
be of interest. But it goes without saying that this has
nothing to do with the meeting of the Security Council, I
suppose this is cleady understood.

147. The Security Council has been convened at the
request of the Eighth Assembly of Heads of State and
Government ‘of the Organization of African Unity, Its
purpose is to discuss ways and means of enforcing the past
decisions of the United Nations, the General Assembly and
the Security Council, on the question of the liberation of
Namibia in the light of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice of 21 June of this year,

139. Tk! pRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
representative of Sierra Leone has asked the Chair whether
before tomorrow’s meeting begins whoever wishes to see
the film may be given an opportunity to do so. Is that
correct?

148. The fact that the Organisation of African Unity as a
body-that is to say, in effect, the whole of Africa,
practically all the countries of the African continent-has
approached the Security Council with a request for
immediate consideration of this important matter, as well
as the participation in these meetings of a representative
delegation of the OAU, headed by the Chairman of the
Eighth Assembly, Mr. Moktar Ould Daddah, President of
Mauritania, and the personal participation in the debates of
the Foreign Ministers of a large number of African
countries, are all indicative of the great significance which,
Africa attaches to the question of the liberation of Namibia
and of the hopes placed by the African peopIes in the
Security Council and in the United Nations in general.

fionl

140. Mr. PRATT (Sierra Leone): Yes, Sir.
141. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
matter has now been resolved satisfactorily.
142. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): I do not quite understand the
concern of some members of the Security Council, Those
who do not wish to see the film will not be dragged in to
see it, and those who wish it will go ahead and see it. I see
no grounds for discussion.
143. As far as my statement is concerned, I have no
objection to deferring it until tomorrow, in view of the
feelings of members of the Security Council about the
lateness of the hour.
144. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
film will be shown tomorrow before the Council’s meeting;
those who wish to see it may do so, accepting the invitation
of the representative of Sierra Leone. I now invite the
representative of the Soviet Union to speak this afternoon.
He is the last speaker on my list.
145. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(tmnslated from Russion): If that is the President’s wish, I
accept his ruling.
146. Before making a statement on the substance of the
question under consideration, I should like, Mr. President,
on behalf of the Soviet delegation, to congratulate you
personally on your assumption of the high office of
President of the Security Council, and to express the hope
that you will be successful in your work and that positive
decisions will be adopted on the matters discussed. I should
also like to convey our appreciation and sincere congratulations to your predecessor, the representative of Japan,
who had a very strenuous period of activity, especially after
the beginning of the General Assembly session, when we
had to combine work at the plenary meetings simultaneously with work in the Security Council. In this
connexion, we departed somewhat from previous practice.
In the past, the practice was that when the Security Council
met, there was no meeting of the General Assembly, and
vice versa. But now, in view of the urgency of the matter
and because of the request made by the whole of Africa,
the Security Council has acted quite correctly in finding
time, despite the plenary meetings of the General Assembly, to discuss this very vital question which is of immense
significance both for all Africans and for the entire world.
13

149. The debate in the Security Council on this issue has
developed into a kind of international trial of the racist
criminals. In the dock are the South African racists, and
their friends and protectors, while the role of the stem
prosecutor is played by the whole of Africa, its States, its
Government and its peopies!
150. The statement by the head of the delegation at the
plenary meeting of the General Assembly /1938zh rneeting/ and here in the Security Council /1583rd meeringj,
and the statements by other representatives of African
States, confirm once again the danger to peace resulting
from the situation created in southern Africa by the South
African racists’ brutal and high-handed disregard and
non-implementation of United Nations resolutions calling
for an immediate end to the occupation of Namibia.
151. For the United Nations, the essence of the question
of Namibia is clear and incontrovertible. The United
Nations has long since recognized that the South African
racists’ seizure of that country is illegal. The General
Assembly and the Security Council have repeatedly called
for South Africa’s unconditional withdrawal from Namibia.
The resolutions adopted by the United Nations with a view
to putting an end to South Africa’s occupation of Namibia
are well.known.
The Security Council, in resolution
269 (1969), actually set a deadline for the withdrawal of
South Africa’s administration from Namibia-a deadline
which has long since expired.
152. The advisory opinion of the International Court,
which upholds the United Narions decisions, also states that
South Africa’s continued occupation of Namibia is illegal
and that South Africa is under obligation to withdraw its
administration from Namibia and to put an end to its
occupation of that court@. Notwithstanding
alI these
United Nations decisions, the South African racist regime is
still doing its utmost to maintain its illegal presence in
Namibia, and to exercise dominion over that Territory and
Entrench itself there. It is applying methods of mass terror

and savage q-msion to stifle the just and natural ~lspfra. and also to fmd a wayout of the impme WChave reached
tion of the people of Namibia for freedom and inde.
in trying to solvethe problem of Namibia’s liberation.
penden% and is extending to Namibia its racist laws,
Governmental Acts and administrative ~gutatiofl~ and
158. It b an indisputable fact that South Aftica, with the
aPPlYi& the policy and practices of apartheid which haw: help of its friend&the racists and tts military allies from
been condemned by the United Nations and by the
the imperialiti camp-has developed and now has at its
internationalcommunity as a whole.
command a rather impressive economic capacity and
mllifary force of its own on which it leans for support In
15% Mr. Makonnen, who spoke in the Security Councfl 88 conducting its racist and colonialist policy h muthem
a member of the DAU delegation and as the representative Africa. At the same time, it is quite obvious that South
Of Ethiopia /1587th meen&,
referred to the racist+
Africa would not have dared to oppose the whole of Africa
Prosecution of the Dean of the Anglican Church in
and the United Nations and to defy the Security C~umfl if
Johannesburg on the pretext that he had violated the
if had stood aloneand truly isolatedand if it were acting

so-called Suppression of Communism Act. Thus, to the
South African racists, even the servants of the Church rank
as communists if they speak out against the odious theory
of racism and the practice ofapartlreid.

without assistance
from outside.The crux of the matter is
that South Africa, in puc;uingits colonialandracist policy
in Namibia, is relying on the economic,political and
military support of a numberof Westerncountries beIonging to the NATO mnitary bloc especiallythe United
Kingdom and the United States of America. It is also
actively supportedby influentialcirclesin thosecountries
which havelinkswith the internationalimperialist monopo
lies operatingin SouthAfrica andNamibia.This is the crux
of the matter and the root of the trouble. The headof the
OAU delegation,Mr. OuldDaddah,the esteemed
President
of Mauritania,wasthereforequiteright whenhe referred to
his important and closely-argued
addressto the General
Assemblyto the helpgiven to the SouthAfrican racistsby
the fuzzily-defmedWesternbloc.

154. We communists glory in the fact that all who fight
against racism and apartheid and for the freedom and
independence of peoples are regarded by the racists as
communists. This means f.hat even the enemies of corn.
munism are forced to admit that communists are genuine
fighters for the equality of all peoples, for their freedom
and national independence without distinction as to nationality, race, sex, languageor religion. However, the
racists, in their fascist blindnessand their hatred for the
Africans forget that the demandsfor the equalrights of
men and women for the equal rightsof nationslargeand
small, and for respect for humanrightswithout distinction 159. When questionsof decolonizationincluding the
as to race, sex, languageor religion, are key provisionsof
questionof the liberationof Namibiaare discussed,
some
the United Nations Charter. Consequentlythe communists membersof the SecurityCounciltry to evadethis point, to
fighting far the equality of all peoplesand againstracial glossover it, to divert the attention of the membersof the
discrimination are not only pursuingtheir lofty humani- Security Councilfrom the essence
of the problem, But if
tarian communist ideals but are’ also carrying out the we wish to make progressin solving the problem of
to refrain from drawingattention
pro~isio~x
of the United Nations Charter. It follows Namibia,it is impossible
therefore, that if the racistscall the fightersagainstracism to South Africa’strading,financialandeconomicpartners,
“communists”, they could with equal justification cd
to those who invest foreign capital in its economy and
them “UN-ists”-in other words, respectersof the United thosewhosupplyarmsto the SouthAfrican racists.
Nations Charter.
u*
160. ReIyingon the economicand military co-operation
155. In cynically rejecting the decisionsof the United of the imperialist forces and enjoying the moral and
Nations on Namibia, the South African racistsarehurling political support of the most reactionaryWesterncircles,
the samesort of challengeat the Organizationasthe Zionist the South African racistsare steadily increasingtheir
military andeconomicpotentialandthe sizeof their armed
racistsof Israel who are frustrating a peacefulsettlementin
the Middle East. In this situation, the SecurityCounciland forces, which ‘are usednot only to maintain the racist
all States Membersof the United Nationsarein duty bound rdgimeinsidethe country by force of arms but aho to
the nationalliberationmovementsof the enslaved
to take the necessary effective measures
to curb the racists, suppress
restore justice and grant them independence
to the People African peoplesin Namibiaby fire and swordand to assist
the Portuguesecolonialistsin their war of extermination
of Namibia.
againstthe African freedomfightersin the countries still
sufferingunder the Portuguese
colonialyoke. The militari156. 111order to determine the main’waysandmeansof
enforcing the past resolutionsof the Security Council-and zation of racistSouthAfrica isalsoaseriousand realthreat
to be freedom and independenceof all the African
this is precisely what Africa demandsand expectsof the
cancg-it
is essential, of course, to analysethe basic count&s which have liberatedthemselvesfrom colonial
reasonswhich impede the implementationof theseresolu- rule.
tions and which paralysethe United Nationswhenit comes
to settling this vital international problem,aswell asmany 161. It is fie political, military and economicassistance
andsupport of the Westerncountries,andespeciallyof the
other problems.
United Kjngdom, whichinspirethe South’African raciststo
continue
their policy of apartheidand tyrannical enslave157. l’he USSR delegationhasalreadyhadanopportunity
to louch on the reasonsfor the South African racists’ ment of he African population,which arousethe disgust
defiant attitude, but we must repeatthem againandagain+ and condemnationof the entire world and the resentment
This will help USto understandthe Situation
more clearly and indignation of the whole of Africa. The continuous
14

‘:

heavy flow of aid and protection froni outside also
determine the insolent position taken by the South
African racists towards the United Nations and the Security
Council.
162. JntcmathtJ
monopolies have invested thousands of
muions in the economy of South Africa and Namibia and
M’C EaPhg huge profits &mounting to millions and millions
of pounds ad dohu,
as was reported to the Council by
tf~ NunWan pohtM leader, Mr, Nujoma, the President of
SWAJ.W, that selfless fighter for Namibia’s liberatton whose
aWznent preceded mine. He has provided the Security
Council with authentic and convincing facts and information of a kind which he alone could have. These profits
come from the plundering of Namibia’s natural resources
and the merciless exploitation of the labour of its people. It
is sufficient to recall that investments by United Kingdom
monopolies in the economy of South Africa, including
Nauribia, exceed $3,500 million, while United States
investments amount to more than $l,ooO million.

163. It is easy to see that the international imperialist
are cbnging tenaciously to the resources of
Namibia and employing every means in concert with the
racists, to prevent its liberation.
monopdics

164. Such co-operation with the racists and assistance to
Ihem are a direct violation of the General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions condemning co-operation of
any kind with tile. racist regime of South Africa. The
well-known United Nations resolutions aimed at putting an
end to and prohibiting deliveries of arms, military equipment and military vehicles to South Africa are also being
ViOlilLCd.
The very important Security Council resolution
283 (1970) of 29 July 1970 on Namibia is also not being
implemented. That resolution contains an appeal to ab
States not to recognize any authority of South Africa with
regard to Namibia, to discourage their companies and
rmtjonals from investing or obtaining concessions in Na
mibia, amI to review all bilateral treaties between themSCIVCSand South Africa.
165. We often hear about the ineffectiveness of t,be United
Nations, about its incapacity and impotence in me matter
of resolving important international problems. Those who
pOSC such questions do not alwaysproduce the answersto
other questions such as: Who is responsible? what is the
reason? Who and what is paralysing the work of the United
Nations? The discussions that have taken place in the
United Nations bodies on problems relating to decolonization give a very clear and precise answer to these
questions. The main culprit responsible for the ineffectivcncss of the United Nations, for its paralysis in carrying
out decisions on the most important questions concerning
the strengthening of peace and security, as well: as OII the
problems of decolonization, is imperialism and its repulsive
progeny, nco-colonialism and racism with its anti-human
policy of apartheid. That is the straight answer to a straight
question.

to the impenabst monop&lies and their O&~M
-,
them allies.

and mahe

167, It 1squite obvious that as Iong as the Westem Powen
and their monopolies support the ntclst retie in South
Africa, the United Nations wilI find it diffk\ult to &&srge
its duty to the people of Namibia, to achieve a radical
change in Namtbia’s condttkm of colonial slavery, and to
open Namibia’s wayto freedom and national independence.
168. There should thus be no ambiguity or disagreement
about precisely who ia responsible for violating United
Nations decisions on Namibia, and for frustrating then
implementation by the South African racists.

169. The responsibility of those States and intematjomj
imperialist monopolies which help to frustrate the United
Nations decisionson Namibia has become far heavjer since
the United Nations declared the presence of the south
African adminjstration and its troops in Namibia to be
illegal, and since the International Court, for its part,
confumed the rVegaIity of South Africa’s occupation of
that Territory. Those who support the South African racist
regime share in full measure the responsibility for its
criminal activities against the Namibian people.
170. The Security Council should condemn in the strongest temrs the support given to South Africa and should
demand that co-operation of any kind with its racist regime
should cease.
171. Yesterday’s announcement by the United States
Secretary of State, Mr. Rogers, in his statement in the
General Assembly /195&k plenary meetingl that the
United States accepted the International Court’s findings
on Namibia must obviously be understood as meaning that
the United States will now be prepared to co-operate and
participate in the implementation of the United Nations
decisions on Namibia. Mr. Rogers also told the Assembly
that assuranceshad recently been given in Washington by
the Government of the United States to the OAU delegation headed by President Chtld Daddah, that the United
States supported “practical and peaceful means to achieve
self-determination and end racial discrimination” [ibid.,
para.24/. The Council is entitled to expect that practical
steps will be taken by the United States of America,
following that official statement made from the august
rostrum of the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth
session,to implement the United Nations decisions on the
liberation of Namibia from the tyranny of the South
African racists.
172. The South African racists have recently been engaging in ~JI manner of stratagemsand political manoeuvres
in order to maintain and consolidate their rule in Namibia
and to mislead Africa, the United Nations and world public
opinion. One means to that end is the idea peddled by
Pretoria of holding a “plebiscite” in Namibia. The representative of Ethiopia, speaking in the Security Council, very
+$,fly describedthat plebiscite, which wasto be organized
and conducted by the repressivemachinery of the South
African racist regime, as a “mockery of the democratic
processof self-determination” [J587tk meet@,Para.37/.
Another piece of demagogy perpetrated by the racists to

166. A partnership to exploit and plunder the indigcnons
African population of South Africa and Namibia, the joint
extraction of superFprofits, racist philosophy and Iydtred of
the Africans-these are what unite the South African racists
1s

”
“,

that same end is the Call for a so-called “peaceful dialogue”*
Its object 1s to split the anti-jmperialfsts and anti-colonial
front of the independent countries of Africa and make it
easier for South Africa to fid a wayout of the impasse of
international lsolatfon into which its racist rulers have
led it.
173. But these stratagems and manoeuvres will not yieid
the results expected by their racist authors, The Oganization of African Unity and all ant.Ecolonial forces have had
no difficulty in seeing through the manoeuvre in respect of
both “plebiscite” and “dialogue” alike, and they decisively
reject and condemn it.
174. The delegation of the Soviet Union expresses its full

solidarity with the delegations of the African States which
call for the immediate liquidation of the colonial racist
regime in Namibia. There can be no possible argument in
favour of or justification for maintaining and continuing
that r&me+
175. We vi&orousLy support Africa’s demand for the
immediate granting of independence to the people of
Namibia, for the expulsion from its territory of the South
African troops, police forces and administration, and for
the immediate termination of the South African racists’
illegal presence in Namibia.
176. The imperialists, colonialists and racists, who have
joined forces in southern Africa in order to maintain and
consolidate tire rule of racism and the imperialist monopolies in Namibia, are the worst enemies of the national
liberation movements of the African peoples. Neither the
peoples of Africa nor their friends throughout the world
will ever reconcile themselves. to the prospect of the
perpetuation of colonialism and racism on the African
continent, The total elimination of the remaining centres of
colonialism and the eradication of the scourge of racism in
Africa are in the interests of the maintenance and strengthening of world peace and security for all peoples.
177. The basic intcrest%of the peoples of Africa, as of all
freedom-loving peoples throughout the world, require the
further strengthening of solidarity and co-ordination of
action of those who cherish freedom and national Jndependence, peace and social progress,A great contribution is
being made to that noble task by the Organization of
African Unity; the enemies of Africa would like to split and
undermine that Organization and force it to adopt a
conciliatory attitude towards the maintenance of cola
nialism and racism in the southern part of that sorely-tried
continent, The stronger that unity becomes, the greater will
be the rebuff suffered by the imperialists and racists, and
the sooner the day of the liberation will come for the
peoples still languishing under the yoke of colonialist and
racist regimes,

plctely excludes from human society any manifestation of
racial difference, hatred, emntty, and inequality. The
Constitution of the USSR declares any form of racial
discrimination to be not only evil but also a crime ubject
to strict penalties.
X79, The General Secretary of the Central Committee of
the Communist Par? of the So&t. Union, Mr. Leonid
llyich Brezhnev, in hh statement at the recent Twenw
Fourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union on the Party’s and country’s programme for the
struggle for peace and international co-operation and for
the freedom and independence of the peoples, declared on
behalf of the entire Soviet people that the Soviet Union
stood for the full implementation of United Nations
decisions concerning the elimination of the remaining
colonial regimes, and that manifestations of racjsm and
upurrhsid called for universal condemnation and boycott.
180. The Soviet Union wholeheatedly supports the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the Security
Council concerning the problems of southern Africa and is
implementing them to the letter, What is required is that
these resolutions should be implemented by all States, that
they should be put in to effect and become a reality.
181. We agree with the view expressed by the esteemed
President of Mauritania, Mr. Moktar Ould Daddah, that the
time has come for the Security Council to go beyond
declarations and resolutions on the question of Namibia
and to adopt the effective measures cnvisagcd in the
Charter of the United Nations in order to make the racists
of Pretoria respect and implement the decisions of the
United Nations.
182. The Soviet Union proclaims its full solidarity with all
the African countries and peopfes of southern Africa in
their just struggle for freedom and independence, and is
actively participating in the United Nations in the discussion of problems relating to the struggle against colonialism and apartheid.
183. The USSR unwaveringly supports the legitimate
desire of the people of Namibia for independence, and
upholds all the basic decisions of the United Nations on the
question of-Namibia, in particular the General Assembly
and the Security Council resolutions recognizing the termination of South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia and
demanding that the South African Government withdraw
its administration from that country.
184. As has already been stated during the discussion of
the question in the Security Council, the Soviet Union
maintains no diplomatic, consular, economic, military or
other relations of any kind with South Africa and has no
economic or other interests in Namibia; no bilateral
agreements have been concluded between the Soviet Union
and South Afrjca.

178. As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, its consistent
policy in favour of the liberation of all peoples from
colonial rule and the total elimination of colonialism and
racism is common knowledge. It flows from the very nature
of socinhst s(.)c‘iety, from Marxist-Leninist ideology, which
is incompatible wit11 the exploitation of man by man and
discrimination by one nation against another, and conl-

185. The USSR is prepared, in concert with other countries, to bend its efforts towards seeking effective ways and
means of promoting the speedv achievement of freedom
and independence by the Namibian people.
16

to emwe PhuWa’s

”
1’
:,.
??:i’

ferpre&&n from $&I?&&): I
ta the Ambaswdors of France
v8ry kid references to me in
OW8 a@in thePr8Sid8IlCy Of
know that I am at their and
your ~isposd, md that 1 am most happy and honoured to
servethe Mty Inlcrests of our Orgmization.
188. Mr. PARAH (Somalia): The Afro-Asian members of
this Cauncil have drawn up a draft of a resah~tion which
could perhaps serve as a working paper. l’he Afro-/&an
members would like to cons& with other delegations upon
it so that we might, in the next two days or so, submit a
text that would command as wide support as possible. Also,
I would certainly wish, through you, Mr.President, to
invite delegations to consult with us on the draft and see
whether we can either strengthen it or modify it, or at least
be enabled SO to tailor it aa to make it commensurate with
the situation which we are facing.
189. While on this subject, I should Iike to say &at my
delegation was particularfy interested in th8 statement
made by the representative of France, ! hope that in the
course of this debate he will expand on what I consider to
be a very important facet, when he said that tber8 was “a

17

ftith witi. the U&cd Natiaas’for th6- cstabkhment of aim
intei+~ational dgime enabling’ the piwple oammqd fseely’ ‘1: : ‘I’.
to choose their de&$. /lib- pma 22 alwe4
‘) : ‘,
‘.,
1% I trust that the rt@miatiyd ofFI7Inc8will expand
an this proposel because, wblle eelfdetwnlnation~for t&
peoples of Namibia certtiy goes right to tba heart of the
matter, I should like to h+va his vbswson how he propow
‘.
to persuade South Africa to enablu the United Nations to :
create conditions tn Nanwa @I& that th8p8Ople thora can ‘.
not only exercise their right of se~detetination
but can
&iO 8XtXCiSCit ill 8CCOtdanCeWith th8 pl’W”isiOIls Of &?ad
AssembIy resolution 1514 orv),
191+ The PRESIDENT (hrpn?tatio?tfram’~nM):

The

representative of S+~alia has referred to a deft which is
being prepared and which is to be circulated shortly to the
members of the Couacil. In my capacity asPresident of the
Security Council I em at the disposal of members. 1 assume
that members wti wish to exchange vfews on this particuk

question.
192. I have been informed that the Mm m8ntiOIWd by
Mr. Nujoma and referEd to later by the Foreign b!inister of
Sierra Leone wifI be shown tomorrow in the Dag Hammarskjijld Auditorium at 3p.m., when we ar8 invited to be
present.
Y&e meetingroseat

Z.55p.n
