S/PV.7148

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7148th meeting

Wednesday, 26 March 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Lucas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Luxembourg)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Sierra Leone
Final report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (S/2014/192)

14-27719 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1427719*

S/PV.7148

The situation in Sierra Leone

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

UNIPSIL’s drawdown by 31 March, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 2097 (2013).

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone
Final report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone (S/2014/192)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Sierra Leone to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I extend a very warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Samura M.W. Kamara,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Republic of Sierra Leone.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jens Anders
Toyberg-Frandzen, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone, to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Guillermo Rishchynski, Chair of the Sierra Leone
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Canada,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/192, which contains the final report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone.
I now give the floor to Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen.
Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen: Let me begin by thanking
the Security Council for the opportunity to present the
final report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone (UNIPSIL), contained in document S/2014/192,
dated 17 March 2014. As members of the Council know,
the report before the Council takes stock of the overall
implementation of the mandate of UNIPSIL since its
establishment in 2008. It also presents an assessment
of the remaining challenges facing Sierra Leone after
2/21

26/03/2014

UNIPSIL is indeed in the final stages of its
drawdown and, as the Council is aware, the SecretaryGeneral marked the formal closure of the Mission on
5 March 2014 during his visit to Sierra Leone. As the
Council is also aware, the country has made remarkable
strides in post-conflict recovery, democratic transition
and peace consolidation. Indeed, the general atmosphere
of peace that now prevails is the culmination of more
than 15 years of successive Security Council-mandated
peace operations in the country. As the report indicates,
the progress achieved is attributable first and foremost
to the determination of the people and Government of
Sierra Leone to break with the past and work towards
a peaceful, democratic and prosperous nation. It is also
the result of a remarkable level of steady engagement
by the United Nations and international partners,
demonstrating that concerted international action can
yield positive results.
Though Sierra Leone is continuing on the right
path, it still faces a number of challenges linked to the
root causes of the war that require sustained attention
and support. Allow me to emphasize some of those key
remaining challenges, as outlined in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. They are, first, pervasive poverty
and unemployment, especially among young people;
secondly, endemic corruption; thirdly, upholding the
rule of law; and fourthly, the need for the authorities to
broaden the political space. The ongoing constitutional
review process and the implementation of the Agenda
for Prosperity are important opportunities in that
regard.
Addressing the remaining challenges will require
the joint efforts of all Sierra Leoneans to work together
and place the national interest above all other interests.
During the Secretary-General’s visit to Sierra Leone
earlier this month, it was heartening to hear all the
major political parties speaking with one voice in a joint
statement in which they committed to work towards a
peaceful future for Sierra Leone.
During its last year, UNIPSIL focused on its
remaining mandate, as outlined in resolution 2097
(2013) and the transfer of residual tasks to the United
Nations country team. In that regard, I am pleased
to note that the United Nations will continue to
provide support through the Peacebuilding Fund to
constitutional review, security sector reform, promotion
of human rights and conflict prevention. Just last week,
14-27719

26/03/2014

The situation in Sierra Leone

the Minister of Finance and I signed the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for 2015-2018,
which will serve as the United Nations strategy in
Sierra Leone in support of the Government’s Agenda
for Prosperity.
I believe that national authorities and institutions
are ready and willing to assume responsibility for their
country’s peacebuilding and development agenda.
Nevertheless, the continued assistance of Sierra Leone’s
international partners will remain critical. I urge Sierra
Leone’s development partners to remain engaged
and to consolidate the many investments made over
the years, including through support for the Agenda
for Prosperity and the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework.
Increasing State revenue will also be crucial. I
commend President Koroma for his zero-tolerance
approach to corruption; it is an important step towards
improving the business climate and attracting investors
with strong, responsible business practices.
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Djinnit and I have worked closely together over the
past month regarding the role of the United Nations
Office for West Africa in Sierra Leone after UNIPSIL’s
drawdown, including through the good offices of the
Secretary-General, as needed. I am pleased to hear that
the Peacebuilding Commission, with which I will be
meeting later today, intends to continue to monitor Sierra
Leone with a view towards engaging on an as-needed
basis. I would also like to underscore the importance of
the Security Council’s support for regional peace and
security efforts of the African Union, the Economic
Community of West Africa States and the Mano River
Union. The Council’s support for implementation of the
strategy for cross-border security in the Mano River
Union presents an opportunity in that regard.
In concluding, I would take this opportunity to
thank the people and Government of Sierra Leone,
in particular His Excellency President Ernest Bai
Koroma, for their support for the efforts of the United
Nations, including the seamless and timely completion
of UNIPSIL’s drawdown and exit. I would also like
to reiterate our appreciation to the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Fund and all bilateral
donors for the fruitful partnership for peacebuilding
in Sierra Leone. Finally, I thank the Council for its
commitment to success in Sierra Leone through the
United Nations peace operations during the past 15
years, and particularly during UNIPSIL’s mandate.

The President (spoke in French):
Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen for his briefing.

S/PV.7148

I

thank

I now give the floor to Ambassador Rishchynski.
Mr. Rishchynski: It is a great honour to brief the
Security Council on this occasion. The passage of Sierra
Leone from the Security Council’s formal agenda marks
the crossing of an important threshold. Sierra Leone is
making the transition from the special attention to postconflict countries to a more traditional development
footing. It has established political stability, restored
basic security, reinvigorated democratic processes,
built important national institutions and generated
economic growth. Those are tremendous achievements.
It is often said that there can be no peace without
justice. A pertinent development in Sierra Leone is
that, in partnership with the international community,
the country established a Special Court for Sierra
Leone to bring to justice the perpetrators of horrific
crimes committed during their war. The Special Court
can take pride in both that contribution and in setting
a number of firsts, such as the first conviction of a
former Head of State since Nuremberg, Charles Taylor.
The Special Court set precedents concerning attacks on
United Nations peacekeepers, child soldiers and forced
marriage, and it was the first international tribunal to
successfully conclude its mandate. The Special Court
was a true partnership between Sierra Leone, the
United Nations and Member States, with great credit
due to its judges and staff, the Management Committee
and, most importantly, the Government and people of
Sierra Leone.
(spoke in French)
In addition to this progress, it is also worth noting
the speed with which Sierra Leone managed this
transformation. Fourteen years ago, the country hosted
the world’s largest peacekeeping mission. At a time
when much policy attention is focused on managing
periods of transition, Sierra Leone stands as an example
of what it is possible to accomplish with successively
smaller peace operations successfully giving way to an
integrated peacebuilding office and a United Nations
country team led by a resident coordinator. More
broadly, Sierra Leone is a success story built on steady
progress, able support from the United Nations system
as a whole, committed bilateral assistance and, above
all, the dedication of Sierra Leoneans.
While the withdrawal of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone

14-277193/21

S/PV.7148

The situation in Sierra Leone

26/03/2014

(UNIPSIL) should be properly celebrated, it should
also not be mistaken for an end point. Despite such
significant progress, a number of problems remain.
The root causes of the original conflict cannot be fully
addressed in little more than a decade. Corruption
requires continued attention, and youth unemployment
remains high. Security and justice sector institutions
will require sustained capacity-building, especially if
they are to retain the public trust. Surging investment
in natural resources and challenges associated with
managing land tenure hold potential for conflict at
the communal level. As time passes, we hope that
Sierra Leoneans will also be able increasingly to
expect concrete improvements in health, education,
employment, and infrastructure. We commend the
Government of Sierra Leone for having identified these
various challenges in its Agenda for Prosperity and for
taking steps to address them.

(spoke in French)

(spoke in English)

Sierra Leone has shown us all that recovery from war
is possible. In the process, it has also proved again that
the United Nations can tackle complex peacebuilding
challenges and see them through to completion. It has
demonstrated that investment in peace on the part of
international partners can reap significant dividends,
as best expressed by Sierra Leone’s transformation
from a recipient of peacekeeping support 15 years ago
to a valued troop-contributing country today. Most
importantly, at a time when the international community
is faced with a series of terrible crises that afflict us all,
Sierra Leone shows that a society determined to build a
better future can indeed succeed. We should celebrate
that development.

At the same time, recognizing these realities
highlights the need for sustained support. Too often,
the international community has failed to adequately
persevere for the full duration of peace consolidation
efforts. I am very pleased to report that initial indications
in Sierra Leone are very positive. Bilateral donors have
remained steadfast in their commitments and some are
increasing their funding. The United Nations country
team is prepared to absorb key residual responsibilities
from UNIPSIL, particularly in the key areas of conflict
prevention and security sector reform, thanks in part
to the Peacebuilding Fund. United Nations technical
assistance is also being provided for the constitutional
review process, which represents a tremendous
opportunity to strengthen democracy, enshrine human
rights, address women’s rights, reform land tenure, and
consider natural resource management. As with all
such processes, the constitutional review also holds the
potential to generate political tensions if not managed
carefully.
For its part, the engagement of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) with Sierra Leone will continue
over the course of the coming year, albeit in a
significantly scaled-down form. When we returned
from our most recent visit to Freetown in late February,
impressed by the level of consensus on this point, the
Government of Sierra Leone, national stakeholders,
diplomatic partners, and the United Nations country
team all expressed the utility of the PBC’s political
accompaniment.

4/21

Its future role will be lighter than it is now, with
the emphasis on serving as an advocate with the
international community and responding to needs as
they arise by mobilizing international attention. As
Chair, I plan to maintain close communication with the
Government, its international partners and the United
Nations country team. Coordination among a smaller
steering group of particularly interested Member States
will allow for a more adaptive approach and a reduction
in the number of formal configuration meetings.
Recognizing that this new role is precedent-setting for
the Commission, I also intend to conduct a light stocktaking exercise in approximately one year with a view
to Sierra Leone’s exit from the Commission’s agenda, if
appropriate at that time.
(spoke in English)

The President (spoke in
Mr. Rishchynski for his briefing.

French):

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
should like to welcome Foreign Minister Kamara
to the Security Council this morning. I also thank
Executive Representative Jens Toyberg-Frandzen and
Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski for their briefings.
I pay particular tribute to Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen for
his personal contribution over the past two and a half
years to the work of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL).
The United Kingdom welcomes the presidential
statement to be adopted later this morning on the
completion of the UNIPSIL mandate. Today marks

14-27719

26/03/2014

The situation in Sierra Leone

a watershed in the history of Sierra Leone and is a
moment of celebration for the people of Sierra Leone,
the United Nations and the Security Council. Today, I
will reflect on three points: Sierra Leone’s success, the
work ahead to consolidate peace, and the key lessons
we can learn from Sierra Leone as we address conflicts
elsewhere in Africa and around the world.
First, with respect to Sierra Leone’s success,
since Sierra Leone came on to the Security Council
agenda 15 years ago it has undergone a remarkable
transformation from civil war to landmark presidential
elections in November 2012. Today is another milestone
in Sierra Leone’s journey from fragile State to a country
that now supports conflict-resolution efforts around
Africa. In 2002, Sierra Leone hosted the world’s largest
peacekeeping mission in the aftermath of a brutal
war. In 2014, Sierra Leone contributes its own troops
to other peacekeeping missions in Africa, helping to
provide stability in countries such as Somalia and Mali.
The United Nations played a central role in helping
Sierra Leone to recover from its devastating civil war.
Effective, tailored and well-planned United Nations
peacebuilding interventions can improve people’s
lives. The United Kingdom welcomes the closure of the
United Nations peacebuilding mission in Sierra Leone,
and I commend the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jens Toyberg-Frandzen, and all
other UNIPSIL staff for their dedicated work in Sierra
Leone. I also welcome David McLachlan-Karr as the
new United Nations Resident Coordinator.
Second is the work ahead in Sierra Leone. While
today we celebrate the departure of UNIPSIL, we
must remember the long road ahead for Sierra Leone
as it seeks to become a middle-income country. As the
Secretary-General recognized during his visit earlier
this month, there is still much to be done if we are
to consolidate the gains of the past decade. President
Koroma’s ambitious five-year development plan, the
Agenda for Prosperity, sets out the development and
social tasks ahead. Tackling corruption will be essential
to attracting investment and insuring that economic
growth benefits all citizens.
The recently agreed mutual accountability
framework will underpin the Agenda for Prosperity
by bringing together the Government of Sierra Leone
and donor partners. The United Nations, the United
Kingdom and other members of the international
community will continue to work with the Government
of Sierra Leone. In that regard, we are delighted that

S/PV.7148

Sierra Leone will be one of seven new markets to
receive United Kingdom Department of Trade and
Industry resources.
Finally, I would like to touch on the lessons we can
learn from Sierra Leone.
Sierra Leone’s experience teaches us that it is
possible to build peace in the aftermath of brutal conflict
and that the United Nations can play a central role in that
process. Strong national ownership of peacebuilding
processes and a focus on building national institutions
are essential to securing sustainable peace. Political
will is required at both the national and international
levels. Political engagement from the international
community, such as through the Security Council,
is needed to provide checks and balances to national
decisions. The different instruments of the United
Nations must work in a complementary fashion, such
as between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission. If we are to replicate the success of Sierra
Leone, we must take those lessons and apply them to
our discussions elsewhere in Africa and beyond, while
drawing on the experiences and reflections of our
colleagues and friends from Sierra Leone.
In conclusion, I would like to extend the United
Kingdom’s best wishes to the Government and the
people of Sierra Leone and to the new United Nations
country team in their work in the years to come.
The United Kingdom will continue to be one of the
country’s closest friends. We look forward to many
years of fruitful partnership ahead.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Security Council’s guest today,
Mr. Samura M.W. Kamara, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of the Republic of Sierra
Leone, has convincingly shown that today marks a
genuine milestone for his country. With the work of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) drawing to a close in less than
a week, the long-time presence of the United Nations
in the country will also come to an end. The country is
closing a chapter and moving beyond its past.
We note the success achieved in Sierra Leone in the
areas of peacebuilding and post-conflict stabilization.
Of course, the international community played an
important role in that regard, mainly the United
Nations and the Security Council. Comprehensive and
coordinated and agreed upon efforts were undertaken.
The experience gained in Sierra Leone will be useful

14-277195/21

S/PV.7148

The situation in Sierra Leone

in finding long-term, lasting solutions to other conflict
situations.
However, regardless of its scope, no outside support
or assistance can alone achieve significant results
without the active efforts of the people of a country and
their Government, including their aspirations for peace
and prosperity. The principle of national ownership has
become a guarantee of progress at all peacebuilding
stages — the people of Sierra Leone themselves
choosing priorities in that regard.
Today there is a multifaceted political progress
taking place in the country in the context of various laws.
The economy is growing steadily. There are political
parties and civic organizations. And there exists a civil
society and media. Tangible efforts are being made
to ensure and uphold human rights. It is of the utmost
importance that the country maintain stability and
security. In addition, new tasks have emerged today, in
particular in the social and economic areas. All of those
positive strides should be strengthened and scaled up.
Of course, as with any other country, Sierra Leone
has its problems. Some of those have been described in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/192) before
us today. We support the active intention of the country
to resolve those issues in a timely manner.
In conclusion, we would like to express our
gratitude to all UNIPSIL staff, as well as to Mr. Jens
Toyberg-Frandzen personally for all his efforts.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to begin by welcoming Mr. Samura M.W. Kamara,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Republic of Sierra Leone. I also thank
Mr. Jens Toyberg-Frandzen, Executive Representative
of the Secretary-General, as well Mr. Guillermo
Rishchynski, Chair of the Sierra Leone configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission.
As the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL)
comes to an end, I would like to express my gratitude to
all the staff of the Office, both local and international,
including the staff of the United Nations country team,
for their contribution in establishing security and
stability and supporting peacebuilding efforts in Sierra
Leone.
No one can deny that the positive turn of events in
Sierra Leone in recent years would not have taken place
without the determination of the country’s people,

6/21

26/03/2014

whatever their ethnic or political affiliations, to build
their State, strengthen their economy, address all the
repercussions of the civil war, aspire to a hopeful future
and strengthen and develop their region. In that regard,
we note that such determination was supported by the
efforts of the United Nations at the highest levels to
complement the work of UNIPSIL and the country
team, both in the capital and in field offices. That made
it possible to secure many achievements — in strategic
planning, for example — as well as in the areas of
implemenation and financing. Moreover, we would like
to pay tribute to the crucial role of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone in providing criminal justice as part of
ensuring peace in the country.
The closing of UNIPSIL in no way means the
end of United Nations commitment in Sierrra Leone.
On the contrary, this is a key moment in transferring
certain functions to the country team following the
very successful conclusion of the work of the Office.
Dialogue will now be the means for resolving conflicts,
and elections will also be held. The participation of
women and young people in Government institutions
will be very important. There will be reform of the
security sector, in particular to address corruption and
drug trafficking. And there will also be strengthening
of human rights. All those are very important
achievements.
We believe that the Government of Sierra Leone’s
assumption of political, economic and security
responsibilities is an essential pillar in ensuring
lasting stability. Moreover, working on the basis of the
principles of good governance, justice and an equitable
distribution of the dividends of economic development
will strengthen the credibility of the Government and
boost national unity, thereby decreasing the likelihood
of conflict among the parties to the extent that economic
development and the fair distribution of development
benefits constitute the primary basis for political and
security stability.
With regard to recent investment in the sound
performance of the economy of Sierra Leone, we
would encourage the Government to continue to make
progress in that direction, with the cooperation of the
international community, by implementing the Agenda
for Prosperity for the period 2013 to 2018, improving
financial stability, reforming the monetary system and
improving the system for the management of public
assets.

14-27719

26/03/2014

The situation in Sierra Leone

In conclusion, although we are aware of the
challenges, we remain optimistic about the future
of Sierra Leone. We have full trust in the future of
the country, thanks to the efforts of the people and
the determination of the Government to face those
challenges and to continue to achieve progress in
various areas. We also think that the work of UNIPSIL
should be documented so that the lessons learned can
be adopted by other missions in the field.
Ms. King (Australia): I would like to welcome
to the Security Council His Excellency Mr. Samura
Kamara, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Republic of Sierra Leone. I would
also like to thank Executive Representative Jens Anders
Toyberg-Frandzen for his briefing and his work and for
that of the entire team of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Mission in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL).
I also thank Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski for
his leadership of the Sierra Leone country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
and for his detailed briefing this morning on the
ongoing work of the PBC.
The closure of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone, in five days’ time,
will mark an important transition for both Sierra Leone
and for the United Nations system. Sierra Leone has
made extraordinary progress since the end of the civil
war in consolidating peace and democracy. As Sierra
Leone’s focus turns now from consolidating peace to
spurring economic development, it is appropriate that
we acknowledge achievements and look at challenges
ahead.
After more than 15 years of successive United
Nations peace operations, Sierra Leone now has
stronger institutions, an entrenched democratic culture
with regular elections and a vigorous civil society.
It is actively fighting corruption and strengthening
accountability. It is a successful model of how postconflict countries can address transitional justice in a
way that holds perpetrators of past crimes to account,
while promoting national reconciliation. Australia
commends the people and the Government of Sierra
Leone for that remarkable progress.
UNIPSIL has been central to that success. As the
Secretary-General’s final report (S/2014/192) makes
clear, by integrating its political mandate together
with the development and humanitarian mandates of
United Nations agencies, UNIPSIL was instrumental
to United Nations system efforts in Sierra Leone to

S/PV.7148

deliver as one. It continuously led efforts to promote
political dialogue, manage electoral-related disputes
and strengthen the vital role of civil society. And it
provided crucial support to strengthen the capacity
and independence of key institutions, including the
National Human Rights Commission of Sierra Leone,
the Political Parties Registration Commission and the
Anti-Corruption Commission.
Australia welcomes the withdrawal of UNIPSIL
as a good model for the conclusion of a successful
United Nations peacebuilding mission. Executive
Representative Toyberg-Frandzen’s strong leadership
of the mission during this critical time has contributed
to a seamless transition. We would encourage the
Secretariat to draw on the lessons that have been
gleaned from the transition process to consider how
they could and should be applied elsewhere.
None of that, however, is to underestimate
the challenges that lie ahead. The constitutional
review process holds great potential for reducing
political polarization in Sierra Leone and fostering a
culture of political inclusivity. Corruption and youth
unemployment will remain major challenges for
the Government, as will addressing trans-national
threats such as drug trafficking and maritime piracy.
Continuing to strengthen Sierra Leone’s institutions,
particularly the security sector and the judiciary, will
be important in tackling those challenges.
We are particularly encouraged by the development
and recent launch of a security sector reform programme,
with support from United Nations Development
Programme and the Peacebuilding Fund, to assist in
strengthening the police and other institutions. While
the Sierra Leone police have come a long way over the
past 12 years, a number of challenges remain, including
accountability, governance, oversight and corruption.
As investment in Sierra Leone’s extractive
industries increases, it will also be important to
strengthen transparency and accountability in the
natural resources sector and to establish robust
dispute-resolution mechanisms. Then Sierra Leone can
ensure that all its people benefit from the boom and the
dividends of peace.
The withdrawal of UNIPSIL does not mean that
Sierra Leone is alone in addressing those challenges.
The United Nations country team continues to impress,
with its high level of integration and the seamless
manner in which its agencies took over responsibility

14-277197/21

S/PV.7148

The situation in Sierra Leone

for many of UNIPSIL’s residual functions. The PBC
will continue to be engaged in supporting the United
Nations transition process. We fully support the Sierra
Leone configuration’s proposed modalities for a lighter
and more responsive approach.
Other countries in West Africa share many
of Sierra Leone’s challenges, therefore increased
cooperation with them will be essential for Sierra
Leone to tackle common threats. Australia sees great
potential in a reinvigorated Mano River Union, which is
strengthening subregional security, including through
the establishment of cross-border security units along
the common borders of its members. Similarly, the
efforts of the Economic Community of West African
States to address maritime piracy, which threatens
regional prosperity, would be important for all the
countries of the region. It will also be important for the
United Nations Office for West Africa to continue to
provide good offices and a preventive diplomacy role
following UNIPSIL’s departure.
In conclusion, I echo Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen’s
comment that Sierra Leone’s remarkable progress is
due first and foremost to the determination of its people
to forge a clear path to peace. But UNIPSIL, and the
United Nations more broadly, has been its absolutely
steadfast partner, and the results of that partnership are
now clear for all to see. We wish the people of Sierra
Leone every success for their future.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I thank Executive Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Toyberg-Frandzen for his briefing on the
situation in Sierra Leone and for his work on bringing
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Mission
in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) to a successful close and
in driving the smooth transfer of UNIPSIL’s remaining
responsibilities to the United Nations country team. We
would also like to express our gratitude to Ambassador
Rishchynski, Chair of the Sierra Leone country-specific
configuration Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
for his efforts to spearhead the PBC’s work in Sierra
Leone. We also welcome Foreign Minister Kamara to
the Security Council today.
With the grisly images of the war that ravaged Sierra
Leone still seared in our memories, today’s meeting is
all the more remarkable. While many in Sierra Leone
lost so much, we have witnessed how the victims of the
war never lost the strength to rebuild their country. We
are in the Council today to mark the official closure
of UNIPSIL because of its determined work and
8/21

26/03/2014

the helping hand offered by the United Nations and
international community to Sierra Leone. This has not
been an easy journey, and we commend Sierra Leone
for the distance it has travelled.
Not only does the situation in Sierra Leone
offer other nations embroiled in conflict a concrete
example of how to rebuild from the most devastating
of circumstances, it also offers the international
community a promising example of the valuable role
the United Nations can play in helping a country work
through civil war and post-war crises. We remember
not long ago when 15,000 peacekeepers were deployed
to Sierra Leone to maintain a shaky peace. United
Nations peacekeepers, humanitarian and development
experts all deserve our praise for helping to foster the
peaceful conditions that Sierra Leone enjoys today.
Today, seeing Sierra Leone as a troop contributor, we
know we have witnessed a great turnaround.
Sierra Leone and the United Nations must be
commended for their collective and collaborative
successes. The Special Court for Sierra Leone, which the
United Nations established, has fostered reconciliation
by bringing the worst perpetrators of that terrible war to
justice, including Charles Taylor. Sierra Leone also did
the hard and slow work of rebuilding its Government
with UNIPSIL’s help. We encourage Sierra Leone to
continue strengthening Government institutions.
We also encourage the Government to continue to
seek guidance and support from the United Nations
country team, focusing especially on much-needed
economic development. Unemployed, uneducated
youth leave a country vulnerable to unrest, as Sierra
Leone learned all too well. Jobs and economic growth
are key ingredients to keeping the hopes of the next
generation alive. Ranked at the bottom of the Human
Development Index just two years ago, Sierra Leone
has already climbed 10 places, and we have every
expectation that this trajectory will continue. The
international community must continue to support that
growth as well.
Sierra Leone is a model post-conflict country,
but we know that tensions remain and the underlying
causes of war have not been fully addressed. The
ongoing constitutional review process should be used
to reconcile those underlying tensions. We encourage
Sierra Leone to broach that effort cautiously and
inclusively in order to ensure that all Sierra Leoneans
have a voice in the process.

14-27719

26/03/2014

The situation in Sierra Leone

Despite the many successes of the Anti-Corruption
Commission and its transnational organized crime
unit, corruption in Sierra Leone remains a deeply
rooted problem that compromises citizens’ access to
basic public services and institutions such as health,
education and the police. Unfortunately, the public
views the judiciary as one of the most corrupt sectors.
The rule of law and public trust in the fairness of
courts are essential to preserving peace. We strongly
encourage Sierra Leone to redouble its efforts to
improve the judicial sector to preserve the progress it
has made.
Sierra Leoneans will not face those challenges
alone. The international community remains invested
in peace and stability in Sierra Leone and will continue
to offer assistance. The United States, for example,
is launching a new $2.5 million, 18-month pilot
programme in the region that will address corruption
and transnational crime, most notably in Sierra Leone.
Finally, we support the recommendation made
by the Chair of the Sierra Leone configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission that Sierra Leone’s PBC
configuration evolve to a lighter role over the coming
year, as suits the situation in-country. We also support
Ambassador Rishchynski’s suggestion that we review
the PBC’s role in 2015, with a view to further refining
and possibly drawing down the PBC in Sierra Leone.
That potential drawdown should be carefully planned
based on the situation on the ground, and considered
when the time is right and sustainable peace is firmly
in place.

S/PV.7148

Leone will continue to implement, in a comprehensive
manner, its agenda for prosperity, steadily advance
in its constitutional review process, defuse political
tensions, eradicate the root causes of political tension
and conflict and consolidate the achievements of its
peacebuilding efforts so that all the people of Sierra
Leone will be able to enjoy the dividends of peace and
development.
Since its inception, in 2008, the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL) has maintained close engagement and
cooperation with the Government of Sierra Leone and
has played a positive role in, and made an important
contribution to, defusing tension and potential conflicts,
maintaining overall peace and stability and supporting
the reconstruction and development of Sierra Leone.
China highly appreciates the work of Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General ToybergFrandzen, his predecessor and his entire team.
UNIPSIL’s mandate will come to an end by the
end of the month. This not only marks the successful
completion of the transition from conflict to peace in
Sierra Leone, but has also established a good model
for the United Nations in helping other countries
in post-conflict situations to achieve lasting peace
and development. Its successful practices should be
compiled and promoted.

Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen, Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Ambassador Rishchynski for their briefings. I also
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra
Leone to our meeting today.

The success of the United Nations experiences
in Sierra Leone indicates that, in conducting its
peacebuilding activities, the United Nations should
give top priority to the ownership and leadership of the
countries concerned, fully respect their sovereignty
and aspirations, provide assistance in priority areas
identified by the Governments concerned and help in
the development of a comprehensive peacebuilding
strategy, taking into consideration the situation on the
ground.

Currently, the overall security situation in Sierra
Leone is stable. Its economy has developed quite
quickly, and various social spheres have seen significant
progress.

Secondly, the United Nations should help the
countries concerned to accelerate economic and social
development and improve their peoples’ lives by
addressing the root causes of the conflict.

China congratulates Sierra Leone on its positive
achievements in its peaceful reconstruction. China
appreciates the tireless efforts made by the Government
of Sierra Leone in consolidating peace, promoting
development, strengthening Government-building
and facilitating social progress with the support of
the international community. China hopes that Sierra

Thirdly, the Organization must assist the countries
concerned in capacity-building in various fields and
develop their capabilities in a sustainable manner so
as to establish a solid foundation and guarantee for
achieving lasting peace and development.
A new page has been turned in Sierra Leone’s
history. The country is embarking upon the road

14-277199/21

S/PV.7148

The situation in Sierra Leone

to lasting peace, stability and social and economic
development and prosperity. However, Sierra Leone
still faces many difficulties and challenges in terms
of eradicating poverty, strengthening governance and
promoting youth employment. It will continue to need
the support and assistance of the United Nations and
the international community.
It is our hope that the international community,
in the context of the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework, will provide financial support
to Sierra Leone in advancing its development in various
areas so that the country can achieve comprehensive
development. China is ready to join hands with the
international community and make its own positive
contribution for an early realization of lasting peace
and development in Sierra Leone.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): We welcome Foreign
Minister Samura Kamara. We are glad to have him in
our midst today. I would like to take the opportunity
of his presence among us to convey our very heartfelt
condolences on the passing of the former President of
Sierra Leone, Alhaji Ahmad Tejan Kabbah. We join the
Government and people of Sierra Leone in paying our
respects to his memory.
I want to thank Executive Representative of
the Secretary-General Toyberg-Frandzen on his
comprehensive briefing on the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL). The Chair of the Sierra Leone configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), our colleague
Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski, deserves our
greatest appreciation for the passion, commitment and
remarkable dedication with which he has approached
his task. Indeed, he is part of this success story.
We commend the Government and people of Sierra
Leone for their purposeful collaboration with UNIPSIL,
which has culminated in discernable progress towards
peace, stability and long-term development. Today, as
speakers before me have noted, Sierra Leone represents
one of the success stories of post-conflict recovery,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Three elements have emerged as the drivers
of the success that we all applaud today in Sierra
Leone’s transformation: political dialogue towards a
constitutional review process and national inclusiveness,
security sector support and the strengthening of human
rights institutions. Those will constitute the focus of
my comments.

10/21

26/03/2014

First, the close collaboration among the
Government, civil society and non-State actors towards
developing solutions to common challenges provides
considerable inspiration and, indeed, a good foundation.
That was particularly evident in the dialogue held
during the constitutional review process. Such efforts
promote understanding, political participation and
capacity-building for governance institutions and are a
clear sign of the country’s democratic progress. More
significantly, they laid the foundations for the holding
of peaceful and credible elections, which represent a
milestone in the political history of Sierra Leone.
The security reforms that have taken place in the
country during the transition are crucial. We note
specifically the establishment of the transnational
organized crime unit and other regional initiatives, in
conjunction with UNIPSIL, for combating national and
transnational crime. We encourage the strengthening
of such initiatives through the development of national
institutions and capacity-building of the security
agencies. That is even more pertinent as UNIPSIL
hands over its functions to the State authorities later
this year.
As UNIPSIL winds up its activities, it is important
to highlight the efforts of the National Human Rights
Commission in establishing a framework that promotes
accountability. Such mechanisms have contributed
immeasurably to the creation of a relatively conducive
environment for the protection of vulnerable members
of society. In the same vein, we welcome the hybrid
mechanism of utilizing the courts and the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission in fighting impunity. The
most visible fruits of that effort are the considerable
lessons that serve to address the issue of transitional
justice.
As other speakers before me have aptly noted,
reconciliation is indeed possible after a protracted and
bitter conflict. We applaud the steady and remarkable
recovery of civilians from the socioeconomic collapse.
We acknowledge the steadfastness of donors and
international development partners, which have served
as pillars of support. The onus is now on the authorities
of Sierra Leone to consolidate those gains and to
reinforce them by encouraging investment and the
development of opportunities in the country.
We are indeed pleased to support the draft
presidential statement to be adopted at the end of the
meeting. It not only speaks to the remarkable recovery

14-27719

26/03/2014

The situation in Sierra Leone

of Sierra Leone but also is an eloquent testimony to the
remarkable achievements of UNIPSIL. For that, we
remain greatly indebted to Executive Representative of
the Secretary-General Toyberg-Frandzen and his staff
for their commitment and dedication in the success
story of Sierra Leone today.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Mr. Jens Anders Toyberg-Frandzen, Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski, Chair of the
Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their presentations to the Council and
for their efforts and concern. We welcome the presence
of Mr. Samura Kamara, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Sierra Leone.
Sierra Leone has almost become a successful
pioneer in multilateralism. It has brought together the
will of a people and its authorities in order to build
a unified society in peace through the cooperation
and assistance of various regional and subregional
actors and the United Nations system, in particualr
the Peacebuilding Commission. A common strategic
vision identified the priority areas for assistance,
which, together with international cooperation, made
it possible to build national capacity and enabled the
people of Sierra Leone again to find the path of peace
and development. UNIPSIL leaves Sierra Leone with
the satisfaction of having accomplished its mandate and
in the hope that the lessons learned and good practices
can be of benefit to other situations under the Council’s
consideration.
A crucial stage has come to an end. However, the
task is not complete. Sierra Leone still faces challenges
and outstanding issues to resolve. In order to cooperate
with the authorities in such areas, Sierra Leone will
continue to enjoy the support of the United Nations
country team. In particular, the timetable outlined
for constitutional reform, security sector reform, the
conflict-prevention and human rights and rule of law
programmes and the implementation of the property
schedule must be maintained. Likewise, we must
continue to address the issues of poverty, corruption
and accountability. Such efforts must be completed so
that what has so painstakingly been achieved becomes
irreversible. The international financial institutions
and the international community will be a fundamental
pillar of this new stage.
I would like to conclude by thanking all the staff
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office

S/PV.7148

in Sierra Leone and of United Nations funds and
programmes, as well as regional and international
actors, for their dedication and work. We truly
congratulate the people and Government of Sierra
Leone on their readiness for and commitment to peace
and development. My country welcomes the draft
presidential statement to be adopted at the end of the
meeting.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me first to thank Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen, Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
presentation. I also commend the intervention of
Mr. Guillermo Rishchynski, Chair of the Sierra Leone
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). I of course welcome the presence among us
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Sierra Leone. On behalf of France,
I would like to welcome this historic time for Sierra
Leone. I would like to focus on three aspects of the
situation in the country.
Since the signing of the comprehensive peace
agreement in 2002, Sierra Leone has followed an
exemplary path. The closing of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL) is the happy conclusion of 15 years’ of
United Nations activity in that country. Such success is
of course primarily that of the people of Sierra Leone
themelves, whose resilience and determination to
rebuild their country after the crisis must be admired.
It is also an example of the successful role of the United
Nations in the stabilization.
Since that time, the country has undergone three
peaceful elections. The political situation is stable.
Economic growth should continue thanks to the
Government’s readiness to improve the business
climate and to encourage key investments. Sierra Leone
has therefore made significant progress on all fronts.
The United Nations has contributed to that positive
development by supporting the Sierra Leone authorities
at every stage. I would like to commend the successful
and steady management of the transition thanks, in
particular, to the remarkable work of the United Nations
team under the coordination of Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen.
Lessons should be drawn from that success. Where
possible, the United Nations should leave a clear path
for the country to take full control of its destiny.
However. as we know, Sierra Leone stil faces
challenges. The constitutional reform under way is a
historic step in dealing with the root causes of conflict

14-2771911/21

S/PV.7148

The situation in Sierra Leone

in the country. The efforts of President Koroma to
promote political dialogue should come to fruition.
All sectors of society should talk and work together.
The general elections of 2017 and 2018 will be a true
test of democracy, and we will watch their smooth
development carefully. The management of national
resources could, unfortunately, be a source of communal
conflict. Fighting corruption should therefore continue
to be a priority for the Government. The United Nations
country team should bear that in mind.
Finally, the closure of UNIPSIL does not stop the
international community from carefully following
the Sierra Leone’s development in the years to come.
In that regard, I am pleased to welcome the draft
presidential statement that we will be adopting shortly.
The Security Council calls for the international
community to maintain its commitment over the long
term to the consolidation of peace and development in
Sierra Leone.
The European Union is engaged in the country, as
are the United Nations Development ProgramSAme,
UNICEF, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the World Health Organization, among
others. I would also like to note that the PBC is
proposing a continuation of its work in Sierra Leone to
a lesser degree. It can therefore support the Agenda for
Prosperity promoted by the authorities of Sierra Leone.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to welcome the presence of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone,
Mr. Kamara, and Mr. Jens Anders Toyberg-Frandzen,
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General for
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL). We are also grateful for the
briefing by the Chair of the Sierra Leone configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador
Guillermo Rishchynski.
Sierra Leone is a clear example of the fact that
human beings and communities are not condemned to
failure and that it is always possible to pick oneself up
from the worst tragedies and most difficult situations,
such as civil war, which for 10 years led to deaths, the
displacement of hundreds of thousands of persons and
refugees, and the deploymen of 17,000 United Nations
peacekeeping troops in that country. Clearly this did
not come about by pure magic. What has happened has
come about because of the resolve and perseverance of
the people of Sierra Leone and the cooperation of the
United Nations and the countries of the region.
12/21

26/03/2014

That is why today, as we close the door on a very
sensitive and painful stage in the development of the
country, characterized by recurring human rights
violations and a serious humanitarian situation in which
pain and suffering became routine, a promising horizon
is emerging in Sierra Leone. Of course, there will be
difficulties; we all have them. But at the same time,
they will be peacefully addressed and resolved because
Sierra Leone has managed to rebuild the rule of law. It
has a Constitution and democratic institutions. It has
been able to achieve peace within its borders, and it
enjoys an extremely promising economic situation with
a predicted growth rate for 2014 of 14 per cent of the
gross domestic product.
Its political leaders and its society are clearly aware
that economic growth alone will not be sufficient, but
that the best ideas and innovative practices must be
implemented in order to guarantee a more inclusive, free
and egalitarian society. Without a doubt, the situation
has turned around and we hope that the Government
of President Koroma and whoever follows him will
continue along that path, which begins with the closure
of UNIPSIL.
We know that the challenges have to be dealt with
in a timely and responsible manner in order to move
forward. In that respect, efforts must be multiplied to
overcome problems related to corruption, an evil that
remains to be overcome with political decisiveness
and efficient mechanisms to ensure transparency,
accountability and the active control of society. That is
essential in order to ensure that the people are once again
able to trust their democratic Government institutions.
In that regard, we welcome the recent announcement
of the Government of Sierra Leone of its intention
to strengthen the Anti-Corruption Commission. We
know that corruption endangers fundamental rights,
exacerbates marginalization, perpetuates poverty and
affects the most vulnerable groups.
The people and Government of Sierra Leone know
that they must continue to fight the deep-seated causes
that led to internal fighting and civil war for so many
years. In that regard, the support of the international
community and the cooperation of the United Nations,
working shoulder to shoulder with the Government
and people of Sierra Leone to help them to meet their
national goals, are indispensable. Due attention should
be paid and particular focus given to the monitoring
and promotion of respect for human rights and the
rule of law, the fight against poverty and inequality,

14-27719

26/03/2014

The situation in Sierra Leone

implementing the corresponding reforms to ensure
good governance, the eradication of corruption,
support for the work of the Peacebuilding Commission,
and inclusive dialogue between the political parties
and various social partners. Those are key in order to
consolidate the achievements made.
It is very encouraging to know that, according
to the report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/192),
70 per cent of the 1,800 cases that were submitted to
the Human Rights Commission of Sierra Leone for
consideration since it was established seven years ago
have been resolved. The law on human rights that has
been passed with the aim of ensuring the equality of
women and gender equality, preventing, eradicating and
punishing violence against women, and strengthening
their political participation, in addition to other laws
that the Parliament has approved with regard to the
rights of the child and persons with disabilities, are also
encouraging.
We know that the Government will and must
continue along the path of ensuring the rule of law,
strengthening security institutions and taking measures,
as other colleagues have said, to resolve the high level of
youth unemployment. Sustained economic growth, the
proper use of natural resources and the establishment
of conditions conducive to investment will undoubtedly
lead to the creation of decent jobs and reducing poverty,
improvements in health and education, and inclusive
conditions for the people of Sierra Leone. We know that
those are Sierra Leone’s challenges, but they are also
challenges in our own countries and as members of the
international community.
In conclusion, we believe that it is critical that the
ongoing distrust among the most important political
parties be overcome. While we recognize that the
electoral cycles are coming to an end, we welcome the
initiative of President Koroma to meet with the leaders
of the political parties that are legally registered.
We celebrate the successful handing over of power
from UNIPSIL to the United Nations country team,
according to the plan established for the transition.
In conclusion, I wish to mark this noteworthy and
exemplary moment. It reflects a key part of the success
of the mission. The capacity that has been developed
by UNIPSIL to break the vicious cycle fear in society
and uncertainty among people that we have seen when
most mandates of United Nations missions come to an
end is praiseworthy. I wish to emphatically recognize

S/PV.7148

how UNIPSIL approached the issue of finding work for
local staff so as to ensure that it was able to ensure jobs
for half of its local staff.
We again thank the United Nations country team
for its assistance to the Government in very different
areas. We agree with the Secretary-General that the
assistance of international partners is still needed,
and we reiterate his call to shore up the funding for
the poverty-reduction strategy in Sierra Leone, the
Agenda for Prosperity for 2013-2018. Congratulations
are also in order for the work that has been carried out
by the Peacebuilding Commission and for Executive
Representative Toyberg-Frandzen.
We fully endorse the draft presidential statement
before us.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Jens Anders Toyberg-Frandzen,
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General for
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone, and Mr. Guillermo Rishchynski, Chair
of the Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their statements.
I would like to welcome Mr. Samura M.W. Kamara,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Republic of Sierra Leone.
With resolution 2097 (2013), the Security Council
extended the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL)
to 31 March 2014 so as to assist the Government in
bringing to completion the efforts undertaken since its
establishment on 4 August, 2008. During that time, we
have observed positive progress overall, with a generally
satisfactory situation, as underscored in the reports of
the Executive Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the mission and of leaders of the various
United Nations agencies on the ground.
Throughout
its
mandate,
UNIPSIL
has
continuously worked to promote national dialogue
and the freedom of the press, to strengthen the
capacities of parliamentarians, and to implement the
recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission. One of the most outstanding results
was the holding of peaceful and credible elections in
2012, for the first time in Sierra Leone. As a result
of that positive development, on 21 October 2013 the
International Monetary Fund approved the new 20132016 economic and financial plan for Sierra Leone.

14-2771913/21

S/PV.7148

The situation in Sierra Leone

26/03/2014

With the sense that UNIPSIL’s work has concluded,
the process of drawing down begins by addressing
pending tasks. Its closure will mark the end of more than
15 years of a United Nations peacekeeping operation
in Sierra Leone. The broad success of the mission’s
operations is due to the determination of the Sierra
Leonean people to rebuild their country and to build
peace. It has also been thanks to the commitment of the
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General and
his entire team, as well as effective cooperation between
the host country, the United Nations and regional and
international partners.

that, after 15 years of presence in Sierra Leone, the
United Nations peace operations in that country have
decisively achieved their goal of supporting Sierra
Leone and its people. Despite the indelible scars left by
the terrible civil war in Sierra Leone, the country has
made remarkable progress, in particular in the security,
political, socioeconomic and human rights sectors.
We note with great satisfaction that Sierra Leone
has successfully embarked on the path to sustainable
security, democratic governance facilitated by strong
institutions, respect for human rights and the rule of
law, economic growth and regional cooperation.

The experience in Sierra Leone could serve as an
example and shows that the international community
can succeed and achieve positive results when all
stakeholders work together to promote peace, stability,
democracy and development in a post-conflict country.
We thank UNIPSIL for having garnered this success
for the United Nations, and we call on the international
community to maintain its support for the Sierra
Leonean Government in maintaining and strengthening
peace in the country, taking into due account the
priorities of the Agenda for Prosperity.

In this regard, we congratulate President Ernest Bai
Koroma on his leadership and extend our congratulations
to the Government and the resilient people of Sierra
Leone. We especially commend President Koroma
for his outreach efforts to promote political dialogue
through his regular informal meetings with the 10
registered political parties in Sierra Leone. We believe
that this will further reduce political tension and build
harmony to the benefit of everyone, in particular as
political space is increasingly being given to women
and youth.

In conclusion, we would like to express our support
for the draft presidential statement to be adopted at the
end of this meeting.

However, as noted by the Secretary-General, Sierra
Leone must build on these political gains and address
the root causes of conflict, which are mainly related
to poverty, corruption and political exclusion. In this
respect, we call on the two major political parties in
Sierra Leone — the All Peoples Congress and the Sierra
Leone People’s Party — to build on the positive trend
and resolve their internal tensions through dialogue.
In this context, we welcome the ongoing constitutional
review aimed at addressing issues of governance, human
rights, natural resources and land tenure, but we call on
all parties to conduct that process with diligence and to
ensure public ownership through inclusive nationwide
consultations.

Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to
thank Mr. Jens Anders Toyberg-Frandzen, Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General for the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone, for his briefing and for the tremendous work
he has done in ensuring the successful completion
of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL). I also
wish to thank Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski of
Canada, Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission
configuration for Sierra Leone, for briefing us,
especially on his visit to the country from 25 to
28 February, and for his dedication in steering one of
the most successful peacebuilding processes.
I also take this opportunity to welcome
Mr. Samura M.W. Kamara, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of the Republic
of Sierra Leone, and to thank him for the tremendous
achievements registered by his country over the past
15 years.
As UNIPSIL completes its mandate at the end of
this month, we can say without the shadow of a doubt

14/21

We note with satisfaction that the general security
situation in Sierra Leone has remained calm and
stable. We hope that the national authorities, with the
support of development partners, will soon complete
the creation of a national infrastructure for peace
to prevent and address conflict, and also implement
the planned project to cement the culture of seeking
peaceful solutions. In the meantime, Sierra Leone
needs to continue strengthening its coordination with
countries of the region in order to counter transnational
organized crime and drug-trafficking. We therefore
welcome the close coordination with the Economic

14-27719

26/03/2014

The situation in Sierra Leone

S/PV.7148

Community of West African States and the Mano
River Union in efforts to tackle transnational crime,
ensure cross-border security and promote stability.
Furthermore, we commend the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime for its support to the Government
of Sierra Leone in implementing the West Africa Coast
Initiative to combat transnational organized crime.

engagement in Sierra Leone to a lighter and more
responsive approach and the establishment of a small
steering group composed of close partners of Sierra
Leone. We believe that such a configuration will
maintain international attention on Sierra Leone while
preparing for the country’s smooth exit from the PBC’s
agenda.

Our country, Rwanda, which had to face the terrible
consequences of the genocide committed against the
Tutsi 20 years ago, highly appreciates the tremendous
achievements of Sierra Leone in addressing transitional
justice through the hybrid Truth and Reconciliation
Commission. While every country emerging from
conflict follows its own path in dealing with postconflict challenges, it is clear that experience-sharing
among fellow African countries is of paramount
importance to ensure permanent peace on the continent.

To conclude, I would like to express my gratitude
to Mr. Jens Toyberg-Frandzen and the whole UNIPSIL
team for a job well done in the service of Sierra Leone
and the United Nations.

We take this opportunity to echo the draft
presidential statement to be adopted, which we endorse,
and congratulate the Special Court for Sierra Leone on
the completion of its mandate. Rwanda was honoured to
be part of that process, having received convicts from
the Court in our correctional facilities.
Rwanda welcomes the positive socioeconomic
advances in Sierra Leone, as well as the International
Monetary Fund projection that gross domestic product
will increase by 15 per cent in 2014 and by 12.4 per cent
in 2015. In order to sustain peace and development and
to create greater opportunities for all Sierra Leoneans,
without any distinction, we encourage the Government
of Sierra Leone to establish an attractive business
environment and to combat all forms of corruption. In
that regard, Rwanda welcomes the signing of the mutual
accountability framework by the Government and
development partners, confirming their commitment
to working closely to strengthen Government-donor
relations within the framework of the New Deal for
Engagement in Fragile States. Also encouraging is the
fact that development partners have discussed the postUNIPSIL engagement with the Government and agreed
on the development partners’ continuing efforts during
the transition, especially in support of the Agenda for
Prosperity.
As I said earlier, Sierra Leone’s success should
also be attributed to the PBC configuration chaired
by Ambassador Rishchynski. We commend the
configuration for its activities and advocacy, and
we support the proposed scale-down of the PBC

Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank Executive Representative Toyberg-Frandzen and
Ambassador Rishchynski for their valuable briefings.
We also appreciate the participation of Mr. Samura
Kamara, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra
Leone.
I would like to join others in offering my
congratulations on the progress made through the
combined efforts of all parties concerned. The United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone (UNIPSIL) is surely an exemplary case of
the United Nations system’s effective coordination.
Lessons learned through its activities should be shared
and applied to other countries dealing with postconflict peacebuilding. As we have witnessed, the
determination of Sierra Leoneans to achieve peace and
stability has been the driving force behind the progress
that UNIPSIL, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
and other partners have made so far.
The 2012 elections marked a watershed in Sierra
Leone’s political history. The two major political
parties are now required to take on more responsibility
for moving the country forward. We hope the political
leadership will address the ethno-regional imbalance
in order to further strengthen political inclusivity and
social cohesion. With good governance and the rule of
law, Sierra Leonean society can reach its full potential.
In that context, we hope the Sierra Leonean authorities
will continue to broaden their engagement not only with
the political community but across the entire social
spectrum, including with women and young people.
The implementation of the Agenda for Prosperity
is also a priority for the Government. Sierra Leoneans’
strong aspirations should be translated into sustainable
development and prosperity. As Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon stressed during his visit to Sierra Leone
earlier this month, the United Nations should continue

14-2771915/21

S/PV.7148

The situation in Sierra Leone

to stand together with its Government and people. The
Republic of Korea also fully supports the consolidation
of peace and the promotion of democratic governance
in Sierra Leone.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): First, on behalf
of my delegation, I would like to extend a warm
welcome to the Council for His Excellency Mr. Samura
Kamara, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Sierra Leone. I thank the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jens
Anders Toyberg-Frandzen, for his briefing on the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL) and his remarks on the remaining challenges
facing the country as UNPSIL concludes its mandate.
Since Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen has briefed the Council
for the last time as Head of UNIPSIL, I offer my
gratitude for his leadership in ensuring the successful
implementation and conclusion of its mandate. I
would also like to thank our colleague the Permanent
Representative of Canada, Guillermo Rishchynski,
Chair of the Sierra Leone configuration, for his briefing
and his personal dedication and commitment to the
cause.
Lithuania congratulates the Government of Sierra
Leone on the remarkable progress that has been
achieved in post-conflict recovery, peace consolidation
and democratic transition through the creation of a
culture of the rule of law, accountability and political
tolerance. As UNIPSIL completes its mandate, l would
like to commend the effectiveness with which the
United Nations, international financial institutions and
regional organizations have contributed over the past
15 years to the peacebuilding efforts in Sierra Leone.
Challenges remain, however. In order to further
consolidate peace, recovery and economic growth, more
must be done in the context of peacebuilding, reforming
the security sector, fighting corruption and furthering
robust, inclusive development. Lithuania takes
positive note of the security-sector reform programme
launched by UNIPSIL in January. We welcome Sierra
Leone’s constitutional review process, conducted by
the Constitutional Review Committee. The country’s
development partners will be playing an important role
in that process. For example, the European Union has
been engaged in the process, with a particular focus on
capacity-building, technical assistance to the Review
Committee and other key stakeholders, civic education
and communication and consensus-building activities.

16/21

26/03/2014

Lithuania also welcomes the Government of Sierra
Leone’s recent adoption of the Agenda. for Prosperity.
That prosperity should be built on successful reforms,
strong economic growth, and, as many speakers have
already noted, on combating corruption.
I would like to encourage Sierra Leone and United
Nations entities to continue supporting women’s full and
equal participation in the country’s political, economic
and social spheres. All political parties in Sierra
Leone should encourage and empower more women to
participate in politics and give them more opportunities
to seek election to Parliament and key positions in it. We
note the proposal to enact a gender empowerment bill
that would give statutory endorsement to a 30 per cent
quota for women’s participation. Similarly, civil society
organizations led by women should be strengthened
politically and financially in order to enable them to
engage meaningfully in building the country’s future.
Finally, a continued commitment on the part of the
United Nations to peace in Western Africa remains
essential. The engagement of the United Nations with
Sierra Leone will be transformed as the country team
takes over UNIPSIL’s residual tasks. The country
team’s leadership will play a critical role in Sierra
Leone’s post-conflict development. Likewise, as is
stressed in the presidential statement to be adopted by
the Council, the United Nations Office for West Africa
will make its good offices available to the Government
of Sierra Leone. Once again, we congratulate the people
and Government of Sierra Leone on the progress they
have achieved. As the Security Council continues to
deal with pressing crises and conflicts, Sierra Leone’s
story of recovery and progress is a much-needed and
inspiring tale of hope.
The President (spoke in French): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Luxembourg.
I, too, would like to welcome to the Security Council
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Sierra Leone, His Excellency Mr. Samura
Kamara. Luxembourg congratulates the Government
and people of Sierra Leone on their exceptional
accomplishments on the road to peacebuilding and
economic development. Theirs is a success story indeed.
I thank the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jens Anders Toyberg-Frandzen,
for his final briefing to the Council in that capacity. We
salute him and the entire team of the United Nations

14-27719

26/03/2014

The situation in Sierra Leone

Integrated Peacebuilding Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL). They have carried out their mandate with
dedication, effectiveness and professionalism in the
allotted time. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Guillermo Richchynski of Canada for his statement and
for his exemplary commitment as Chair of the Sierra
Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC).
At the end of 12 years of support on the part of the
United Nations in the wake of a civil conflict of the
most violent kind, Sierra Leone has made remarkable
progress. The efforts to consolidate that progress must
go on, for such progress is never irreversible. However,
we are confident for the future. We are confident that
the representatives elected by the Sierra Leoneans will
possess the necessary wisdom to avoid the errors of the
past. We trust that they will be ready to consider the
national interest above all else, remain open to their
partners’ feedback, and find the necessary strength to
bring lasting peace and prosperity to the country.
The Agenda for Prosperity is ambitious. Its
implementation is essential if Sierra Leone is to achieve
its goal of becoming a middle-income country by the
year 2035. To that end, Sierra Leone will need partners.
Its long-standing partners have already heeded the
call. For the next seven years, the European Union
has already set aside €372 million, amounting to some
$500 million, under the framework of the European
Development Fund, to support Sierra Leone in the areas
of governance and civil society, education, agriculture
and food security. The European Union has also decided
to support Sierra Leone in the fields of constitutional
reform and capacity-building of its police force.
In addition to official development assistance,
Sierra Leone needs reliable foreign direct investment.
Tax revenues will continue to grow. The economy
must be diversified beyond the extraction of natural
resources, which must take place under the necessary
transparency so as to ensure that the income thus
derived benefits the people of Sierra Leone as a whole.
Efforts are also needed to prevent and resolve land
disputes. Mutually beneficial arrangements for local
communities and the private sector can and must be
found.
Despite the persistent challenges, including
endemic poverty and the unemployment that especially
affects young people, we are confident that the people
of Sierra Leone will enjoy the long-awaited peace
dividends. The signing on 4 February of the mutual

S/PV.7148

accountability framework under the framework of
the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States was
a sign of confidence, as is the continuing partnership
with the Peacebuilding Commission. Luxembourg
welcomes Ambassador Rishchynski’s proposal to adapt
the approach of the Peacebuilding Commission’s Sierra
Leone configuration in the next 12 months.
Finally, Luxembourg commends the cooperation
established by Sierra Leone among its neighbours in
the Mano River Union. In October, the Union adopted
a border security strategy that was drafted with the
support of the United Nations Office for West Africa
(UNOWA). The implementation of the strategy will
enhance the fight against transnational organized crime
and build peace at the regional level. We count on the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the Office for West Africa, Mr. Said Djinnit,
and the UNOWA team, in collaboration with the United
Nations country team, in supporting Sierra Leone in a
continually evolving regional context.
The leaders of Sierra Leone bear a heavy burden
of responsibility, but we are confident that they will
continue to follow the positive path that has been forged
over the past 12 years. The end of the Council’s support
represents a historic milestone. We thank the United
Kingdom for preparing a draft presidential statement
to allow the Council to duly note that. We wish great
courage and success to the Government and people of
Sierra Leone as they open a new chapter on the history
of their country.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of the Republic of Sierra
Leone.
Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): Let me start by
congratulating you, Madam President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March and by thanking you for inviting Sierra Leone
to participate in the debate on the final report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/192) on the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL).
I wish to convey, on behalf of His Excellency
President Mr. Ernest Bai Koroma, the Government
and people of Sierra Leone, fond appreciation for
the invaluable support and unfailing interest of the
Security Council, the wider membership of the United

14-2771917/21

S/PV.7148

The situation in Sierra Leone

Nations and our international partners in consolidating
our hard-won peace, security and stability to the point
of being considered a historic success story of United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Mr. Ernest Bai Koroma, has asked me to tender
his apologies for not being able to attend this meeting
himself to deliver this message to the Council on this
historic occasion.
“It is a pleasure to address the Council today
on this epoch-making event marking the end of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone and the transition of the United
Nations engagement in Sierra Leone to the new
United Nations country team model. Prior to this
meeting, we were honoured to receive in Sierra
Leone, first, Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski
in February, followed by no less a person than
the Secretary-General on 4 and 5 March. The two
eminent personalities came to join us in celebrating
the wonderful transition in the United Nations
mandate to Sierra Leone, defined by the residual
and future roles of UNIPSIL and the Peacebuilding
Commission.
“We were heartened by their inspiring words
about the remarkable progress our country has
made, especially in identifying and resolving
tensions and threats of potential conflicts, in
monitoring and promoting human rights, in
building peace and security, in consolidating goodgovernance reforms, and in undertaking the boldest
ever sector-wide and nation-wide public investment
programmes.
“Those, together, provide for us the appropriate
healing therapy for a country that has emerged
from a massively devastating internal conflict,
in terms of loss of innocent lives, displaced
people and wide-ranging destruction of physical
infrastructure. We are at the same time cognizant
of the remaining huge challenges to healing. On
behalf of the people of Sierra Leone and in my own
name, I wish to reiterate our very firm commitment
to sustaining our transformation.
“About 23 years ago, war broke out in our
beloved nation. The conflict brought out the worst
hatred and criminality in a few Sierra Leoneans
and their international backers, but it also
inspired the best resilience in the overwhelming
majority of our people. The great majority of our

18/21

26/03/2014

compatriots — including members of the armed
forces, the military, the police and the civil defence
forces, as well as civil society at large — resisted
the onslaught on their humanity. So many of our
people suffered in the process, and so many were
displaced, murdered and wounded, but they stood
firm, held on to their spirits and ushered in a return
to peace, security, democracy and civilian rule in
1996. But unfortunately, the struggles continued
until the war was formally declared over in January
2002.
“We were not alone in our actions for peace,
democracy and security. Members of the Economic
Community of West African States, particularly
Nigeria and the Republic of Guinea, were among
the first to join our resistance to the carnage. The
United Nations, the United Kingdom and other
friends of Sierra Leone later joined the concerted
efforts to put an end to the carnage and ensure that
our nation once again joined the ranks of peaceful,
stable and democratic countries.
“We have in diverse ways tried to honour the
memory of the people — men and women — whose
perseverance, dedicated service and sacrifice
brought peace and healing to the nation. At this
moment, I would kindly ask that the Council join
us in remembering them in a quiet moment and
to remember a strong pioneer for national peace
and reconciliation, Alhaji Ahmad Tejan Kabbah,
former President of Sierra Leone, who passed away
on Thursday, 13 March and was laid to rest on
Sunday, 23 March. May their souls and the souls of
all faithful departed rest in perfect peace.
“Today, we are here to recognize a significant
transition in our actions to move towards a
democratic, peaceful, stable, developing and
prosperous country. We have seen several United
Nations transitions in Sierra Leone, commencing
in 1998 with the transition to the United Nation
Observer Mission in Sierra Leone, to monitor and
observe efforts to disarm, demobilize and socially
reintegrate ex-combatants while at the same
restructuring the security forces. That was followed
by the transition to the much larger United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone in 1999, which focused
on the implementation of the Lomé Peace Accord,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, while continuing
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme and the resettlement, rehabilitation and

14-27719

26/03/2014

The situation in Sierra Leone

reconstruction processes. That was then followed
by the establishment of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Sierra Leone in 2006, which
supported the Government in consolidating the
peace, security and democracy. That in turn was
followed, finally, by the United Nations Integrated
Peace Building Office in 2008.
“UNIPSIL has been pivotal in many processes
in the country, including furthering the work of
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and
the Special Court for Sierra Leone; building civil
society capacities and promoting political dialogue,
human rights, good governance and the rule of law;
undertaking comprehensive security sector reform;
furthering gender empowerment; contributing to
the holding of credible internationally recognized
elections in 2012; and in transforming the
Government-owned broadcasting service into an
independent public service broadcaster, the Sierra
Leone Broadcasting Corporation (SLBC).
“The SLBC is still facing certain challenges,
but it has been a worthwhile transformation. More
than at any time in the nation’s history, there is
now greater diversity of information and opinions
thanks to it, and its reach is wider than in the decades
before. Those are laudable achievements, but the
partnership to improve its financial base, technical
competencies and coverage must continue.
“The transition we are recognizing today is a
very special one. It is a transition that crowns with
success all the preceding transitions. The goal of
all the other transitions was to bring the country to
this particular stage — a country that once received
peacekeepers is now contributing peacekeepers to
other countries; a country that was once a byword
for humanitarian crisis now has one of the fastest
growing economies in the world; a country that
succumbed to military dictatorship has held a
succession of free and fair elections; a country
rocked by armed and uncivil divisions is healing
itself, thanks to the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, the Special Court for Sierra Leone,
the perseverance of our people and the commitment
of the United Nations and our many international
friends. That we are now inaugurating another
profound shift in the core mandate of the United
Nations in Sierra Leone, from peace consolidation
to development, shows that the Organization has

S/PV.7148

always aligned its actions with the aspirations of
our people.
“On becoming, President in 2007, I signalled
my determination to move the country towards
economic development and prosperity. The
United Nations has been a valued partner in
that transformation. The indicators of the
transformation are more evident in every part of
the country today than at any time in its history.
We are constructing roads in our cities and towns.
We are regenerating agricultural productivity and
significantly re-establishing food self-sufficiency.
We are ensuring greater access to health care for
pregnant women, lactating mothers and children
than at any time in our country’s history. We are
providing more funding for education and seeing
increases in school enrolment rates. We are
promoting small and medium-sized enterprises and
attracting large-scale investment and creating job
opportunities for all. We are expanding the provision
of electricity and ensuring that more women are in
positions of authority in the Government, security
forces and other key institutions and organizations
within the country.
“Now, we have taken a collective decision to
move towards becoming a middle-income nation
by 2030, in alignment with the targets of the United
Nations sustainable development goals. Moving the
target date from 2035 to 2030 was inspired by the
Secretary-General himself. We have commenced
the implementation of the Agenda for Prosperity,
the first five-year national plan towards achieving
the goal of middle-income status, and we welcome
the alignment of the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework with our Agenda for
Prosperity.
“As I intimated earlier, we still face formidable
challenges going forward, but we are inspired by
the commitment of the United Nations to support
us in meeting them through its new United
Nations country team. We also welcome the
commitment of the United Nations to supporting
our Constitutional Review Committee, the Political
Parties Registration Commission and other goodgovernance institutions. A successful partnership
is one that is underpinned by an alignment of goals
and aspirations. We salute the United Nations for
being an avid supporter of such alignments.

14-2771919/21

S/PV.7148

The situation in Sierra Leone

“Today, Sierra Leone is addressing this body
for the last time as a subject for its consideration.
We have now moved from a country on the Security
Council’s agenda to a nation that is a storehouse
of lessons on how to successfully move away from
war to peace and development.
“With UNIPSIL’s closure, Sierra Leone is
leaving fragility behind. We are improving our
international risk profile as a post-conflict country
and advancing confidence as a destination for
quality investment. Those are valuable prerequisites
for putting the very negative insignia of a blooddiamond nation behind us. We are now harnessing
our diamonds and all our other natural resources
for purposes of ensuring sustainable development
and national prosperity.
“Our people have shown determination and
great dignity during all the transitions I have
mentioned. We have built enduring partnerships
for dignity, peace, security, democracy and
sustainable development, and we remain committed
to continuing to work with the Peacebuilding
Commission and other partners to promote those
overarching aspirations both in Sierra Leone and in
the wider world.
“We salute the leaders and members of the
various configurations for peace, justice and
development in Sierra Leone, including the
European Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the African Union, the
Peacebuilding Commission, Nigeria, the United
Kingdom, the United States, China, Guinea, the
Netherlands, Canada, and all other development
partners, including Arab funding agencies.

26/03/2014

Finally, I would like to thank Ambassador Rishchynski
for his efforts in undertaking the residual functions of
the Peacebuilding Commission. He is still around, and
I am sure that his heart is still in Sierra Leone.
The President (spoke in French): After consultations
among Council members, I have been authorized to
make the following statement on their behalf.
(spoke in English)
“As the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) completes its
mandate on 31 March 2014, the Security Council
commends the remarkable achievements made
by Sierra Leone over the past decade as well
as its contribution to important regional and
global initiatives. The Security Council further
commends the effectiveness of the approach of the
United Nations, international financial institutions,
regional and subregional bodies and the broader
international community to peacebuilding in Sierra
Leone.
“The Security Council welcomes the considerable
progress that has been made by Sierra Leone in
strengthening institutional and human resources
capacities of State institutions, including in the
security, justice and governance sectors, which
play crucial roles in safeguarding stability and
promoting democracy.
“The Security Council also welcomes the
successful presidential and parliamentary elections
conducted in 2012, which have helped to consolidate
Sierra Leone’s democratic institutions.

“The journey has been a challenging one, and
there are remaining challenges, no doubt. But there
shall be no turning back; we shall continue to be a
force for peace in the world, a symbol of successful
transformation and a partner for peace, security,
democracy and development.”

“The Security Council recognises the important
contribution of UNIPSIL in promoting peace,
stability and development in Sierra Leone,
particularly during the 2012 electoral process. The
Security Council expresses its appreciation for
the efforts of the Mission and the United Nations
country team, under the leadership of the Executive
Representatives of the Secretary-General.

In closing, I should like on behalf of His Excellency
the President, the Government and the people of Sierra
Leone to recognize the sentiments and words of
encouragement that I have received from all present
here. I also want to recognize the good work of the
outgoing Executive Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, and wish him and his wife every success in
their future endeavours.

“The Security Council underscores the
importance of continued support to Sierra Leone
as it embarks on the next stage of its development,
beyond UNIPSIL, including the constitutional
review process, and notes the willingness of the
United Nations and bilateral and multilateral
partners to continue, as requested by the Sierra
Leonean authorities, to play a significant role in this

20/21

14-27719

26/03/2014

The situation in Sierra Leone

regard. In addition, the Security Council urges the
international community and development partners
to continue to provide coordinated and coherent
support to Sierra Leone to meet its peacebuilding
and development priorities.
“The Security Council stresses that there is
important work ahead to further embed peace and
secure equitable prosperity for the benefit of all
Sierra Leoneans. The Security Council welcomes
the adoption by the Government of Sierra Leone
of the Agenda for Prosperity, covering the period
from 2013 to 2018, and notes the importance of the
implementation of this programme in accordance
with the mutual accountability framework agreed
between the Government of Sierra Leone and
Sierra Leone’s Development Partners Committee
in March 2013.
“The Security Council reaffirms the important
potential role of extractive industries in Sierra
Leone’s economic development, and encourages
the Government of Sierra Leone and international
partners to strengthen protection of workers’ rights
and national capacities for transparent regulation,
oversight, and revenue collection from such
industries, as well as to address issues of land
ownership with a view to establishing mutually
beneficial arrangements for local communities and
the private sector, and calls upon the Government
to tackle corruption.
“The Security Council stresses the importance
for Sierra Leone’s long-term stability of ensuring a
peaceful, credible and transparent electoral process
in 2017.

S/PV.7148

“The Security Council reiterates its request
in resolution 2097 (2013) that the United Nations
Office for West Africa make available its good
offices to support the Government of Sierra Leone
and the new United Nations Resident Coordinator
as necessary.
“The Security Council welcomes the work
of the Sierra Leone Configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission. The Security Council
recalls its request in resolution 2097 (2013) for
the Peacebuilding Commission to review its
engagement with a view to scaling down its role
and welcomes the Commission’s shift to a lighter
form of engagement for a transitional period
over next 12 months, as outlined in its report to
the Council (S/2014/211). The Security Council
requests that Sierra Leone contribute to the work
of the Peacebuilding Commission to gather lessons
learnt and best practices.
“The Security Council congratulates the Special
Court for Sierra Leone on the completion of its
mandate, recalls the strong support it expressed for
the Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone as it
commences its functioning, and reiterates its call
in resolution 2097 (2013) for Member States to
contribute generously.”
(spoke in French)
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2014/6.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

14-2771921/21
