S/2015/624*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 August 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2213
(2015) of 27 March 2015. It covers major political and security developments in
Libya, provides an overview of the human rights and humanitarian situations in the
country, and outlines the activities of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) since my report of 26 February 2015 (S/2015/144).

II. Political and security-related developments
2.
Against the backdrop of continued political polarization, institutional crisis
and armed conflict, much of the focus of United Nations, regional and international
engagement remained on encouraging the main political stakeholders to make
progress in talks aimed at reaching an overall political settlement and pave the way
for the formation of a single unified national government. While evolving security
and community dynamics on the ground in Libya resulted in a number of l ocal
reconciliation and ceasefire initiatives, instability and conflict continued to affect
many parts of the country, also due to the growing activity and territorial gains of
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/Daesh-affiliated groups.
3.
On 11 July, an important breakthrough was achieved when most of the
participants in the United Nations-facilitated Libyan political dialogue initialled the
Libyan Political Agreement, which provided a framework for future negotiations on
the formation of a Government of National Accord, and helped inject a sense of
optimism and unity among Libyan stakeholders. The success of the agreement rests
on political inclusiveness. It will therefore be important for the parties that have not
initialled the agreement to continue to engage with the dialogue process.
Political dialogue process
4.
Throughout the reporting period, my Special Representative and Head of
UNSMIL, Bernardino León, remained actively engaged in efforts to push forward
the Libyan political dialogue process, aimed at resolving the institutional crisis
resulting from the contending claims of legislative and executive legitimacy, and
bringing an end to the armed conflict. While a full agreement was not reached in the
* Reissued for technical reasons on 19 August 2015.

15-13079* (E)

190815

*1513079*

S/2015/624

reporting period, progress was made on a number of fronts, including on local,
temporary security arrangements, the broad framework of a political settlement, and
dialogue regarding the return of internally displaced persons.
5.
Building on a series of initial meetings convened in Geneva in J anuary 2015,
UNSMIL continued to work closely with all the main parties in Libya to facilitate
and develop a comprehensive political dialogue process that ensured the
participation of all relevant stakeholders. In addition to the main political talks
involving representatives of key political stakeholders, negotiations were also
conducted along several tracks involving municipalities, political party leaders and
activists, as well as armed groups. UNSMIL also facilitated separate discussions
with women’s groups and civil society representatives that have been integrated into
the other dialogue tracks.
6.
Participants in the main political track gathered in Skhirat, Morocco, on
5 March and then again on 12 March for further discussions pertaining to the
formation of a Government of National Accord and security arrangements that
would form the basis for a nationwide ceasefire and the phased withdrawal of armed
groups and militias from towns and cities across Libya. Other key elements for
discussion included guiding principles for the management of the remainder of the
transitional period and confidence-building measures, mainly focused on alleviating
the humanitarian situation and addressing urgent human rights concerns.
7.
During a round of talks beginning 19 March, participants agreed to focus
discussions on reaching an overall framework solution to the political crisis and
armed conflict in Libya. Initial feedback from the parties on the framework
provided the basis for subsequent negotiations, primarily focus ed on the creation of
political institutions that would manage the remainder of the transitional period,
defining their competences and agreeing on a road map for the constitution drafting
process.
8.
Between late March and late June, my Special Representative convened the
dialogue participants for several rounds of talks in Skhirat to try to forge consensus
on the main text of a political agreement. Throughout that period, the dialogue
teams from the two main camps regularly travelled back to Libya to cons ult with
their respective constituencies, primarily the House of Representatives and the
General National Congress. During the course of the political dialogue, UNSMIL
launched a public awareness campaign aimed at encouraging widespread support for
the agreement.
9.
In an important breakthrough, most of the dialogue participants initialled the
Libyan Political Agreement at a ceremony in Skhirat on 11 July. Despite calls by
other dialogue participants urging the General National Congress to take part in the
initialling ceremony, its representatives were not in attendance. My Special
Representative has nonetheless given public assurances that the United Nations
remained committed to engaging with all the relevant parties, noting their concerns
in order to ensure an inclusive, credible and successful Libyan dialogue process.
10. In parallel to the main political tracks, UNSMIL also convened in Algiers
three separate rounds of talks between March and June with Libyan political party
representatives and political activists. The talks included discussions on ways of
advancing the overall dialogue process and on key issues for the democratic
transition, including combatting terrorism and responding to the humanitarian needs

2/15

15-13079

S/2015/624

of the population. After each round of talks, participants sent clear messages of
support for the main political track and urged a peaceful resolution to the political
and institutional crisis in the country.
11. Separately, UNSMIL convened meetings of representatives of 28 municipal
and local councils from across Libya. These included a meeting in Brussels on
23 March and another in Tunis on 29 May. Participants exchanged views and
discussed cooperation with UNSMIL and the United Nations country team on issues
related to humanitarian-assistance support, prisoners, missing persons and the
internally displaced.
12. It was within this framework that delegations from Misrata and Tawergha met
in Tunis on 27 and 28 May, with UNSMIL facilitation, to begin discussions on the
return of the Tawerghans to their city. In a public statement at the end of the
meeting, both sides agreed to set up a joint committee to resolve issues relating to
the right of return to Tawergha in a safe and dignified manner, including
accountability and reparations for victims on both sides. UNSMIL is providing
further assistance in this endeavour.
13. In an effort to push forward discussions on security arrangements, UNSMIL
arranged a series of preparatory meetings in Libya. Participants included a number
of Libyan security actors, with discussions focusing on issues related to a ceasefire,
arms and ammunition management and monitoring, as well as possible United
Nations and international community support for the implementation of security
arrangements.
14. The Mission also undertook and supported activities in parallel to the official
dialogue tracks, which also include some influential women delegates. The Mission
convened a meeting in Tunis on 21 and 22 April, which brought together some
40 Libyan women from across the country’s political spectrum, regions and cultural
and ethnic groups.
15. Underscoring the importance of regional and international engagement in the
Libyan dialogue process, my Special Representative continued to consult closely
with different Member States and with regional and international organizations,
including the African Union, the League of Arab States and the European Union.
Their combined support for the dialogue process and positive engagement has been
critical in facilitating the work of my Special Repre sentative.
16. From 25 to 28 May, the Egyptian Government hosted a meeting of a group of
Libyan tribal leaders in Cairo to support the overall dialogue process.
17. On 5 June, at the invitation of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chad, my
Special Representative briefed Libya’s neighbouring countries, during which he also
had the opportunity to exchange views with high-level representatives of the African
Union and the League of Arab States on progress in the dialogue process and
common challenges resulting from the conflict in Libya.
18. On 9 June, the Government of Germany hosted a meeting in Berlin where a
number of Member States presented a joint demarche to participants in the main
political talks, including the House of Representatives and the Genera l National
Congress, urging them to swiftly conclude the dialogue and spare their country from
the scourge of protracted conflict, chaos and terrorism. Representatives from the

15-13079

3/15

S/2015/624

participating Member States committed to support the transitional institutions once
an agreement is signed.
19. On 12 June, my Special Representative attended and briefed the fourth
meeting of the International Contact Group on Libya, hosted by the African Union
during the summit of Heads of State and Government in Johannesburg, South
Africa.
Constitution drafting process
20. The Constitution Drafting Assembly continued to pursue its mandate, though
security, political, logistical, financial and organizational difficulties presented
significant obstacles to progress. The Assembly shifted its focus away from the
eight substantive committees that dominated its earlier work, and has devoted much
of its attention to debating the preliminary texts released by the committees in
December 2014.
21. The Constitution Drafting Assembly voted in late February to conduct a
number of workshops outside of Libya with support from the United Nations and
other international partners. Logistical and other constraints, however, have largely
disrupted these plans, resulting in the Assembly spending most of the reporting
period in Al Baida. Security concerns over travel to Al Baida, in turn, have severely
limited the international community’s access to the Assembly and its capacity to
provide significant assistance.
22. UNSMIL continues to serve as the coordinating body and primary liaison for
the international community to the Constitution Drafting Assembly. The United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) has provided support for constitution related advocacy programmes, including for a campaign to include women’s
concerns in the constitution and a new process focusing on Libyan youth. UNDP has
also embedded a media adviser and a liaison officer with the Office of the President
of the Constitution Drafting Assembly in Al Baida.
Situation in the west
23. Following the last round of clashes in late March around the town of Aziziya,
south of Tripoli, the general security situation in the western region was
characterized by a growing rapprochement among different actors, with several
local communities initiating ceasefire and reconciliation initiatives, in certain cases
with active support from UNSMIL.
24. In the oil crescent region, Misratan forces withdrew from the town of Sidra in
late March, effectively bringing an end to Operation Sunrise, launched in December
2014 in an effort to gain control over oil installations in the area. The withdrawal
followed an agreement between armed groups and tribal leaders from Misrata and
the Magharba tribe, including elements from the Petroleum Facilities Guard under
Magharba control. UNSMIL assisted in facilitating the agreement.
25. In mid-March, forces from Warshafana launched a military offensive south of
Tripoli to regain areas in the Warshafana tribal belt that had been previously
captured by the Libya Dawn coalition. Warshafana forces asserted control over the
town of Aziziya, despite resistance from additional forces from Libya Dawn
redeployed into the area, mainly from Misrata. The two sides subsequently
negotiated a ceasefire, the terms of which included a cessation of hostilities, the

4/15

15-13079

S/2015/624

disengagement of forces in the area, the cantonment of medium and heavy weapons,
an exchange of prisoners and the return of internally displaced persons.
26. Following the ceasefire agreement between Misrata and Warshafana, a s imilar
initiative of detente was launched between Misrata and Zintan. Both sides
undertook steps to reduce tensions and cease hostilities at the main flashpoints in
the region. In mid-June, both Misrata and Zintan reached agreement with several
coastal towns, including Sabratha, Zuwara, Regdalin and Jmeil, on a trilateral
ceasefire arrangement for the Wuttiya airbase, which for much of the past year had
been a main point of armed confrontation between the Libya Dawn coalition and
Zintan forces.
27. In a parallel move, Zintan negotiated local ceasefire deals with the towns of
Gheryan and Al Qala‘a. The various local ceasefire initiatives led to a marked
reduction of military tensions in western Libya and the greater Tripoli area.
28. In June, a hard-line faction within the Libya Dawn coalition, which had earlier
called for the rejection of the United Nations-facilitated political dialogue process,
announced the formation of a new military coalition, the “Steadfastness Front”. The
move reflected increasing fragmentation within the Libya Dawn coalition, as many
of its armed group components publicly supported the dialogue.
29. The growing threat posed by ISIL/Daesh-affiliated groups became increasingly
evident as the movement consolidated its presence and influe nce in central Libya
during the reporting period. A combination of factors provided it with a conducive
environment to expand its influence and assert control over new territory. These
include weak border controls and State institutions, local community gr ievances, the
ongoing institutional crisis between east and west and developments in the Sahel
region.
30. Fighting between Misratan and ISIL/Daesh forces intensified around Sirte and
the town of Nawfiliya in March, with a series of airstrikes against ISIL /Daesh
targets in the area. As the fighting escalated, ISIL/Daesh claimed responsibility for
several suicide bombings against Misratan forces and their allies in both Sirte and
Misrata. In June, Misratan forces withdrew from Sirte, citing a lack of support from
other elements of the Libya Dawn coalition and the authorities in Tripoli.
ISIL/Daesh subsequently took control of Sirte and much of the 200 -kilometre
coastal area east of the city. In June, forces from Misrata intensified airstrikes on
ISIL/Daesh in Sirte, Nawfiliya and the town of Zella further inland.
Situation in the east
31. In the east, the security situation remained critical throughout the reporting
period, with fighting continuing primarily in Benghazi and Derna, mainly between
Operation Dignity forces and armed Islamist groups.
32. In Benghazi, the ongoing conflict shifted into an urban war of attrition in
which neither side has been able to make additional significant territorial gains.
Operation Dignity forces remain in control of large parts of eastern and northern
Benghazi, while the Benghazi Revolutionaries’ Shura Council, a coalition of local
Islamist groups and Ansar al-Sharia, maintain control over neighbourhoods in the
west and south of the city. The Council has increasingly relied on snipers,
improvised explosive devices and suicide attacks, while Operation Dignity forces
continued to conduct air attacks on Council positions. Mortar and Grad rocket

15-13079

5/15

S/2015/624

attacks have reportedly caused the deaths of at least 20 civilians throughout the city
since March.
33. Heavy fighting erupted in June between ISIL/Daesh and the Derna
Mujaheddin Shura Council, a coalition of local Islamist and Jihadi groups. This was
triggered by the targeted killing of two senior Council leaders, as well as by
growing local opposition to the frequent beheadings, crucifixions and suicide
bombings carried out by ISIL/Daesh. Supported by local citizens, the Council
scored a major victory in mid-June, successfully ejecting ISIL/Daesh from the city
following several days of fighting in which more than 70 ISIL/Daesh fighters were
reportedly killed and more than 200 captured. Despite that, ISIL/Daesh elements
remain present in a number of areas in the vicinity of Derna. The Libyan National
Army, affiliated with Operation Dignity, conducted parallel operations against
ISIL/Daesh around Derna throughout the reporting period.
34. In a separate development, on 15 June the United States of America carried out
an airstrike close to Ajdabiya, targeting a meeting o f senior jihadists linked to
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb. The attack killed a number of militants, among
them reportedly senior Al-Qaida figures.
Situation in the south
35. Fighting broke out in Brak al-Shati in early March between military units
drawn largely from the local Magarha and Qadhadifa tribes on the one hand, and the
Misratan Third Force on the other. In early April, Misratan troops captured Colonel
Mohamed bin Nail, commander of the local Libyan National Army force, and
subsequently turned him over to the General Prosecutor in Tripoli. On 23 April,
negotiations brokered by Misratan and Zintani elders resulted in an agreement to
end the fighting, placing the Brak al-Shati military base under local Libyan National
Army control and redeploying the Misratan force elsewhere in the south.
36. In Awbari, sporadic fighting between Tabu and Tuareg armed groups over
control of key oil facilities, roads and Government buildings continued throughout
the reporting period, despite the forging of two separate ceasefire agr eements in
Doha and Al Baida by leaders from the two communities in early June. Relations
between the two groups continued to be marred by tensions as both the Libya Dawn
and Operation Dignity military coalitions sought to influence local tribal leaders to
assert control over oilfields and other key facilities in the area.
37. In Sabha, incidents of criminality, including kidnappings, killings and robbery,
continued throughout the reporting period. Despite several community protests
against the lack of local security, efforts by the Municipal Council and Southern
Operations Room to address the situation made little, if any, progress.
Approximately 60 people were killed in June and July, during Ramadan. In early
July, fighting between Tabu and Tuareg armed groups broke out following a
spillover of tensions from Awbari. Despite a ceasefire agreement reached between
representatives from the two communities on 18 July, clashes resumed a few days
later.

6/15

15-13079

S/2015/624

III. Other activities of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya
A.

Electoral support
38. The High National Elections Commission remained functional throughout the
reporting period, despite difficulties retaining staff and limited financial resources.
UNSMIL and UNDP continued to provide assistance in maintaining the
Commission’s technical capacities to administer elections, convening a series of
workshops between February and July to address technical topics, and facilitating
contact with its counterparts in the region. As a result, the newly establish ed
Organization of Arab Electoral Management Bodies appointed the Commission
Chairman as its interim president in May 2015. Support was also provided to the
Commission for consultations with a variety of partners on a coordinated response
to expected challenges associated with the implementation of a constitutional
referendum. In an environment where many of the national institutions are
struggling to remain operational, the Commission continues not only to be
functional, but also to improve its capacity.

B.

Human rights, transitional justice and rule of law
39. Violations and abuses of international human rights and humanitarian law
continued across Libya throughout the reporting period, with civilians suffering the
consequences of protracted fighting and the breakdown of law and order. UNSMIL
continued to monitor and report on the human rights situation in the country, despite
the relocation of international staff outside of Libya in mid -July 2014 and the
operational constraints imposed by the security situation in different parts of the
country.
40. In Benghazi, the reported indiscriminate shelling of residential areas by all
sides to the conflict, including Operation Dignity and the Benghazi Revolutionaries’
Shura Council, resulted in the death and injury of civilians, including children and
medical workers, while also causing damage to civilian infrastructure. The Benghazi
Medical Centre was shelled on at least three occasions during the reporting period.
The warring parties failed to guarantee safe passage for civilians, reportedly leaving
a number of people trapped in combat zones in Benghazi. UNSMIL also received
reports of the deliberate destruction of property by armed elements associated with
Operation Dignity.
41. In western Libya, civilians were killed and injured in periodic outbursts of
fighting in Al Zawiya and Tripoli. UNSMIL received reports of armed groups
engaging in looting and deliberate destruction of civilian property targeted because
of family or perceived political affiliations. Civilian facilities and infrastructure,
including airports were also hit in airstrikes and shelling, particularly in Zintan and
Tripoli.
42. Many human rights defenders fled the country or fell silent in the face of
assault, arbitrary detention, closure of non-governmental organization offices and
death threats; others operate underground at great risk to themselves and their
families. The Benghazi offices of the National Council for Civil Liberties and

15-13079

7/15

S/2015/624

Human Rights, whose Tripoli offices were closed in Nove mber 2014, were raided
on 16 March.
43. Journalists and other media professionals continued to face attacks,
abductions, threats and intimidation against them or their families, torture and other
ill treatment. On 23 April, an armed group allegedly affiliated with the Benghazi
Revolutionaries’ Shura Council killed Muftah al-Qatrani, a prominent media
professional and owner of a television production company in Benghazi. Women
journalists have also been vulnerable to sexual assaults and harassment, leading
many to flee the country. Some continued to receive threats while abroad.
44. Attacks on journalists and activists took place against the backdrop of an
ongoing systematic campaign of media incitement, as different television stations
and other media outlets continued to either openly take sides in the conflict or be
pressured into doing so. This often resulted in media outlets getting actively
involved in the public dissemination of inflammatory material. The United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) continued to work
closely with Libyan media organizations to promote professional and ethical
standards in news reporting and move away from programming that propagates
stereotypes and risks incitement to violence.
45. Refugees, asylum seekers and migrants remained vulnerable to arbitrary and
prolonged detention in abusive conditions, sexual abuse, forced labour, exploitation
and extortion. Foreign nationals detained by the Ministry of the Interior or by armed
groups face deplorable conditions, with substandard access to basic necessities and
medical care. Armed groups have abducted foreign nationals for ransom or to secure
releases of Libyans detained overseas. Others have been taken on suspicion of
engaging in armed hostilities. In eastern Libya, foreign nationals accused of
belonging to terrorist groups have been detained without legal authorization and
allegedly subjected to torture or other ill treatment.
Abductions, detention, torture and killings
46. Fighters on all sides abducted civilians on the basis of their identity, family
and perceived political affiliations. Children also continued to be victims of
abductions, including by armed groups seeking ransoms from their families. In
eastern Libya, forces loyal to Operation Dignity abducted civilians suspected of
sympathizing with or having relatives associated with the Benghazi Revolutionaries’
Shura Council. Many were held in the Department of Criminal Investigations in
Benghazi and Marj, the Birsis detention facility, and the military wing of Gernada
Prison, amid concerns of deaths in custody.
47. At least four men were publicly executed and the hand of another amputated
on the orders of a purportedly ISIL/Daesh-established court in Derna during the
reporting period.
48. In western Libya, armed groups from different sides of the conflict abducted
civilians, often in the hope of securing exchanges of fighters and civilians taken by
rival groups. Those abducted were usually at risk of torture and other ill treatment
and frequently denied contact with their families. UNSMIL also received reports of
torture and other ill treatment in a number of detention facilities in western Libya,
including the Abu Salim, al-Farouq, al-Jazira, and al-Janoubi detention facilities, as
well as the Abu Bakr al-Siddiq and al-Wutya military bases. A number of detainees,

8/15

15-13079

S/2015/624

including one Tawerghan individual taken from the street in Tripoli, died in custody,
believed to have been summarily executed or tortured to death. The Tawerghan
individual’s relative who had also been taken with him was transferred to
al-Jawiyyah Prison in Misrata. Three aid workers employed by the Sheikh Taher
al-Zawi Foundation Charity were also abducted on 5 June in al -Shwayrif while
en route to deliver humanitarian assistance to areas in the south-west.
49. The appearance of a number of abducted individuals in televised “confessions”
aired on the Libya Awalan channel, “admitting” to engaging in fighting and murder
remains of particular concern. Bruises and swelling were visible on those filmed at
the Birsis detention facility.
50. Foreign nationals were also the victims of attacks, abductions and unlawful
killings because of their religion. On 19 April, ISIL/Daesh released videos showing
the beheadings and shootings of some 28 Ethiopian and Eritrean nationals. The fate
of other Christian foreign nationals abducted between August 2014 and June 2015
remains unknown.
51. UNSMIL continued to urge the immediate and unconditional release of all
those illegally detained persons. A number of prisoner exchanges between warring
parties took place during the reporting period, including in April and May. Over
50 prisoners were released in Misrata in July.
Judiciary and penal system
52. Fighting in different parts of the country continued to impede the full
functioning of the judicial system, particularly in Sirte, Derna and Benghazi. On
14 June, the Court of South Benghazi decided to resume operations for the first time
since a bomb attack in February 2014. The Court of Derna is planning to r esume
work by relocating to Al Baida or Tobruk.
53. Several prisons, especially in the east and south of the country, have reported
severe shortages of medical supplies, including drugs for infectious diseases. Also,
as a result of budgetary considerations, authorities in Tripoli decided to reduce the
medical staff seconded from the Ministry of Health to work in prisons.
Trials of officials of the former regime
54. In May, the Tripoli Court of Assize concluded public hearings in the trial of
37 former regime officials, including Saif al-Islam Qadhafi and Abdullah
al-Senussi. On 28 July, the Court of Assize issued its verdict, sentencing Saif
al-Islam, Abdullah al-Senussi, and 7 other officials to death, 8 others to life
imprisonment and 15 to prison sentences of between 5 and 12 years; and 4 were
acquitted of all charges. The Court also announced that seven of th e defendants,
including Saif al-Islam, were tried in absentia. The prosecution presented no
witnesses or other evidence during the hearings, and the court allowed each defence
to present no more than three witnesses. Some defence lawyers argued that
witnesses were afraid to testify and that they faced challenges in meeting their
clients privately. Mr. Qadhafi has not appeared at any hearing since J une 2014, and
Libya has not complied with the International Criminal Court’s order to surrender
him. The United Nations and human rights organizations have expressed concern
that the trials fall short of international standards.

15-13079

9/15

S/2015/624

C.

Security sector
Support to Libyan planning for interim security arrangements
55. Within the framework of the security track of the Libyan political dialogue,
UNSMIL continued to engage Libyan security actors on planning for the
implementation of interim security arrangements, outlined in the Political
Agreement. Throughout the reporting period, the Mission held meetings with
representatives of armed groups, police and armed forces in Libya. It is expected
that plans operationalizing the security arrangements will be final ized within the
security track of the Libyan political dialogue.
Border security
56. Libyan security institutions continued to have very limited capacity to control
or monitor the country’s land and sea borders, allowing easy access for smugglers,
human traffickers and other illegal groups.
Arms and ammunition management
57. During the reporting period, the United Nations Mine Action Service
(UNMAS), as a component of UNSMIL, developed and disseminated a planning
framework for international support for arms and ammunition management in the
event that the Libyan political dialogue process concludes with agreement on the
formation of a Government of National Accord. UNMAS continued to provide
support to the Libyan Mine Action Centre, which is overseeing limited spot
clearance of explosive remnants of war in and around Tripoli and risk education
programmes. UNMAS also organized capacity-building programmes for the Centre
in Tunisia, and developed a database of arms and ammunition storage facilities in
Libya.

D.

Coordination of international assistance
58. During the reporting period, UNSMIL continued to coordinate international
assistance to Libya from Tunisia, including by chairing a number of international
coordination groups in the areas of security, human rights, elections, the constitution
and women’s empowerment.

E.

Humanitarian assistance
59. The humanitarian situation in Libya continued to deteriorate during the
reporting period, affecting an estimated 2 million people, a figure representing an
increase of 125 per cent since September 2014.
60. Approximately 435,000 people remain internally d isplaced in Libya, including
approximately 290,000 women and children. As at May, 201,373 internally
displaced persons were located in eastern Libya, including 105,000 in Benghazi; at
least 211,902 were in western Libya, most in and around Tripoli. As at J anuary, at
least 12,230 people had been displaced by the recent fighting in and around Awbari,
in addition to the 4,800 internally displaced persons who remained unable to return
to their homes following clashes in January 2014. Most Libyan internally disp laced

10/15

15-13079

S/2015/624

persons are sheltered in public or abandoned buildings, or hosted by relatives and
local communities. Many have been displaced repeatedly and remain in need of
assistance.
61. There are currently approximately 100,000 refugees and asylum seekers in
Libya, of whom 36,868 have registered with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). In June, UNHCR commenced renewal of
expired asylum seeker and refugee certificates, and verification of the existing
registration data, with plans to resume registration of new asylum seekers once
security conditions permit.
62. Approximately 47,449 migrants and refugees reached the Italian coast by sea
during the first five months of 2015, including 4,338 minors, of whom almost 3,000
were unaccompanied; approximately 90 per cent had departed from Libya, a figure
representing a 15 per cent increase over the same period in 2014. More than 3,800
persons have been rescued or intercepted at sea by the Libyan Coast Guard in 2015,
and disembarked in Libya.
63. Some 1.2 million migrants from neighbouring and third countries are currently
estimated to be in Libya. Conditions in migrant detention centres do not meet
minimum international standards; they are invariably overcrowded, with poor
sanitation and often no separation of men, women, and children, creating a
heightened risk of sexual and gender-based violence. UNHCR has successfully
advocated for the release of persons of concern, including pregnant women in need
of natal care, and continues to seek community-based alternatives to detention for
children, particularly those unaccompanied. However, forced labour, exploitation
and abuse in unofficial places of detention operated by militia groups and human
traffickers remain serious concerns, as does the targeting of Christians by extremist
groups.
64. UNHCR operates two community development centres in Tripoli and one in
Benghazi through its implementing partners, providing medical assistance,
psychosocial counselling, financial support for the most vulnerable, individual case
management, and a safe space for asylum seekers and refugees in the urban
community. In Benghazi, UNHCR also participates in coordinating the response to
the crisis of internal displacement in collaboration with local and internatio nal
NGOs, including through the distribution of food and non -food items to an
estimated 1,200 families.
65. The intensification of fighting in eastern and southern Libya, coupled with
widespread fuel shortages, the disruption of market supply and soaring p rices, has
made access to food a serious issue for over a million people. Despite limited
funding, the World Food Programme (WFP) has distributed food rations to 146,000
internally displaced persons in Libya through local cooperating partners since
January. According to a preliminary forecast by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the 2015 cereal crop is almost 10 per cent
below average.
66. Shortages of some medical supplies, particularly of anaesthesia, dialysis,
cancer and psychiatric medicines, as well as vaccines, have become severe owing to
funding limitations and logistical difficulties. The World Health Organization and
other health partners continued to provide donations of medicines in the most
affected areas, but available resources are relatively limited. Damage to medical

15-13079

11/15

S/2015/624

facilities, staff shortages and local insecurity have also forced the closure of many
hospitals, particularly in areas that have sustained long -term conflict, including
Benghazi, Sabha, Sirte and Awbari.
67. United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners consider improved and
updated information on humanitarian needs in Libya a top priority. The
humanitarian country team launched in April 2015 a multisectoral in-depth
assessment designed to provide the evidence base for a new humanitarian needs
overview and humanitarian strategic response plan for Libya. This will replace the
previous humanitarian appeal for Libya launched in September 2014.
68. Limited funding for humanitarian operations for Libya cont inued to present
significant challenges. The response to date to the current humanitarian appeal has
fallen considerably short of the $35,250,000 requested, with only 34 per cent
funded.
69. Against the backdrop of continued attacks on religious and cultur al sites and
the threat that the ongoing consolidation of ISIL/Daesh is posing to Libya’s cultural
heritage, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) conducted a series of workshops in Tunisia for technical staff involv ed
in heritage protection in Libya. UNESCO is also expanding its work with
municipalities and youth in Libya to promote the appreciation, protection and
preservation of cultural heritage.

IV. Deployment of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
70. Due to security conditions, the majority of international staff have been
relocated to Tunisia, with the Mission’s temporary headquarters in Tunis. As at May,
a total of 224 UNSMIL international and national staff members and government provided personnel were deployed. In relation to the UNSMIL presence in Tunisia,
the United Nations is in discussions with the Government of Tunisia to conclude an
agreement on the emergency temporary relocation of UNSMIL to the country, in
order to ensure that the Mission can continue to carry out its mandate from there. In
addition, UNSMIL has three staff members at Headquarters and 15 at the Global
Service Centre in Brindisi.

V. Safety and security
71. The overall security situation in Libya remained highly volati le and
unpredictable. Terrorist attacks and security incidents targeting the international
community continued during the reporting period. On 12 April, terrorists attacked
the South Korean embassy in Tripoli, with a similar attack on the Moroccan
embassy the following day. On 20 April, an improvised explosive device exploded
in front of the Spanish embassy. On 24 May, unknown gunmen attacked Ukraine’s
ambassador to Libya while he was driving from Tripoli to Tunis. On 12 June, an
armed group stormed the Tunisian consulate in Tripoli and kidnapped 10 Tunisian
staff, in apparent reprisal for the Tunisian Government’s arrest of a senior Libya
Dawn member facing kidnapping charges in Tunisia. The Tunisian nationals were
later freed.

12/15

15-13079

S/2015/624

72. Several protests against the United Nations-facilitated Libyan political
dialogue and my Special Representative took place during the reporting period.
They included demonstrations in Tobruk on 9 and 23 March, with the latter
preventing a scheduled meeting between my Special Representative and House of
Representative members. In Tripoli, protestors gathered on 31 March and 7 April at
the compound previously used as the UNSMIL headquarters. That was followed on
1 May by a call by elements of the Libya Dawn coalition to protest again st the
United Nations for allegedly undermining the Libyan revolution.

VI. Financial aspects
73. The total resources approved for UNSMIL for the period 1 January 2015 to
31 December 2015 amount to $47,860,100, approved by the General Assembly in its
resolution 69/274 B.

VII. Observations and recommendations
74. A year after the serious outbreak of violent conflict in the summer of 2014,
Libya’s political, social and security landscape has been completely transformed.
Political polarization continues to be manifested in the deeply divisive institutional
crisis at both the legislative and executive levels, dangerously hindering governance
and undermining any effort to address the many challenges confronting Libya. The
grave humanitarian situation resulting from internal displacement, growing
insecurity and criminality has been compounded by further weakening of State
institutions. The consequences of the conflict in Libya are evident not only in the
hardship borne by the Libyan people, but also in the increasing activities of human
smugglers and traffickers, who continue to brazenly exploit the country’s security
vacuum.
75. The scale of human suffering, the degree of economic decline and the
destruction wrought on Libya and the foundations of the State underscore the urgent
need for bold and decisive steps to restore peace, law and order. While no one
underestimates the deep sense of mistrust that continues to characterize the political
climate, leaders from across the Libyan political spectrum must b e reminded that
unless they quickly reach an agreement that allows for a peaceful solution to the
current conflict, the consequences to Libya’s long-term future and stability will be
dire.
76. In this regard, I wish to acknowledge the perseverance and cont ribution of all
participants in the Libyan political dialogue and commend them for their courage in
transcending their differences in the interest of peace, with a view to forging a
vision that allows for the resumption of Libya’s democratic transition and an end to
the armed conflict.
77. The initialling of the Libyan Political Agreement on 11 July marks an
important breakthrough in the Libyan political dialogue. Despite the difficulties and
challenges that have confronted the talks, these Libyan leaders h ave demonstrated a
clear commitment to bringing an end to the year-long conflict. The initialling of the
Agreement has sent a reassuring message to the Libyan people that Libya’s political
leaders can work together to unite and rebuild their country, and spare further
bloodshed.

15-13079

13/15

S/2015/624

78. The success of any agreement and its ability to bring an effective end to the
conflict will be largely dependent on its inclusiveness. I urge all parties that have
not initialled the agreement to continue engaging with the dialo gue process. There
can be no alternative to dialogue, and the United Nations will spare no effort to
ensure that the concerns of all stakeholders are taken into account.
79. I further call on Libya’s leaders to take note of local reconciliation initiatives
in the west, which not so long ago was the scene of major hostilities. I am
particularly encouraged by the initiatives taken by community representatives and
security actors to negotiate local ceasefire agreements and prisoner exchanges, and
I call on other actors elsewhere in the country to show similar leadership. Today,
Libya’s leaders have a unique opportunity to conclude a political agreement that can
bring a decisive end to the conflict and a resumption of the political transition
process.
80. For its part, the United Nations, along with the wider international community,
will continue to work in close consultation with Libyan stakeholders to ensure
adequate support to the implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement, as well
as technical assistance to a future Government of National Accord to enable it to
effectively address the wide array of complex challenges facing the country.
81. Notwithstanding progress in political talks at the national level, I remain
deeply concerned by the situation in Benghazi, a city that once prided itself on
being the birthplace of the Libyan revolution. The armed conflict has destroyed
large areas of the city and is significantly impacting the humanitarian situation of
the civilian population. An agreement that ends the fighting in Benghazi will not
only help address and alleviate the existing humanitarian needs, it will also pave the
way for legitimate security actors and State institutions to jointly counter the threat
posed by terrorist and other violent extremist groups operating in the city and its
environs. Libya’s leaders must take decisive action to spare Benghazi further
carnage and hardship.
82. I am equally alarmed by the apparent increased criminality and communal
fighting in various areas of southern Lib ya, which has forced hundreds of families
to flee their homes and placed an additional burden on communities already
struggling to cope with the continued influx of migrants and refugees. The cycles of
violence and communal tensions underscore the need for Libya’s political leaders
and stakeholders to move quickly to conclude a political settlement that restores
State authority and paves the way for the establishment of law and order.
83. The continued ability of terrorist and other violent extremist groups such as
ISIL/Daesh and Ansar al-Sharia to expand their areas of influence and control is a
source of grave concern. Experience from elsewhere in the region has demonstrated
clearly the imminent danger these groups pose not only to the territorial integrit y of
a State, but equally and perhaps more destructively to local communities.
Countering this threat will require a unified and collective effort on the part of all
Libyans. I urge Libya’s leaders to take the threat seriously. There is no doubt that
these groups are acting in close coordination with other violent extremist and
terrorist groups in the region, and that they will stop at nothing in the pursuit of
their objective to forcibly impose a political and societal vision that is at odds with
the principles and values that guided Libya’s 17 of February Revolution.

14/15

15-13079

S/2015/624

84. I am deeply concerned by the practice of abducting civilians and other serious
violations and abuses of international human rights and humanitarian law. I urge the
Libyan authorities and those with influence on the ground to do their utmost to end
these abuses and ensure that the perpetrators are brought to justice, in accordance
with international standards. Field commanders and political leaders in particular
should declare publicly that such abuses will not be tolerated and that those
committing them will be removed from active duty and held accountable. All those
detained must be treated humanely and either released or handed over to the justice
system for fair and due process. All abducted civilians must be released immediately
and unconditionally and the fate of missing persons must be clarified.
85. I urge all parties to the conflict to immediately end indiscriminate attacks or
direct attacks on civilians and ensure the safe and voluntary evacuation of civilians
trapped in areas of conflict. I also call on all warring parties to ensure unimpeded
access to humanitarian assistance to all affected communities, and undertake all
necessary measures to ensure that humanitarian personnel are protected from attacks
including arbitrary detention and intimidation. With regard to international support
for humanitarian efforts, I reiterate earlier calls for Member States to redouble their
efforts towards mobilizing additional resources in support of the Libya
Humanitarian Appeal.
86. The United Nations will remain focused on supporting the Libyans to conclude
the political agreement that was initialled on 11 July. The United Nations will
provide facilitation and assistance in accordance with the principles of national
ownership. To that end, I recommend that the Security Council renew the mandate
of UNSMIL as an integrated special political mission, pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2213 (2015). This will allow the United Nations and my Special
Representative to work with the Libyans on moving the political dia logue process
forward, conclude the Political Agreement and pave the way for the formation of a
Government of National Accord. In accordance with my special report on the
strategic assessment of the United Nations presence in Libya of 13 February
(S/2015/113), the United Nations has continued its planning process to implement
the recommendations of the report in the evolving context. The Government of
National Accord, once formed, will determine the support requi red from the United
Nations in the immediate term in order to enable the implementation of the Libyan
Political Agreement. The United Nations has initiated preparations to respond
swiftly and effectively to such a request. Furthermore, I intend to dispatch a
technical assessment mission to Libya to formulate proposals on how the United
Nations should specifically adapt to the new operating environment that will result
in the establishment of a Government of National Accord.
87. I would like to express my appreciation for the strong support and technical
and logistical assistance that various Member States, as well as regional and
international organizations, have provided in support of the United Nations facilitated dialogue process. I also wish to convey my appreciation to the staff of
UNSMIL for their dedication and continued efforts in such difficult circumstances,
more than a year after the Mission’s evacuation from Tripoli. Finally, I would like to
commend my Special Representative, Bernardino León, for his leadership and
tireless efforts to bring Libyan actors to the negotiating table. While much work lies
ahead, I congratulate him and his team on the progress achieved so far, against
formidable odds.

15-13079

15/15
