S/2010/493

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 September 2010
Original: English

Letter dated 23 September 2010 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to paragraph 6 of Security Council resolution 1765
(2007) in which the Council decided that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Côte d’Ivoire shall certify that all stages of the electoral
process provide all the necessary guarantees for the holding of open, free, fair and
transparent presidential and legislative elections in accordance with international
standards.
I am pleased to inform you that tomorrow, 24 September 2010, my Special
Representative will be issuing the attached statement (annex I), certifying the final
voters list, which was agreed upon by the Ivorian parties on 6 September 2010. I
intend to issue a statement on the same day, which is also attached (annex II). As
you are aware, my Special Representative will brief the Council on 28 September
2010 on the certification process in detail.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council for information.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

10-54988 (E) 270910

*1054988*

S/2010/493

Annex I
[Original: English and French]

Statement on the certification of the final voters list by
Choi Young-Jin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Côte d’Ivoire
Abidjan, 24 September 2010
1.
The Security Council mandated me in resolution 1765 (2007) to certify that all
stages of the electoral process provide all the necessary guarantees for the holding of
open, free, fair and transparent presidential and legislative elections in Côte d’Ivoire
in accordance with international standards, and requested the Secretary-General to
take the necessary steps to have at my disposal a support cell providing me with all
the appropriate assistance to fulfil this task.
2.
The Ouagadougou Political Agreement (signed in March 2007) recognized that
the identification of the Ivorian and foreign populations living in Côte d’Ivoire is a
major issue and that the absence of clear and standard identity documents and of
individual administrative documents attesting to the identity and nationality of
persons is a source of conflict. The parties agreed that all Ivorian citizens of voting
age may be registered on the voters list. In order to register, they must be in
possession of a birth certificate or duplicate birth certificate.
3.
In Côte d’Ivoire, the ownership of the organization of elections belongs to the
Ivorian authorities with the assistance of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
(UNOCI). Consequently, I, as head of UNOCI, am to certify the elections without
organizing them. Furthermore, when the office of High Representative for the
elections was abolished in 2007 in the wake of the signing of the Ouagadougou
Political Agreement, its two major functions, guidance and verification, were
assigned to two separate entities. Guidance to help resolve any difficulty in the
electoral process was integrated into the role of the Facilitator while verification
became certification to be mandated to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Côte d’Ivoire.
4.
With a view to assessing the certification under this specific context, I developed,
in consultation with the key Ivorian stakeholders, the five-criteria framework for
certification, which was subsequently referred to in paragraph 32 of the sixteenth
progress report of the Secretary-General on UNOCI (S/2008/250). The framework
defines broad benchmarks that enable me to assess whether: (a) a secure
environment exists during the period leading to the elections and allows for the full
participation of the population and the candidates in the process; (b) the electoral
process is inclusive; (c) all candidates have equitable access to State-controlled
media and whether the latter remain neutral; (d) the voters lists are credible and
accepted by all parties; and (e) the results of the elections are determined through a
transparent counting process and are accepted by all or are challenged peacefully
through the appropriate channels.
5.
The Security Council stressed that it would base its assessment of the electoral
process on the certification to be prepared by the Special Representative consistent
with the five-criteria framework referred to in document S/2008/250 and after

2

10-54988

S/2010/493

inclusive contacts with all stakeholders in Côte d’Ivoire, including civil society
(resolution 1880 (2009)).
6.
The certification of the final voters list focuses on six major steps that have
spanned more than five years, such as the mobile courts operation, the reconstitution
of the civil status registers, the identification of the population, the voter registration
process, the establishment of the provisional voters list and the appeals process. At
the successful conclusion of each of the first five steps, I duly certified each step
“implicitly” through a press conference in which I made a positive evaluation of the
work accomplished.
7.
The most important of such examples is the “implicit” certification of the
provisional voters list on 25 November 2009, which I characterized at a press
conference as “solid, balanced and credible”. This assessment was supported by a
detailed analysis and illustrating tables of the provisional voters list, which
consisted of 5,277,392 traced people, commonly known as the “white list”, and
1,033,985 yet to be traced people, commonly known as the “grey list”.
8.
The certification of the final voters list, at this juncture, focuses on the appeals
process, building upon the “implicit” certification of the previous five steps.
9.
Throughout the process leading to the establishment of the final voters list, I
closely monitored the consultations among the parties, examined and analysed the
procedures agreed upon, closely followed the implementation of those procedures,
and gave priority to consultation and dialogue with all the national institutions, civil
society and stakeholders responsible for managing the electoral process, including
political actors, the Facilitator and international partners.
10. I measured that process against two key yardsticks: peace and inclusiveness.
While I remain concerned about the violence that disrupted the electoral process in
February 2010 and multiple challenges and delays encountered in the
implementation of the Ouagadougou Political Agreement and its supplementary
agreements, peace and stability have generally prevailed since the signing of the
Ouagadougou Political Agreement in 2007.
11. The inclusiveness issue encountered significant challenges. The need for
verification of the voters list, as agreed to by the protagonists of the Ouagadougou
Political Agreement, was prompted by reports of the “fraudulent” preparation of a
parallel list of 429,000 persons by the former president of the Independent Electoral
Commission (IEC), in early January 2010. The dissolution of the Independent
Electoral Commission and the Government ensued on 12 February 2010. With the
Facilitator’s assistance, the new Independent Electoral Commission was established on
25 February 2010 whereas the new, complete Government took office on 4 March
2010.
12. At a meeting held on 14 April 2010, the Prime Minister and the President of
the Independent Electoral Commission agreed to deal with the “grey list” of
1,033,985 persons in a separate manner. On 15 July 2010, 434,000 persons of the
“grey list” have been validated and merged into the “white list” to produce the new
provisional voters list of 5,776,784 persons.
13. At the end of a long and winding procedure, however, the Ivorian protagonists
finally agreed upon the results of the verification operation and of the appeals
process, on 6 September 2010, with minimal modification of the provisional voters

10-54988

3

S/2010/493

list. This has enabled the establishment of the final voters list by the Independent
Electoral Commission, which, at that time, had already concluded its own appeals
process. Presidential decree No. 2010-238 of 9 September 2010 authorizing the
distribution of national identity cards to 5,750,720 people on the final voters list was
subsequently signed. Furthermore, in a press communiqué, this final voters list was
endorsed by the members of the Standing Consultative Framework of the
Ouagadougou Political Agreement on 21 September 2010.
14. The making of the final voters list of 5,725,720 from the new provisional
voters list of 5,776,784 is as follows:
– 55,948 adjourned as a result of verification process.
– 1,261 rejected as biometric duplicates.
– 1,273 cancelled as a result of the appeals process.
– 7,418 added as a result of the appeals process.
15. After a thorough analysis and evaluation of this final voters list, I arrived at
the conclusion that this list is, just as in the case of the provisional voters list, solid,
balanced, credible and, I should add, certifiable. It is my assessment that, despite
multiple challenges and delays, the electoral process has been conducted in an
atmosphere that could be qualified as peaceful and stable. The procedures adopted
and implemented throughout this process also reasonably gave eligible voters ample
opportunity to register to vote. Thus, as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, and in keeping with the certification mandate vested upon me by the
Security Council, I have the honour to hereby explicitly certify the final voters list
for the upcoming Ivorian elections.
16. At this juncture, I have to point out that my certification role has been
facilitated by the Ivorian protagonists’ consensual way of taking decisions all along
the electoral process. This consensual way of decision-making, although time
consuming, was in the end instrumental in ensuring a peaceful environment for the
electoral process as well as inclusiveness. For this, I would like to address my
sincere appreciation to the Ivorian people and political leaders.
17. It must be noted that the successful establishment of the final voters list in
Côte d’Ivoire carries a crucial additional consequence. This is the identification of
the population. Now, with the completion of the final voters list, millions of people
will soon receive an identity card for the first time in their life. This is a landmark
achievement.
18. The challenges lying ahead are not to be underestimated. Yet I remain
confident that, together, we shall meet them with success. The Ivorian people, who
have suffered and waited for so long, deserve nothing less. I call upon all
stakeholders to remain committed to the holding of open, free, fair and transparent
presidential and legislative elections, with a view to bringing the Ivorian crisis to a
conclusion.

4

10-54988

S/2010/493

Annex II
[Original: English]

Statement attributable to the Spokesperson for the
Secretary-General on the certification process in Côte d’Ivoire
24 September 2010
The Secretary-General notes the certification by his Special Representative for
Côte d’Ivoire of the final voters list established by the Independent Electoral
Commission. He congratulates the Ivorian political leaders and the Facilitator on
this important achievement.
The Secretary-General calls on all Ivorian political actors to build on this
consensus in order to maintain a peaceful environment before, during and after the
elections, with a view to bringing a peaceful and expeditious conclusion to this
process.
He commends the Ivorian people for their patience and hopes this crucial step
forward will lead to the holding of open, free, fair and transparent presidential and
parliamentary elections. He reiterates the United Nations willingness to assist in
accordance with its mandate and resources.

10-54988

5
