S/2017/712

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 August 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on progress in the
implementation of the political agreement of
31 December 2016
1.
The present report covers developments in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo since 30 June 2017 and is submitted pursuant to resolution 2348 (2017), in
which the Security Council requested the Secretary-General to update it in writing
every 45 days on political and technical progress and obstacles to the
implementation of the Comprehensive and Inclusive Political Agreemen t signed on
31 December 2016.

I. Key political developments related to the implementation of
the agreement
2.
Political tensions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo continue to rise,
amid continuing challenges towards the full implementation of the political
agreement of 31 December 2016, which should guide the country towards t he
holding of peaceful and credible elections and the conclusion of the political
transition period. Against this backdrop, popular dissatisfaction with the political
process continues to grow, aggravated by the worsening socioeconomic situation.
Moreover, the security situation remains of concern in several areas in the country,
in particular in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Kasai region,
while security incidents have occurred in Kinshasa and in other main urban centres.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the signatories of the
political agreement have yet to reach consensus on an inclusive way forward for the
implementation of the agreement, particularly with respect to establishing
conditions conducive to the holding of timely, credible and transparent presidential,
national and provincial legislative elections.
3.
In a statement on 1 July, my Special Representative for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo reminded all signatories of the 31 December agreement of
their obligation to fully and faithfully implement the agreement. He stressed that the
Independent National Electoral Commission has the primary responsibility for the
organization of the elections and called upon the Commission to publish, without
further delay, an official and consensual electoral calendar. My Special
Representative further recalled the importance of the required confidence -building
measures for promoting a meaningful consensus. The President of the Commission,
Corneille Nangaa, responded on 4 July, through the media, by asserting that the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of

17-13631 (E)

180817

*1713631*

S/2017/712

the Congo (MONUSCO) was not mandated to organize elections, but rather to
maintain peace.
4.
On 7 July, in Paris, during a high-level meeting on the electoral process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo held at the initiative of the International
Organization of la Francophonie (OIF), Corneille Nangaa provided an update on the
status of the electoral process, including a suggested set of minimum timelines
required for the successful conduct of the process that would make it difficult to
comply with the December 2017 deadline.
5.
On 13 July, the Minister of Communication and the Media and government
spokesperson, Lambert Mende, stated that further assessments of the electoral time
frame were the joint prerogative of the National Council for Monitoring the
Agreement and the Electoral Process, the Government and the Independent National
Electoral Commission, in accordance with the agreement of 31 December 2016. On
20 July, the President of the Union pour la nation congolaise, Vital Kamerhe, made
similar remarks, stating that the decision to postpone the holding of elections
beyond December 2017 could only be taken jointly by the Commission, the Council
and the Government, and urged the Commission to publish a detailed electoral
calendar. The opposition Rassemblement des forces politiques et sociales de la
République démocratique du Congo acquises au changement platform and it s
member parties made several statements denouncing the remarks made by the
President of the Commission, describing it as “a declaration of war against the
Congolese people” and calling for “acts of resistance” starting on 22 July. The “acts
of resistance” did not, however, materialize.
6.
President Joseph Kabila delegated to the Presidents of the two Chambers of
Parliament his prerogative to convene the designated members of the National
Council for Monitoring the Agreement and the Electoral Process to va lidate their
credentials, discuss the consensual designation of the Council’s President and
establish the bureau of the oversight mechanism. On 3 July, the Speaker of the
National Assembly, Aubin Minaku, presided over a preliminary meeting of proposed
Council members, which was criticized by many opposition parties, including the
Union pour la nation congolaise, a signatory of the special arrangement of 27 April,
which had set out the process for establishing the Council. On 20 July, the President
of the Senate, Léon Kengo wa Dondo, met with most of the proposed Council
delegates. That meeting was followed on 22 July by a meeting co -chaired by the
presidents of both chambers of Parliament, at which the President of t he Forces
novatrices pour l’union et la solidarité and leader of the Rassemblement dissident
wing, Joseph Olenghankoy, was appointed Chair of the Council. Adolphe Lumanu,
of the Presidential majority, and Vital Kamerhe were nominated as vice -presidents
of the oversight mechanism, with a third post allocated to the Front pour le respect
de la Constitution opposition platform led by the Mouvement de libération du
Congo. Vital Kamerhe declined to accept the position of vice -president, arguing that
the process to designate members of the Council was no t in line with relevant
provisions of the 31 December 2016 agreement. On 24 July, the Secretary -General
of the Episcopal Conference of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Abbott
Donatien Nshole, expressed disapproval with regard to the process leading to the
appointment of the Chair and members of the Council, citing the lack of sufficient
consensus and inclusiveness. On 25 July, the Front pour le respect de la Constitution
dissident wing spokesperson, Lumuna Ndubu, accepted the vice -president position
previously rejected by Eve Bazaiba, the coordinator of the Front and Secretary General of the Mouvement de libération du Congo. Also on 25 July, Joseph
Olenghankoy chaired the first meeting of the Council, which resulted in the
establishment of two commissions responsible for developing, respectively, the
rules and regulations and the draft budget of the mechanism.
2/7

17-13631

S/2017/712

7.
On 17 July, President Kabila appointed the former Deputy Chief of Staff for
Intelligence and Operations of the Forces armées de la République d émocratique du
Congo, Lieutenant-General Dieudonné Amuli, as Commissioner General of the
national police, replacing General Charles Bisengimana. Further changes were made
to the leadership of security services, in particular the national police, at the
national and provincial levels.
8.
The Rassemblement convened a conclave on 21 and 22 July. The opposition
platform reiterated calls for the implementation of the confidence -building measures
foreseen in the political agreement, in particular with regard to t he release of
political prisoners and restrictions to democratic space, measures to promote the
independence of the Independent National Electoral Commission, the publication of
the electoral calendar and the holding of the elections by December 2017. The
Rassemblement announced a timeline for popular mobilization, including two
general strikes, on 5 and 9 August, protests in main cities on 20 August and further
actions after 1 October, should the Commission fail by September to convene voters
to take part in polls in December 2017. In response, the Minister of Communication
and the Media and government spokesperson stated that any attempts to overthrow
the Government would be considered a crime against the nation and the State and
dealt with as such, in line with the Constitution.
9.
On 27 June, the Deputy Secretary-General of the presidential majority, Joseph
Kokonyangi, stated that a constitutional referendum could prove an alternative to
failed negotiations on the holding of elections. On 11 July, the Un ion des
démocrates socialistes, a party affiliated with the presidential majority, advocated
for electoral reforms aimed at modifying the voting system. On 15 July, the youth
league of the Parti du peuple pour la reconstruction et la démocratie, the domina nt
party in the presidential majority, called for a state of emergency to be declared.
10. Political actors expressed varying views regarding a post -December 2017
transition. On 11 July, the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social advocated
for a six-month transition during the first half of 2018, without President Kabila in
office, should elections not be organized in accordance with the political agreement.
On 14 July, the President of the Liberté political party and former Minister of
Industry, Germain Kambinga, advocated for an 18-month transition period, subject
to a 3-month prorogation in case of force majeure, to be led by President Kabila,
with a prime minister from the Union.

II. Key developments related to the implementation of
the agreement
Electoral developments
11. The Independent National Electoral Commission announced that it had
registered, as at 29 July, over 37 million eligible vot ers (90 per cent), including 48
per cent women, out of the 41 million estimated members of the electorate
nationwide. The rate of women’s participation in ongoing voter registration
operations ranged from 43 to 48 per cent, with the exception of North Kivu and
South Kivu Provinces, where the rate stood at 51 per cent, owing to special
measures implemented by the Commission, in cooperation with local authorities and
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women.
Regarding the five provinces of the Kasai region, which account for 16 per cent of
the estimated electorate, according to the Commission, voter registration is well
under way in the Kasai Oriental and Sankuru Provinces and most parts of Lomami
Province. Voter registration operations are expected to begin in August in the Kasai
Central and Kasai Provinces, and the Kamiji and Luilu territories of Lomami
17-13631

3/7

S/2017/712

Province, which account for 8.5 per cent of the estimated electorate. Given the
requirement for registration centres to operate for 90 days and the time required for
the consolidation of the registration data, the voter registration process throughout
the country will most likely not be completed before November 2017.
12. On 18 July, the Independent National Electoral Commission announced its
intention to organize gubernatorial elections on 26 August in 11 provinces , namely
Bas-Uélé, Equateur, Haut-Katanga, Haut-Lomami, Kasai Central, Kwilu, Mongala,
South Kivu, South Ubangi, Tshopo and Tshuapa. This announcement followed a
string of no-confidence motions, starting in October 2016, mainly by provincial
deputies from the presidential majority against governors hailing from their own
ranks on the grounds of allegations of embezzlement of funds and mismanagement.
The elections have yet to be held.
Restrictions on political space and violence as they relate to the implementation
of the agreement in the electoral context
13. In its semi-annual note published on 26 July, the United Nations Joint Human
Rights Office documented 430 violations of human rights and fundamental
freedoms linked to restrictions of the democratic space in relation to the elections
between January and June throughout the country. These were mainly violations of
the right to liberty and security of the person, of the right to freedoms of opinion
and expression (98 violations) and of the right to freedom of peaceful assembly (80
violations). The data confirms an increasing trend of violations of political rights
and freedoms since 2015. This is compounded by an absence of meaningful and
systematic investigations and accountability for violators of hu man rights. National
police officers remain the main alleged perpetrators of these violations, accounting
for 211 of the documented human rights violations. The Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo were allegedly responsible for 90 violations,
and were followed by the political and administrative authorities (44 violations),
National Intelligence Agency agents (35 violations), armed groups (28 violations),
judicial authorities (16 violations) and other agents of the State (6 violations).
Confidence-building measures
14. There is an urgent need for further progress towards the implementation of the
confidence-building measures enshrined in the political agreement of 31 December
2016. According to opposition parties, a significant number o f political prisoners
remain in detention, while the Government claims that some of the high -profile
personalities in detention are charged with criminal offences unrelated to their
political activities. Furthermore, a general ban on protests continues to be applied in
most of the main cities. On 10 July, in Kisangani, Tshopo Province, the mayor
prohibited an awareness-raising campaign on voter registration, organized by the
Mouvement de libération du Congo. On 19 July, the appeal in the case against the
former governor of Katanga Province, Moïse Katumbi, who had been sentenced in
2016 to three years in prison on charges of forgery of documents for the acquisition
of a property by the peace tribunal of Kamalondo, commenced at the high court in
Lubumbashi, Haut-Katanga Province. Katumbi’s lawyers noted several irregularities
in the proceedings, all of which were dismissed by the court. There are concerns
regarding efforts to affect the impartiality of the magistrates, especially with regard
to the attempted assassination by unidentified gunmen of one of the judges the night
before the court hearing. Furthermore, intimidation and harassment by state agents
targeting the President of the Union nationale des fédéralistes du Congo and leader
of the Rassemblement in Haut-Katanga, Gabriel Kyungu Wa Kumwanza, have
increased since early July.

4/7

17-13631

S/2017/712

III. Good offices efforts for the implementation of the
agreement and regional developments
15. The Government has intensified diplomatic efforts to broaden regional
support. On 2 July, President Kabila travelled to Addis Ababa on the occasion of the
twenty-ninth African Union summit, to seek the support of his African counterparts
against the targeted sanctions that the European Union and the United States of
America have imposed against some Congolese officials. At the request of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the members of the
Executive Council of the African Union denounced what they considered unjust
unilateral sanctions against States and citizens of African Union member States. As
regards the political agreement, the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the African Union urged for the effective and consensua l implementation of the
31 December agreement, with a view to the holding of elections in December 2017,
and called for the urgent appointment of the chairperson and members of the
National Council for Monitoring the Agreement and the Electoral Process.
16. The Episcopal Conference of the Democratic Republic of the Congo took a
strong stance in support of the full implementation of the agreement of 31 December
2016 and the holding of elections in 2017, calling on the Congolese people to “take
responsibility for their future”, a move which was described as a call for an
insurrection by the presidential majority and the Government. On 4 July, the
Catholic Church launched an awareness-raising campaign on the role of peaceful
protests in support of the political agreement.
17. On 7 July, in Paris, OIF, in collaboration with the International Contact Group
on the Great Lakes Region, convened an extraordinary meeting to discuss the
electoral stakes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Vice Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Léonard She Okitundu, and the President of the
Independent National Electoral Commission, Corneille Nangaa, attended the
meeting.
18. On 13 July, during an extraordinary meeting held in Luanda, the Council of
Ministers of the tripartite mechanism of Angola, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and South Africa unanimously denounced foreign interference in the internal
affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, calling for the withdrawal of
targeted sanctions by non-African organizations and countries against officials of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
19. In the final report of the 19th meeting of its Ministerial Committee of the
Organ on Politics, Defence and Security Cooperation, held from 17 to 21 July, in the
United Republic of Tanzania, the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) asserted that instability in the Kasai region had an impact on the electoral
timeline foreseen by the political agreement and denounced “extra -continental
interference in the internal affairs of African Union member States”, calling for the
withdrawal of targeted sanctions against officials of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. SADC envisages the appointment of a special envoy for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the establishment of a temporary office to better support
the electoral process and facilitate liaison with MONUSCO, with the expectation
that its presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo would restore confidence
among the population and ensure regional support for t he electoral process.
20. My Special Representative and my Special Envoy to the Great Lakes Region
carried out good offices efforts in support of the timely and comprehensive
implementation of the agreement of 31 December 2016 and worked collaboratively
with national actors and regional and international partners towards a solution to the
political impasse.
17-13631

5/7

S/2017/712

21. My Special Representative continued to encourage key Congolese
stakeholders to remain committed to the political process, notably the
implementation of the political agreement. His efforts included meetings with
(a) the Vice Prime Minister and Minister of the Interior and Security, Emmanuel
Shadary Ramazani, on 17 July, who encouraged my Special Representative to
engage separately with the presidential majority and the Rassemblement in a small
contact group format to foster consensus around the political process; (b) the
Secretary-General of the Episcopal Conference of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Abbott Donatien Nshole, on 17 July, who asserted that it was the
responsibility of the Government and the Independent National Electoral
Commission to unblock the current impasse by, respectively, the implementation of
confidence-building measures and the publication of an electoral calendar; (c) the
President of the Rassemblement, Félix Tshisekedi, on 23 July, who described the
appointment of Joseph Olenghankoy at the helm of the National Council for
Monitoring the Agreement and the Electoral Process as an additional tactic by the
ruling majority to delay elections, while deploring the position of regional actors
such as SADC, the Economic Community of Central African States and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region vis-à-vis the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Building on the aforementioned interactions, my Special
Representative continued to encourage all stakeholders to engage in direct dialogue
to find a consensual and inclusive way forward for the full and faithful
implementation of the agreement of 31 December 2016, the establi shment of an
environment for the holding of peaceful and credible elections and the holding of
elections no later than December 2017.
22. Efforts undertaken by my Special Envoy included consultations with regional
and international partners on ways to pro mote and harmonize the engagement of the
international community with the Congolese parties in support of the
implementation of the political agreement. In this regard, on 17 July in Addis
Ababa, my Special Envoy met with the Chairperson of the African Uni on
Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat, and the Commissioner for Political Affairs,
Minata Samate Cesouma, to encourage continued close partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union with a view to facilitating peaceful and
credible elections. The Chairperson welcomed the joint efforts of the two
organizations and urged the guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region to take
additional measures, including joint visits to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in order to sustain engagement with all stakeholders in the political process. On
2 August, my Special Envoy met the President of the Congo, Denis Sassou Nguesso,
to discuss, among other issues, regional efforts to support t he implementation of the
agreement of 31 December 2016.

IV. Observations
23. The political process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is marked by a
widening gap between opposition platforms and the ruling majority regarding the
implementation of the political agreement in a context of continued shrinking of the
democratic space. Many opposition actors, including those opposition parties that
have until recently adopted a more collaborative approach (namely Mouvement de
libération du Congo and Union pour la nation congolaise), might become less
supportive of the agreement if divergences with the ruling majority persist. The
perceived breaches of the political agreement, including the appointment of the
Prime Minister, the signing of the amended special arrangement and the
controversial establishment of the National Council for Monitoring the Agreement

6/7

17-13631

S/2017/712

and the Electoral Process, have undermined the confidence that the stakeholders had
in the political agreement early in 2017 and have led to divisions within and among
opposition platforms and the ruling majority. In addition, the trust that had
developed among the signatories of the agreement has waned. In this light, strong
political will and broad consensus are urgently needed for the full and faithf ul
implementation of the political agreement of 31 December 2016 if a new phase of
political confrontation is to be avoided, especially as political tensions heighten in
the context of repeated calls by many opposition platforms, the Episcopal
Conference of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and civil society for elections
to be held by December 2017, in line with the provisions of the political agreement.
Failure to create conditions conducive to the holding of timely, peaceful, transparent
and credible elections enabling a peaceful transfer of power and concluding the
transition period could deepen the political crisis in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, compounding an already serious security, human rights, humanitarian and
economic situation.
24. Moving the implementation of the 31 December 2016 political agreement
forward requires the parties to demonstrate more political will and that they engage
more constructively. The immediate, full and tangible implementation of the
confidence-building measures, the consensual operationalization of the National
Council for Monitoring the Agreement and the Electoral Process and the publication
of an electoral calendar in line with the provisions of the political agreement are
elements that are essential to fostering the required level of confidence to overcome
the deadlock in the political process. An open democratic space and full respect for
political rights and freedoms for all, including the freedoms of opinion and
expression and peaceful assembly, are essential to establishing the necessary
conditions conducive to the holding of peaceful and credible elections. Politically
motivated deprivation of liberty and other acts of intimidation against persons
expressing opinions perceived as critical of the Govern ment must stop, and those
responsible for human rights violations must be held accountable. Ensuring full
respect for human rights by state security forces, in particular in refraining from the
excessive or disproportionate use of force in the maintenance of public order and
including ensuring accountability for violations of such rights, as well as the
exercise of the utmost restraint by all stakeholders across the political divide, are
also essential for establishing the conditions conducive to the holding of elections. I
exhort Congolese stakeholders to recommit themselves to the faithful implementation
of the agreement of 31 December 2016, including the implementation of confidencebuilding measures to pave the way for a peaceful and credible transfer of power. In
the light of the above, continued political engagement with all key political actors
and civil society will be crucial. It will also be important that regional and
international actors approach the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Con go
with concerted actions and a common understanding of the complexity of the
situation and possible solutions based on Congolese ownership. My Special
Representative, working closely with my Special Envoy, will continue to pursue his
good offices initiatives, in coordination with regional and international partners,
with a view to helping Congolese stakeholders agree on reaching a consensual way
forward for the political process.

17-13631

7/7
