124

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

5. Takes note of the decisions of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme and of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme aimed at expanding and strengthening the joint
venture and invites them to continue to intensify their support for the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office in order
to enable it to carry out its increased responsibilities at a
level commensurate with the pressing needs of the countries
of the region;
6. Expresses its gratitude to the Governments, agencies
of the United Nations system, intergovernmental organizations and other organizations that have contributed to the
implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian region of the Plan
of Action to Combat Desertification;
1. Urges all Governments, organizations of the United
Nations system, other intergovernmental bodies, nongovernmental and other organizations to continue to respond
favourably, bilaterally or through the United Nations
Sudano-Sahelian Office or any other intermediary, to requests for assistance from the Governments of the SudanoSahelian countries in combating desertification;
8. Requests the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme to continue to report annually,
through the Economic and Social Council, to the General
Assembly on the implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian
region of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December /981

36/191.

Study on financing the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/ l 72 of 19 December 1977, in
which it approved the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification, 129 and its resolutions 33/88 and 33/89 of 15 December 1978, 34/184, 34/185 and 34/187 of 18 December
1979 and 35/72 and 35/73 of 5 December 1980, dealing
with various aspects of the implementation of the Plan of
Action,
Taking note of the relevant sections of the report of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its ninth session 130 and Governing Council decisions 9/22 A and B of 26 May 1981 131 on the implementation
of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification,
I. Notes with concern that the problem of insufficient
financing and the increasing demands on the scarce resources of countries suffering from desertification are constraining the implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification;
2. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-GeneraJl 12
and the annex thereto which contains feasibility studies on
and detailed modalities for financing the Plan of Action to
Combat Desertification, prepared by a group of high-level
specialists in international financing;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to obtain the views
of Member States on the feasibility studies and concrete
recommendations for the implementation of the additional
measures of financing deemed practicable by the SecretaryGeneral, and also on the modalities for obtaining financial
resources, as described in paragraphs 13 to 17 of the report
of the Secretary-General;

130
Official Records of the General k,semhlv. Thirll'-sixth Session, S,q,plement No. 25 (A/36/25 and Corr. I).
·
·
131
Ibid., annex L
132
N36/\41.

4. Also requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme, to obtain the views of Member States on
the establishment of an independent corporation for the financing of desertification-control projects on the basis of
the plan presented in the annex to the report of the SecretaryGeneral and also to ascertain the views of Governments as
to their interest in participating financially therein;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
103rd p/enarv meeting
17 December /98/

36/192.

International co-operation in the field of the
environment

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme on the work
of its ninth session. rn in particular annex II thereto,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolutions
1981/51 of 2?. July 1981 and 1981/73 of 24 July 1981
concerning, respectively, the interrelationships between resources, environment, people and development, and international co-operation in the field of the environment,
Taking into account the note by the Secretary-General on
international conventions and protocols in the field of the
environment, 134
Bearing in mind the importance which the International
Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade1.i, attaches to an ecologically sustainable
development process and the need for further international
co-operation in the field of the environment, and taking into
account the fact that environmental considerations should
be viewed in the context of national plans and priorities and
development objectives of all countries, in particular the
developing countries.
Welcoming the convening of an Ad Hoe Meeting of Senior
Government Officials Expert in Environmental Law at Montevideo from 28 October to 6 November 1981,
Stressing the need for additional resources to be made
available to the Fund of the United Nations Environment
Programme for the developing countries to deal with their
most serious environmental problems, such as soil degradation and deforestation, which are examples of very severe
deterioration of natural resources calling for particular
attention,
Recognizing that environmental deficiencies generated by
the conditions of underdevelopment pose grave problems
and can best be remedied by accelerated development
through the transfer of substantial quantities of financial and
technical assistance as a supplement to the domestic effort
of the developing countries and such timely assistance as
may be required,
I. Takes note of the report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme, as adopted,
on the work of its ninth session and the decisions adopted
by the Governing Council at that session; 110

1
" Official Record., ,,j thl' Ge11aal A.uemh/1'. Thirt_\·-sixtl, S1·ssim1, S11pp!t-ment No. 25 (Ant,'2:i and Corr. I l.
'14 A/36/142.
11
' Resolution 35156. annex
116
Official Records of'thi• General Assemhl_r, Thirtr-sixth Session, Supplement No. 25 (Ai3hi2:i and Corr. I). annex 1
