112

General Assembly-Twenty-ninth Session

cil of its responsibilities under the relevant provisions
of the Charter to reconsider their negative attitude
with a view to the elimination forthwith of the threat
to international peace and security ·resulting from the
explosive situation obtaining in the Territory;
8. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to follow the implementation of the present resolution, and invites the Security Council Committee established in pursuance of resolution 253
( 1968) concerning th~ question of Southern Rhodesia
to continue to co-operate in the related work of the
Special Committee.
2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974
3299 (XXIX). Activities of foreign ~onomic and
other interesl8 which are impeding the im•
plementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in Southern Rhodesia,
Namibia and Territories under Portuguese
domination and in ali other Territories under colonial domination and efforts to elim•
inate colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Activities o_f
foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples in Southern Rhodesia, Namibia and Territories under Portuguese domination and in ali other
Territories under colonial domination and efforts to
eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa",
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to this question, 68
Taking into consideration the parts of the report of
the United Nations Council for Namibia relating to this
question, 69
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the prQgramme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, as well as all other
resolutions of the United Nations relating to the item,
Reaffirming the solemn obligation of the administering Powers under the Charter of the United Nations
to promote the political, economic, social and educa·
tional advancement of the inhabitants of the Territories under their administration and to protect the
human and natural resources of those Territories against
abuses,
Reaffirming that any economic or other activity
which impedes the implementation of the Declaration
and obstructs eflorts aimed at the elimination of co68 /hid., chap. IV.
69 lbid., Supplement No. 24 (A/9624) and Supplement
No.14A (A/9624/Add. l ).

lonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa and other colonial Territories violates the
political, economic and social rights and interests of
the peoples of the Territories aad is therefore incompatible with the purposes and principies of the Charter,
Condemning the increasingly intensified activities of
those foreign economic, financia! and other interests
which continue to exploit the natural and human resources of the colonial Territories and to accumulate
and repatriate huge profits to the detriment of the interests of the inhabitants, particularly in southern Africa, thereby impeding the realization by the peoples
of the Territories of their legitimate aspirations for
self-determination and independence,
Strongly condemning the support which South Africa
and the illegal racist minority régime in Southern Rhodesia continue to receive from those foreign economic,
financia! and other interests which are collaborating
with them in their exploitation of the natural and human resources of, and in the further entrenchment of
their illegal and racialist domination over, the international Territory of Namibia and the Non-Self-Goveming Territory of Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe) respectively,
Noting with satisfaction the increasingly widespread
public opinion against the nefarious involvement of
foreign economic, financia! and other interests which
impede the implementation of the Declaration,
1. Rea.ffi.rms the inalienable right of the peoples of
dependent Territories to self-determination and independence and to the enjoyment of the natural resources
of their Territories, as well as their right to dispose of
those rcsources in their best interests;
2. Reiterates that any administering Power which
deprives the colonial peoples of the exercise of their
legitimate rights over their natural resources or subordinates the rights and interests of those peoples to
foreign economic and financia! interests violates the
solemn obligations it has assumed under the Charter of
the United Nations,
3. Reaf]irms that, by their depletive exploitation of
natural resource~, the continued accumulation and repatriation of huge profits and the use of those profits
for the enrichment of foreign settlers and the entrenchment of colonial domination over the Territories, the
activities of foreign economic, financia! and other interests operating at present in the colonial Territories
of southern Africa constitute a major obstacle to po·
litical independence and to the enjoyment of the natural
resources of those Territories by the indigenous inhabitants;
4. Condemns the policies of the colonial Powcrs
and other States which continue to support or collaborate with those foreign economic and other interests
engaged in exploiting the natural and human resources
of the Territories, thus violating the political, economic
and social rights and intcrests of the indigenous peoples and obstructing the full and speedy implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in respect of
those Territories;
5. Calls upan the colonial Powers, as well as those
Governments which have not yet done so, to take legislative, adminisírative or other measures in respect of
their national., and the bodies corporate under their
jurisdiction who own and opcratc enterprises in co-

Resolutions adopted on the reporte of the Fourth Commillee

Jonia( Territories, particularly :n Africa, which are
detrimental to the interests of the inhabitants of those
Territories, in order to put an end to such enterprises
and to prevent new investments that run counter to
the interests of the inhabitants;
6. Requests all States to take effective measures to
end the supply of funds and other forms of assistance,
including military supplies and equipment, to those
régimes which use such assistance to repress the peoples of the colonial Territories and their national liberation movements;
7. Invites ali Govemments and the organizations
within the United Nations system, having regard to
the relevant provisions of the Declaration on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, contained in General Assembly resolution 3201 (S-VI) of
1 May I 974, and of the Programme of Action on the
Establishment of a New International Economic Order, contained in Assembly resolution 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, to ensure in particular that the permanent sovereignty of the peoples of the colonial Territories over their natural resources is fully respected
and safeguarded;
8. Calls upon all States to discontinue ali economic,
financia! or trade relations with South Africa conceming Namibia and to refrain from entering into economic,
financia! or other relations with South Africa, acting
on behalf of or concerning Namibia, which may lend
support to its continued illegal occupation of that
Territory;
9. Calls upon the administering Powers to abolish
every discriminatcry and unjust wage system which
prevails in the Territories under their administration
and to apply in each Territory a uniform system of
wages to ali the inhabitants without any discrimination;
I O. Requests the Secretary-General to give the widest possible publicity to the adverse effects of the activities of foreign economic and other interests in ali
colonial Territories, as well as to the decisions of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
of the General Assembly on this question, and requests
al) Governments to assist the Secretary-General in that
regard;
11. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
study this question and report thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirtieth session.

2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974
3300 (XXIX). lmplemenlalion of the Declaration
on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the inlernational institutions
associated with the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Havi11g considered the ítem entitled "Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated
with the United Nations",
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,

113

and the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration. contained in its resolution
2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, a~ well as ali other
relevan! resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council,
Taking into accmmt with appreciation the reports
submitted on the item by the Secretary-General, 71 ' the
Economic and Social CounciF 1 and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,7~ as well as
the related report of the United Nations Council for
Namibia,73
Taking into account also the statements of the representatives of the national iiberation movements of
the colonial Territories in Africa who participated as
observers in the work relating to their respective countries, and conscious of the urgen! and pressing need of
the peoples concerned for concrete assistance from the
specialized agencies and other institutions associated
with the United Nations in the administration of their
countries and in the reconstruction programmes being
undertáken by their national liberation movements,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the Unitcd
N ations system to take all effective measures, within
their respective spheres of competence, to ensure the
full and speedy implementation of the Declaration and
other rcl.:vant resolutions of the United Nations, particularly in the provision of moral and material assistance, on a priority basis, to the peoples of the colonial
Territories and their national liberation movements,
Noting with deep concern that, although progress
has been maintained in the extension of assistance to
refugees from the colonial Territories in Africa, the
actions taken thus far by the organizations concerned
in the provision of assistance to the peoples of the
Territories through their national liberation movements
continue to remain far from adequate to meet the
urgent needs of those peoples,
Noting with satisfaction the measures taken by severa! specialized agencies and other organizations within
the United Nations system to grant observer status to
the national liberation movements, and expressing the
hope that other organizations concerned will proceed
forthwith to take the necessary steps in this regard,
Expressing its appreciation to the General Secretariat
of the Organization of African Unity for the continued
co-operation and assistance extended by it to the organizations within the United Nations system in connexion
with the implementation of the relevant resolutions of
the United Nations,
We/coming the categorical renunciation by the Government of Portugal of the colonialist policy of its
predecessors, in particular the unequivocal acceptance
by that Government of its obligations under the relevan! provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and its recognition of the right of the peoples concerned
to self-determination and independence in accordance
with the Declaration and with the provisions of all related resolutions of the United Nations, as well as its
ro A/9638 and Add. l, Add. l /Corr.l and Add.2-5; A/9830.
71 Officit1/ Recorcl.r of rhe General As.remhly, Twe11ty-11it11/i
Session, Suppleme111 No. 3 (A/9603), chap. VI, sect. F.
7~ /bici., S11pp/eme111 No. 23 (A/9623/Rev. l), chap. VI.
1:1 /bici..
Supplement No. 24 (A/9624) and Supplement
No. 24A (A/9624/Add.l).
