UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/10
7 March 1997
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH, FRENCH
AND RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3746th meeting of the Security Council, held on 7 March 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Croatia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 24 February 1997 (S/1997/148) on the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES)
and recent developments in that region. It recalls the statement by its
President of 31 January 1997 (S/PRST/1997/4) and reiterates its call on the
parties to cooperate fully with UNTAES and the Transitional Administrator.
"The Security Council shares the observation contained in the report
of the Secretary-General that, with the full cooperation of the parties,
13 April 1997 is a realistic and achievable date for the holding of free
and fair elections in the region.
"The Security Council underlines that it is in the best interests of
the members of the Serb community to collect their citizenship documents,
to participate fully in those elections, and to take part in Croatian
political life as equal citizens on the basis of the implementation of the
rights and guarantees contained in the letter of 13 January 1997 from the
Government of Croatia (S/1997/27, annex). The Council deplores disruptive
activities by some elements of the Serb community in the region creating an
atmosphere of political agitation and uncertainty. It calls upon all
residents of the region to follow wise leadership, to stay in the region,
and to take up their future as citizens of the Republic of Croatia.
"The Security Council stresses that the holding of the elections will
also depend on the readiness of the Government of Croatia to meet all
preconditions, including the issuance of documents, provision of data and
timely completion of the technical arrangements required for certification.
The Council acknowledges the encouraging progress the Government of Croatia
is making in this respect. It is, however, concerned that implementation
of these procedures has been uneven. The Council urges the Government of
Croatia to redouble its efforts to ensure the completion of the necessary
technical preparations for the holding of elections.
97-06299 (E)

070397

/...

S/PRST/1997/10
English
Page 2

"The Security Council strongly urges the Croatian Government to issue,
as a gesture towards reassuring the Serb community, formal public
confimation of the oral guarantees made to UNTAES as specified by the
Secretary-General in his letter of 21 January 1997 (S/1997/62) and to
reaffirm its obligations as referred to in paragraphs 28 and 29 of the
report of the Secretary-General. It also calls upon the Government of
Croatia to apply its amnesty law fairly and consistently to all persons
subject to its jurisdiction. The Council stresses that, to a large
measure, the long-term success of peaceful reintegration will be determined
by the commitment of the Government of Croatia to reconciliation and to
ensuring that those Serbs who are currently resident in the region will
enjoy equal rights as Croatian citizens.
"The Security Council shares the serious concern, as stated in the
report of the Secretary-General, that no progress has been made concerning
the future of displaced persons in the region and the establishment of
equal treatment with respect to housing, access to reconstruction grants
and loans and property compensation, in accordance with the Basic Agreement
on the Region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (S/1995/951)
and Croatian law. The Council reaffirms the right of all refugees and
displaced persons to return to their homes of origin throughout the
Republic of Croatia and to live there in conditions of security. It
welcomes the proposal elaborated by UNTAES and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) concerning the return of displaced
persons and urges the Government of Croatia to pursue discussions on that
proposal without delay, to cooperate closely with UNTAES and UNHCR in
implementation, and to make a clear and unambiguous public statement and
undertake concrete actions confirming the equal rights of all displaced
persons regardless of their ethnicity.
"The Security Council welcomes the commitment by the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and the Republic of Croatia to make progress in their
bilateral relations, in particular with respect to the permanent
demilitarization of the border region and the abolition of the visa regime,
which would constitute a major contribution to local confidence-building
and the stabilization of the region.
"The Security Council recalls its resolution 1079 (1996) of
15 November 1996 and expresses its intention to consider recommendations,
to be submitted by the Secretary-General as soon as possible after the
successful holding of elections, concerning the further United Nations
presence consistent with the fulfilment of the Basic Agreement.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to keep it
regularly informed of the situation. It will remain actively seized of the
matter."

-----
