UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2540). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Adoption of the agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 17 May 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Kuwait to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16569). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . :. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

WV.2540

and Cot-r.1 and 2

.

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of-the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964; are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.
..

l

2540th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 21 May 1984, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

“I have the honour to request that the Security
Council extend an invitation
to Mr. Zehdi Labib
Terzi, Permanent Observer for the Palestine Liberation Organization to the United Nations, to participate in the deliberations of the Council on the item
entitled ‘The situation in the Middle East’, in accordance with the Council’s usual practice.”

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

3. The proposal of the representative of Egypt is not
made pursuant to rule 37 or rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure, but, if approved by the Council, the
invitation to participate in the debate would confer on
the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) the same
rights of participation as those of a Member State when
invited to participate pursuant to rule 37. Does any
member of the Council wish to speak on this proposal?

agenda (SlAgendal2540)

of the agenda

‘.

The situation in Middle East:
Letter dated 17 May 1984 from the Permanent
Representative
of Kuwait to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16569)
The meeting

4. Mr. SORZANO
(United States of America): The
United States opposes extending to the PLO the same
rights to participate in the proceedings of the Council
as if that organization represented a Member State.
We have consistently taken the position that, under
the provisional rules of procedure, the only legal basis
on which the Council may grant a hearing to persons
speaking on behalf of non-governmental
entities is
rule 39. For 35 years the United States has supported a
generous interpretation of rule 39 and would not object
in this case. We are, however, opposed to special ad
hoc departures from orderly procedure. In particular,
the United States does not agree with the recent practice of the Council which appears selectively to try to
enhance the prestige of those who wish to speak in the
Council through a departure from the rules of procedure. We consider this special practice to be without
legal foundation and to constitute an abuse of the rules.
For these reasons the United States requests that you,
Mr. President, put the terms of the proposed invitation
to the vote. The United States will vote against.

was called to order at 4.20 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 17 May 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Kuwait to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/16569)
1. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives
of
Kuwait and Lebanon in which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

5. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]: If
no other member of the Council wishes to speak at this
stage, I shall take it that the Council is ready to vote on
the proposal of Egypt.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fakhoury
(Lebanon) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Abufhassan (Kuwait) took the place reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: China, Egypt, India, Malta, Nicaragua,
Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.

2. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
I should like to inform the Council that I have received a
letter dated 17 May 1984 from the representative of
Egypt [S/16.571], which reads as follows:

Against:

1

United

States of America,

Abstaining: France, Netherlands,
United
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Th,e proposal
3 abstentions.

was adopted

Kingdom

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sarrk (Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Znalienable Rights of the Palestinian People) took the place
reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber.

by I1 votes to 1, with

11. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation from Russian]:
The Security Council is meeting today in response to
the request contained in the letter dated 17 May 1984
from the representative of Kuwait to the President of
the Council [S/26569].

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation Organization) took a place at the Council table.
6. Mr. SERRY (Netherlands): The Netherlands delegation has abstained in the vote on the participation by
the PLO in the Council’s debate. In so doing my delegation does, however, certainly not wish to convey the
impression -that in our view the representative of the
PLO should not be heard by the Council. My delegation
is moved by the concern that the Council should be
guided by the rules of procedure it has set itself.

12. I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to the following other documents: document S/16568, which contains the text of a letter dated
16 May 1984 from the Acting Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People to the Secretary-General,
and document S/16570, which contains the text of a letter dated
17 May 1984 from the representative of Egypt to the
President of the Security Council.

7. Members of the Council will be aware that my
country, together with the other States of the European
Community,
has expressed the view that the Middle
East can enjoy true peace and lasting stability only
through a comprehensive
settlement to be concluded
with the participation
of all parties concerned, which
means that the PLO will have to be associated with
negotiations.

13. The first speaker is the representative of Kuwait,
who wishes to make a statement in his capacity as the
Chairman of the Group of Arab States for the month of
May. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and
to make his statement.
14. Mr. ABULHASSAN
(Kuwait) [interpretation
from Arabic]: Mr. President, first may I congratulate
you on your accession to the presidency of the Council
for this month and to take the same opportunity to
express to you the appreciation of the Group of Arab
States, which I have the honour of presiding over for
this month, and also the particular appreciation of my
delegation for your extreme wisdom and well recognized skill in directing the work of the Council in a spirit
of integrity, skill and objectivity, and also for the support which your friendly and great country has been
giving to the Arab cause.

8. My delegation therefore welcomes the participation of the PLO in the present debate. Our reservations
relate only to the procedure followed. This is clearly
designed to grant the PLO, admitted to the General
Assembly as an observer, a status similar to that of a
Member State. This is a gesture of a political nature
which does not reflect the true relationship of the PLO
to the United Nations and which we, therefore, cannot
support.
9. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter dated 21 May 1984 from the
Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the
Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, which
reads as follows:

15. Similarly, it is my privilege and pleasure to pay a
tribute to the-skill shown by your predecessor, the representative of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
who directed the work of the Council last month.

“I have the honour to request that I be allowed to
participate in the Security Council’s consideration of
the item entitled ‘The situation in the Middle East’,
in accordance with the provisions of rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, in my capacity as Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.”

16. I should also like to convey to you and to all the
members of the Council, my delegation’s thanks for
giving us this opportunity to speak before you today on
behalf of the Group of Arab States at the United Nations on the important item which we have ‘met to
discuss.
17. On 15 May, Israel committed a further horrific
crime when more than 1,500 troops from the Israeli
occupation forces surrounded the Palestinian refugee
camp, Ein El-Helweh, in the southern part of Lebanon,
using more than 150 vehicles, tanks and armoured cars.
They also demolished about 30 houses belonging to
peaceful citizens in that camp. This was then followed
by a series of events in which dozens of Palestinians
were killed or wounded, and several were arrested-.

10. On previous occasions, the Council has extended
invitations to representatives of other United Nations
bodies in connection with the consideration of matters
on its agenda. In accordance with pastpractice in this
matter, I propose that the Council extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the
Chairman of the Committee-on
the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
2

18. To commit such heinous crimes is nothing new in
the brief history of the tyrannical Zionist entity, but
it does underscore, day after day, our conviction and
the conviction of the international community that the
Zionist entity is developing and thriving on crime, usurpation and oppression, which have become the main
features reflecting the real nature of the philosophy
underlying its conduct.

23. This latest Israeli crime, which is the expression
of a doctrine and method used by the Israeli authorities
in all their practices and policies in the occupied Arab
and Palestinian territories should remind us of the following points.
24. First, the Israeli authorities, as is now becoming
increasingly evident, are convinced that the Palestinian
presence, in theory and in practice, constitutes a danger
to Israeli territorial dreams because it serves as a constant reminder to the international
community of the
fate of the Palestinian people following the well-known
international
plots which resulted in the creation of a
Jewish State on Palestinian territory. That is why the
Israeli authorities have always had recourse to two
principal means of dealing with this reality. The first is
to defame the Palestinian people, portray them in the
eyes of the world as nothing more than a group of
terrorists and endeavour to nip in the bud the idea that
this is a people struggling for its legitimate rights; then
to proceed to the physical annihilation of that people by
seizing their properties, expelling them from their country and terrorizing them by forcing them to emigrate,
applying collective sanctions and using other methods
common in the worst days of imperialism.

19. The crime committed in Ein El-Helweh camp is
not an isolated one. It is neither the first nor the last
of its type committed by Israel. It is only one more link
in a whole chain of inhuman crimes which Israel has
committed and continues to commit in its desperate
attempts to strengthen its grasp over that territory,
whether in southern Lebanon, the West Bank, the Gaza
Strip, or the Syrian Golan Heights. Thus, what occurred in the southern part of occupied Lebanon cannot be divorced from what has happened and what is
happening even now in other occupied Palestinian territories on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
20. The massacre after their arrest by the Israeli
authorities of the two commandos who participated in
the Ashdod operation is no different, as a heinous and
indicative act, from the massacre of innocent women
and children who had demonstrated against the occupying authorities in the camp of Ein El-Helweh. These
acts are but two different forms of the same sterile
thinking that gives the person who pursues this policy
the right to commit atrocities against an unarmed people that is simply clamouring for its legitimate rights.

25. Secondly, the Israeli authorities have the mistaken illusion that the extermination
of the Palestinian
people and the terror through which they are trying to
stifle the Palestinian movement in the Arab Palestinian
territories can succeed in dissuading that people from
carrying on their national struggle. If the Israelis looked
at the history of colonialism in general and at the years
they have themselves spent in applying their policy of
colonialist occupation in the occupied territories, they
would realize that the policy of terror and repression,
however ingeniously it is put into practice, cannot succeed in shaking the will of a people struggling for its
right to be free. Very often it has precisely the opposite
result-that
is, it tends to increase the will and the
resolve of those people to continue their struggle.

21. It is no longer a secret to anyone that the Zionist
doctrine, which was essentially based on a false slogan- “a land without people for a people without a
land”-cannot
survive unless it is being continuously
fed by a series of similar lies and falsehoods, which are
characteristic of all the acts committed by Israel.
22. We have not yet forgotten that Israel invaded
Lebanon, thus violating the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of a Member State under the spurious and
feeble pretext of putting an end to the bombing of Israeli
settlements. All neutral sources recognized that the
bombing had stopped at least a year before this invasion
occurred. The Israeli occupation of parts of sovereign
Lebanon has persisted, however, despite all the resolutions adopted by the Council, starting with resolution 509 (1982), in which the Council demanded that
Israel withdraw forthwith and unconditionally,
as well
as resolution 5 17 (1982), in which the Council censured
Israel for its failure to comply with resolutions 508
(1982),509(1982),S12(1982),513(1982),515(1982)and
516 (1982). This amply demonstrates that the reasons
adduced by Israel to justify its barbaric invasion of
Lebanon, which change according to circumstances,
have always been spurious, and that the long-term
objectives in Lebanese territory
are today more
obvious than ever. They have been confirmed and
borne out by the persistence of the Israeli occupation,
with all that entails in tragedy and suffering for the
Lebanese and Palestinian people.

26. Thirdly, the Israeli authorities harbour another
illusion-that
is, that by applying the policy of terror
in the occupied territories, whether it be in southern
Lebanon, the West Bank or the Gaza Strip, they can put
an end to the commandos’ operations against the occupying forces. It would not be unrealistic to say that such
an erroneous conception corresponds to the ideas of the
former Minister for Foreign Affairs, Abba Eban, who,
according to The Jerusalem Post, said:
“For a number of years now we have been dominated by poisoned imaginations,
such as that which
claims that 1,250,OOO Palestinians,
who are internationally recognized as a separate people, could be
permanently subjugated by the Israeli authorities.”
The heroic struggle of the Lebanese people against
Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon and the heroic
struggle of the Palestinian people against Israeli occupation on the West Bank and in Gaza should convince
3

the Israeli authorities that a policy of terror and repression cannot put a stop to the struggle against the occupation. Nothing will stop that struggle but the cessation
of occupation; if Israel wants to ensure the security of
its troops in the occupied territories it has only to withdraw them.

32. Mr. FAKHOURY
(Lebanon)
[interpretation
from Arabic]: Allow me at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of May and to express to you
our confidence that your wisdom and experience will
enable you successfully to guide the work of the Council. I should also like to extend our thanks to your
predecessor, Mr. Vladimir Kravets, representative of
the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, for the politically competent and outstanding way in which he presided over the Council last month.

27. Fourthly, the Israeli authorities, in committing
these crimes against the Palestinian and Lebanese people in the occupied territories, are committing
a dual
crime, since instead of protecting the civilians in the
occupied areas, as the authority responsible for the
protection of civilians, in accordance with the fourth
Geneva Convention,’
they commit acts of aggression
against civilians and their property and seek to change
the geographical, legal and demographic status of the
regions they occupy, in contravention of the letter and
spirit of the provisions of the Geneva Convention.

33. The events that occurred on the night of 15/16 May
and on 17 May in the Ein El-Helweh camp south-east
of Sidon in occupied southern Lebanon deserve the
serious attention of the Council. The Israel Defence
Forces launched a large-scale assault, with a big force,
attacking the camp from every direction with three
contingents and then overrunning it. Those forces blew
up several houses, some of them while the occupants
were still inside. They also arrested approximately
150 people, who were transported on three buses to
a concentration
camp, and killed or wounded many
inhabitants of the camp.

28. The Arab world, ,which has been profoundly
shaken by persistent Israeli arrogance and the systematic pursuit of a policy of extermination and repression in occupied Palestinian and Arab territories and by
the fact that the Council has not fully shouldered its
responsibility
to put a stop to the actions of Israel,
appeals to the Council to fulfil its responsibilities
as
defined in the Charter of the United Nations.

34. Such an onslaught cannot be justified, and the
responsibility for it cannot be evaded. We have stated
here on numerous occasions that the Council will bear
a heavy responsibility
if its numerous resolutions on
southern Lebanon and on Israel’s withdrawal to internationally recognized borders remain without practical
application and implementation.
We do not advocate
the accumulation
of resolutions that remain dead letters, whether adopted by the Council or by other bodies. Hence our legitimate
and rightful call for the
implementation
of earlier Council resolutions will continue to be made until it is heeded and until the Council
responds effectively and sincerely to the demands of
right and justice.

29. Israel is fully responsible for what is occurring in
the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories. As the
occupation authority, it is called upon not only to put an
end to the massacres, dispersal, torture and imprisonment of civilians in the occupied territories and the
destruction of their houses, in violation of international
law, but to protect those citizens and their goods until
the fate of the occupied areas has been finally decided.

::

30. That is why the Council is required to shoulder its
full responsibility and to ensure the implementation
of
all its resolutions on this matter. We refer to the following resolutions:
first, the resolutions requesting
Israel to put an end to its contravention of international
legality in the occupied territories and to provide safeguards which would guarantee that these violations of
international
instruments and resolutions will not be
repeated;. secondly, the resolutions calling on Israel
to withdraw from all Palestinian and Arab territories
occupied since 1967, since such a withdrawal is the only
effective remedy for all the evils that constitute a permanent threat to peace and security in the Middle East;
thirdly, the resolutions demanding that the Palestinian
people be enabled to exercise their inalienable rights,
including their right to self-determination
and to establish their own State on the soil of their fatherland;
fourthly, the resolutions concerning the guarantees of
the independence, territorial integrity and security of
Lebanon, and the total and unconditional withdrawal of
Israeli troops, in accordance with resolution 509 (1982).

.
:
,-.
::.
:.

3 1. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation from Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Lebanon,
upon whom I now call.

::.
:._-.
:
.
:

::
::.
:-:
::

35. Since its occupation of southern Lebanon, Israel
has consistently launched oppressive military campaigns and carried out inhuman practices against Lebanese citizens in their villages and Palestinians in their
camps on Lebanese territory. It is our national duty to
inform international
public opinion about campaigns
and practices and to call upon the Council to denounce
them, deplore them and condemn them, because they
are in flagrant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and of human rights.
36. It is also incumbent upon the Council to put an end
once and for all to the present state of affairs by prevailing upon Israel to comply with its resolutions
by withdrawing completely from southern Lebanon so
that the Lebanese State may regain its sovereignty and
authority up to its internationally
recognized border
and transform the south into a zone of peace and security.
37. This latest act of aggression is very serious,
whether it was planned and carried out by contingents
4

42. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organizationl:
Mr. President, I greet you,.first, as the representative
of a nation whose peoples paid an extremely high price
in human as well as material sacrifice in their struggle against the Nazi hordes that invaded their country.
I greet you, also, as the representative of a nation that
fully and unconditionally
supports the international
consensus for the convening of an International
Peace
Conference on the Middle East, for the achievement of
peace by means of a just solution to the Palestinian
problem. That Conference would, under the intemational consensus, be held with the participation of the
parties to the Israeli-Arab conflict. We have every confidence in you as a person, and we are sure that with
your prudence, your capabilities and your experience
you will successfully conduct the work of the Council
this month.

of the Israel Defence Forces or completed by groups
established, armed and trained by Israel. No allegation,
statement or attempt to distort the facts and camouflage
realities can absolve the occupying Power of its direct
responsibility.
38. Had we decided to lodge a complaint with the
Council about every aggressive act or practice on the
part of Israel we could have taken up all the Council’s time from now until the end of the year. I have
already on several occasions recalled some of the acts
of aggression and arbitrary practices carried out by
Israel in southern Lebanon, which include the following: first, there is Israel’s blocking of all access
routes to the south, which has led to the complete
isolation of that region from the other parts of Lebanon;
secondly, there is the destruction of walls surrounding
orchards and the uprooting of fruit-bearing trees along
the roads in a large area of the country; thirdly, ports
in the south have been blockaded, thus intensifying
the strangulation of the country begun by the blocking
of the access roads; fourthly, fishermen have been
prevented from practising their trade, thus depriving
the poorer classes of their only means of livelihood;
fifthly, in the larger cities there has been indiscriminate
tiring on civilians, including men, women and children;
sixthly, the homes of peaceful citizens have been violated, although those homes should be inviolable, and
terrorist attacks have been carried out against them by
Israeli soldiers, who do not hesitate to use any kind of
arbitrary method; seventhly, a mercenary army has
been established to work in Israel’s interests and has
been entrusted by Israel with the carrying out of outrageous acts against peaceful citizens; eighthly, there has
been indiscriminate
aerial bombing of Lebanese cities
and towns, the most recent instance of which was the
bombing the other day in the Bekaa area.

43. We extend our thanks to the members of the
Council who-notwithstanding
the one negative votehave made it possible for the PLO, the sole and legitimate representative
of the Palestinian
people, to
convey to the international
community,
through the
Council, the sincere aspiration and determination
of
our people to achieve peace in the Holy Land, in Palestine and in the region.
44. Mr. President, we offer your predecessor, the
representative of the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, our appreciation for the wise way in which he
conducted the Council’s business last month. The commitment of the Ukrainian people, like that of all the
peoples of the Soviet Socialist Republics, to the cause
of justice and the cause of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, has been and is still being concretely manifested in the membership of the Ukrainian
SSR in the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

39. If the Council does not take a position commensurate with the gravity of the Israeli practices,
that failure will pave the way for Israel to persist in
its attempt to change the geographic and demographic
character of southern Lebanon in furtherance of its
own interests and of its own designs, under the pretext-a false pretext-of
the protection of its security.
Israel invoked that pretext for the aggression of June
1982, and its army overran more than 100 kilometres of
Lebanese territory, including the capital of the country,
Beirut.

45. Let us now reflect for a moment on what happened on 16 May 194341 years ago. In Warsaw that
date marked the last day of the criminal proceedings
and acts of genocide undertaken by S.S. Chief of Brigade and Major General of Police Juergen Stroop. The
campaign to eliminate the heroes of the Warsaw Ghetto
had been under way, the campaign to remove Jews
from the Warsaw Ghetto “for security reasons”-the
same reasons used by the Fascists in Tel Aviv-and
to
“resettle” them, mostly in Treblinka, where they were
gassed, exterminated, physically eliminated. We know
that those Jews resisted, with pistols and home-made
Molotov cocktails. They resisted Nazi occupation;
they resisted dehumanization;
they fought for their survival, in dignity, in their homes.

40. We call on all the members of the Council to
recognize the real situation in occupied southern Lebanon and to heed the dictates of their conscience, as
reflected in the Council’s resolutions. We call on them
to do their duty of preserving the safety of southern
Lebanon, its citizens, its residents, and restoring to
Lebanon, the motherland,
the territory usurped by
blood and sword.

46. It is worth noting here that some months earlier
the leaders of the IZL [h-gun Zvai Leumi]--the
socalled Israel Liberation Movement, members of which
are still alive and hold key positions in the military junta
currently commanding
in Tel Aviv-were,
having
turned their backs on their own people, issuing communiques calling for co-operation with the new order in

41. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization. I now call on him.
5

Europe, co-operation that would also be along the lines
of one of the last speechesof the German Reich Chancellor, Adolf Hitler. Such communiques encouraged
some’to co-operate in the formation of the JudenrutsJewish Councils. I hasten to state that others joined the
Judenrats, as they believed that the Nazis would
then spare their lives, albeit at the cost of the lives of
hundreds of thousands of other Jewish brothers and
sisters in the Ghetto,

Nazis, and likewise the crime here is still the crime of
the junta in Tel Aviv. The world holds Adolf Hitler and
his gang fully and solely responsible, and rightly so.
Similarly, one can assume that the Council will consider the junta in Tel Aviv and the military field commanders solely and fully responsible for this latest in a
long series of crimes, including the crime of genocide
committed in Sabra and Shatila refugee camps in September 1982.

47. But the true nature of the Nazis was unveiled
when even the collaborators were not spared. And we
know that the true nature of the Zionist junta in Tel
Aviv is also being unveiled now, if everyone is not
already aware of it.

5 1. The responsibility of the occupying Power is well
defined in the norms of international law,’ and Israel is
still an occupying Power. I am not at all surprised at the
way in which the United Nations correspondent of The
New York Times reported his story on Sunday. He only
missed the point, and maliciously so, that the so-called
Palestinian National Guard is only another unit of the
Israeli troops of occupation. Here again is another Fascist phenomenon. We are informed that the funeral procession for the woman shot by the “Palestinian National Guard” had been broken up by the “Palestinian
National Guard” by shooting, which resulted in the
wounding of five or six refugees, and by making arrests.
We keep hearing .about the “Palestinian National
Guard”, but not the so-called Palestinian National
Guard as a unit of the Israeli occupation army. We trust
that somehow this point will be clarified to the general
public.

48. On 16 Mav 1984. the world was shocked bv a
similar racist, genocidal crime. The President of the
Security Council was immediately informed, as was
the Secretary-General. It is our understanding that
the Secretary-General informed the Security Council
on 18 May-more than 48 hours later-that the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) had informed him on that day that, at
approximately 2300 hours on the night of 1506 May,
the so-called Israel Defence Forces (IDF)-more correctly, the Judeo-Nazi troops of occupation-had surrounded the Ein El-Helweh camp (meaning, I presume,
the Palestinian refugee camp at Ein El-Helweh). Now,
2300 hours on the night of 15/16May means 1600hours
New York time on 15May. Our question is this: Why
did not the Commissioner-General report the matter
immediately? Be that as it may, the Council was also
informed that the responsible offtcers of the IDF troops
of occupation had refused to see the senior official of
UNRWA. Naturally they would refuse: their troops
were in the midst of committing heinous crimes.

52. Reference has been made to the Judenruts, and
something similar is taking place in the occupied Palestinian territory. On 24 April 1984, a new co-ordinator of
the Government’s activities in the territories, a certain
Shmu’el Goren, took office, and at the first stagehe will
have to deal with the appointment of a head of the
civilian administration in “Judaea and Samaria”, that
is, the occupied Palestinian territory, and the question
of the structure of the civilian administration and military government. He will also have to find new mayors
to replace the army offtcers now heading several municipalities in the territory. So the analogy here of the
Judenrats and the appointment of new mayors by the
Coordinator-by a military governor-is only another
phenomenon. Why? Because the occupying Power in
1976had tried elections for the local councils and for
mayors, and the result stunned the occupying Power.
There was unanimous rejection of the occupation and
support for the PLO as the sole and legitimate representative of the Palestinian people under occupation. After
that experience, of course, Israel would not dare to
indulge in elections in the occupied territories.

49. We understand that the report of the SecretaryGeneral to the Council indicates that members of the
“Palestinian National Guard” were firing at boys
burning tyres on 17May. The significant element here is
that- those boys were burning tyres. The only explanation I can give in that respect is that this act was to
obstruct and prevent the advance of Israeli occupation
troops further inside the refugee camp. This is a heroic
and legitimate act of self-defence, and we are proud that
those boys took action. The other significant element
is that the so-called Palestinian National Guard is reported to be organized by the IDF. “IDF” should mean
“incommensurably degenerate Fascists”. Those IDF
troops by any other name are still IDF troops. The
perpetrators of the crime could be Israeli troops or any
of their instruments.

53. Judging from the past diatribes of the representative of the Tel Aviv junta, the Council will be told that
the IDF went to the camp to search for arms and for
those who use the arms and explosives against the
Israeli troops of ,occupation. Frankly, one is. proud
to note that the population in southern Lebanon, be
they Lebanese citizens or Palestinian refugees, are only
exercising a legitimate and inalienable right to resist
foreign occupation by all means available to them, including explosives-namely, armed struggle. Occupa-

50. The human conscience does not consider the Nazi
crimes, and especially the genocide in the Warsaw
Ghetto, any less criminal simply because there were the
thugs of the Judenruts or because some Jews responded
positively to the appeal by the so-called Israeli liberation movement. The crime was still the crime of the
6

resolution 446 (1979), a special Commission to examine the situation relating to settlements in the occupied Arab territories. The Commission was refused cooperation by Israel, and in its first report [S/234.50and
Add.1 of22 July 29791it referred to the Israeli actions.
That report was unanimously adopted by the Council in
resolution 465 (1980), and when the Commission presented its second report [S/14268], dated 25 November
1980,the Council refrained from considering the report,
and there it lies in the archives of the Secretariat. Why?
Our understanding is that one permanent member had
impeded consideration and threatened to reject the report. That member is the United States. It not only
impeded the work of the Council, but it granted Israel,
the occupying Power, more moral and financial support
and entered into a military-strategic alliance with it.

tion engenders resistance, and this is exactly what the
population under foreign occupation, not only in southem Lebanon but in all the territories under occupation,
is doing and will continue to do as long as Israel remains
in those territories. To resist foreign occupation is a
right and a duty. We can share in honouring the memory
of the millions who sacrificed their lives while resisting
foreign occupation in Europe, in Africa, in Asia and in
Latin America. The memory of those freedom fighters
remains our beacon.
54. Israel is the occupying Power in southern Lebanon. On 6 June 1982, the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 509 (1982), in which, inter alia, it
demanded “that Israel withdraw all its military forces
forthwith and unconditionally to the internationally
recognized boundaries of Lebanon”. I think no further
clarification is needed to illustrate that Israel is the
occupying Power; it has not complied with that resolution and, unfortunately, action by the Council is still
being hampered and undermined by at least one permanent member of the Council. As long as Israel occupies southern Lebanon and Palestinian and other Arab
territories, Israel should be held responsible for such
criminal acts and the Council must condemn Israel for
those acts.

58. The daily bulletin of the Jewish Telegraphic
Agency of 18May tells us that the Executive Director of
the so-called American-Israel Public Affairs Committee claimed that Israel was the engine that passed the
foreign aid bill in the House of Representatives. They
are referring to the House of Representatives in Washington, not’ in Tel Aviv. Be that as it may, the American-Israel Public Affairs Committee considers that it
was thanks to Israel that the bill was passed. What does
that bill include? It includes a total grant to Israel for the
year 1985 of $2.5 billion: $1.1 billion in economic aid
and $1.4 billion in military aid to that arsenal in the
Middle East that is threatening peace in the region and
in the world. So we can see to what extent there is
collusion and collaboration by the Government of the
United States in Israel’s criminal acts.

55. What, one wonders, is to be done? The PLO maintains that it is the duty of the Security Council to insist
that the provisions of the Charter and other intemational conventions be respected. The Charter expects
each and every Member “to accept and carry out the
decisions of the Security Council”. Article I of the
fourth Geneva Convention’. reads: “The High Contracting Parties undertake to respect and to ensure respect for the present Convention in all circumstances.”
Thus, it is incumbent upon the members of the Council,
both collectively and individually, to ensure respect for
those provisions and for those moral values. The Council is called upon to invoke the powers vested in it and
thus help contribute to the maintenance of the faith and
trust of peoples in the Council. The Council is called.
upon to impose mandatory sanctions on a Member that
vioiates the Charter, commits crimes and fails to respect the conventions-in this case the fourth Geneva
Convention.
56. It has been rumoured that the Council should
establish a special commission to investigate. The question is: to investigate what? The Council has unanimously considered Israel to be an occupying Power,
and the Council must of necessity recognize the inevitability of resistance against the troops of occupation
and so-called countermeasures of repression, savagery
and even genocide taken by the occupying Power. So
the investigation will be a waste of time. It might be a
drug. There should be an immediate call and action to
ensure that Israel is totally out of Lebanon and the other
territories it has occupied, where the Council has unanimously requested and demanded that withdrawal.

60. To us there is more than concern. We fear for their
lives as well. The Israelis claim that they do provide
“human” consideration to those detainees. If they do
there is a challenge by ICRC and Amnesty International
and the entire international community: provide them
with access.

57. We have had some experience in this regard: it
may be recalled that the Council had established, under

61. As the Council knows, those people in Atlit were
originally detained in the Ansar detention camp. :

59. We have been informed by the representative of
Lebanon that a number of people were arrested and
taken away. Here we have to express grave fear, based
on past experience. Indeed, in a report dated 18 April
1984, Amnesty International expressed its concern that
detainees held in Israel were being denied their legal
rights in accordance with internationally accepted
standards, including the principles of international
humanitarian law. Amnesty International is further
concerned that almost all have been held incornmunicado since mid-November 1983and that they have been
denied access to humanitarian organizations, such as
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
or to lawyers or to their families. One of the prisons in
which detainees have been held incommunicado is in
Atlit, where they are denied any accessto, or means of
communication with, their families or with intemational humanitarian organizations. That is the concern
of Amnesty International.

7

I

.:.

:
::_.
:.:

..

‘According to Amnesty International,
they were supposed to have been released last year, but then Israel
rearrested 136 Palestinians and Lebanese and put them
back in Atlit prison. As a matter of fact, Israeli radio
yesterday admitted that one of the detainees in the
Ansar detention camp was killed. And why? Because,
they say, he was trying to escape. They did not say that
he was alone. They said that five detainees managed to
escape; four were recaptured and the fifth was shot and
killed.

67. Your predecessor, Mr. Vladimir Kravets of the
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, also deserves our
commendation for the authority and skill with which he
conducted the Council’s work during the month of
April.
68. Finally, I should like to thank all the members of
the Council for allowing me, as Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People and as representative of Senegal, to
participate in this debate, which we regard as very
important. Senegal’s head of State, Mr. Abdou Diouf,
only recently expressed, at a meeting of the National
Council of the Socialist Party of Senegal, his concern
over the worsening of the situation in the Middle East.

62. The Council is considering the criminal act committed against the Ein El-Helweh refugee camp. We
shall refrain from referring to the escalating repressive
measures by the Israelis against our people in occupied
Palestinian territory, in Nablus, in Jerusalem, in Bethlehem, in Hebron: all those criminal acts are being
reported to the Council and to the Secretary-General as
they occur, which is very often.

69. For all the members of the Committee the question before the Council is particularly disturbing because it closely concerns not only the future of the
Palestinian refugees in .Lebanon but also international
peace and security.

63. Let me recall that the General Assembly, on
15 December 1983, in its resolution 38/79 D, has requested the Security Council

70. As members well know, in the past few years the
Security Council has met frequently to consider the
situation in the Middle East and related events in Lebanon and to take action on them. The very fact that the
Security Council and the General Assembly have had to
meet so often to consider these questions confirms the
international
community’s
deep concern about these
practices and their serious consequences.

“to ensure Israel’s respect for and compliance with
all the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
of 12 August 1949, in Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem,
and to initiate measures to halt Israeli policies and
practices in those territories”.

71. Today, as we examine the recent events in the
Palestinian refugee camp of Ein El-Helweh in southern
Lebanon, the massacres of Sabra and Shatila come to
mind, because of the similarities
between the two
cases.

I wonder whether the Council has been made aware of
that request of the General Assembly and, if it has,
whether it has taken any action to respond-somehow
at least-to
the request that was adopted by an overwhelming majority.

72. The Council will agree with the members of the
Committee
that the operation
carried out during
the night of 15/16 May in the refugee camp of Ein
El-Helweh shocks the human conscience and represents a systematic denial of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people as expressed in a number of General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions. Moreover,
that operation was a flagrant violation of human rights
as defined in the Charter of the United Nations and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

64. Finally, we trust that the Council will take the
proper action, which was outlined by the representative
of Lebanon, in order to ensure that Israel complies with
the resolutions of the Council and, at the same time,
that the Council will see to it that some measures are
taken to guarantee the safety and security of civilians in
the territories occupied by Israel, be it in southern
Lebanon or in any part of Palestinian or other Arab
territory.
65. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, Mr. Massamba Sarre. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

73. The Committee
notes that, taking advantage of
the tragedy in Lebanon, Israel is trying to silence the
Palestinians who are legitimately protesting against the
occupation of their territory, and is pursuing its illegal
plans to annex the West Bank‘and Gaza, in defiance of
international
law and world public’ opinion, as evidenced in the many letters that the Committee has sent
to the Secretary-General
and to the Council. It is also
interesting to note that this policy of annexation is
condemned by a certain section of Israeli public opinion, which, it should be stressed, has the merit of understanding that Israel’s security liesin dialogue with the
parties concerned rather than in the pure and simple
annexation of territory.

66. Mr. SARRE (Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People) [interpretationfrom
French]: Let me first, Sir,
congratulate you very sincerely and extend to you my
best wishes for success as President of the Council for
the month of May. During the past three weeks we have
all been able to assess your talent and skill in carrying
out your very delicate task.
8

74. All these practices and policies exacerbate the
tensions in the region and endanger international peace
and security. Scarcely a day passes without news of
repressive measures and harassment against the civilian populations of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip
and against the refugees in Lebanon. Demonstrations
are put down by force, invariably ending in loss of
human life. Schools and other educational establishments are closed for weeks, even months, sometimes
for the most frivolous reasons. Freedom of education
and equality before the law are flouted.

Council under your able presidency will lead to respect
for the rule of law and human rights in the occupied
Arab lands.
79. Representatives who have spoken before me have
placed before the Council a detailed expose of the recent tragic events in the Ein El-Helweh camp in southern Lebanon. The actions carried out there provide
clear evidence of the increasing acts of .brutality and
repression being perpetrated in the occupied Arab territories by the Israeli authorities. The recent statement
by the Secretary-General,
based on the report received
from the Commissioner-General
of UNRWA, has also
provided information
on the current tense situation
prevailing in the camp. We were shocked to learn about.
the indiscriminate
and inhuman acts against unarmed
Palestinian civilians living in the Ein El-Helweh camp,
which resulted in a number of civilian casualties. This is
not an isolated event; similar serious armed attacks
have been reported earlier in the occupied Palestinian
and Arab territories. Raids and indiscriminate
killing,
torture, imprisonment
and. harassment of Palestinians
have become daily occurrences. The present incidents
come in the wake of numerous other tragic incidents
following the genocidal massacres of Sabra and Shatila.
Israel has been relentlessly pursuing its policy of intimidation of the civilian population and consolidafion of
its stranglehold on the occupied Arab territories.

75. These events show that it is now more than ever
necessary for the Security Council to consider,.in the
light of General Assembly resolution 38/X$ the question of Palestine in its entirety-in
particular, the
guidelines for an International Peace Conference on the
Middle East. Such a conference could have beneficial
effects on the whole region, and particularly on Lebanon, whose unity and territorial integrity must be
safeguarded, today more than ever before. The constant outbreaks of violence which we witness often
spring from the failure to settle the question of the
Middle East and the Palestinian cause. Today violence
seems to have been elevated to the level of law, continually claiming innocent victims. In the light of all
this, the Council must without further delay seek to
promote a climate of mutual confidence which will
allow all the interested parties to calm their passions in
order to devote themselves to the peace process, as
defined by the International
Conference on the Question of Palestine and approved by the General Assembly in the resolution that I have just mentioned.

80. The need of the hour is to put an immediate end to
the bloodshed and the continuing harassment of the
Palestinians and to restore peace and order in the
occupied territories. Israel should be made to discharge
its obligations under the relevant international conventions that dictate civilized behaviour on the part of
occupying Powers towards the people of occupied territories. Israel must withdraw all its military forces
forthwith and unconditionally
to the internationally
recognized boundaries of Lebanon, in implementation
of resolutions 508 (1982).and 509 (1982). Israel’s policies and practices of establishing settlements, in the
occupied territories are illegal and are contrary to the
resolutions of the United Nations. At the same time, it
is imperative that the international
community seek a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the conflict
in the Middle East, without which no peace can prevail
in the region.

76. If the Council did not intervene in the present
circumstances it would be a confession of impotence on
the part of the Organization, as the Secretary-General
-to whom we pay a tribute for all his efforts in the
cause of Palestine and the Middle East-stressed
in his
very telling report to the General Assembly shortly
after he took offrce.
77. Faced with the constant worsening of the situation
in the region, the Council has the duty and responsibility to take the appropriate measures to put an end to
these tragic events and bring about the renewal of the
policy of dialogue between all the parties concerned in
order to bring about the return of a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East, a peace which will take fully
into account the inalienable rights of the people of
Palestine.
/
78. Mr. VERMA (India): We have already had the
opportunity to felicitate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of May.
Your ready response, and indeed that of the members
of the Council, to the request to convene the Council to
consider the latest incident in the occupied areas of
southern Lebanon is indeed a testimony to the Council’s sensitivity to the gravity of the challenge faced by
the hapless Palestinians under Israeli occupation. It is
our sincere expectation that the deliberations in the

81. The fundamental
principles of and the basic
framework for such a solution already exist in the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, the Arab peace plan adopted at Fez [see S/Z5520 of
6 December 1982, annex], the pronouncements
of the
non-aligned countries at the Seventh Conference of
Heads of State or Government [see S/25675, annex],
held at New Delhi in March 1983, and the Geneva
Declaration on Palestine,* adopted in September 1983
at the international
Conference on the Question of
Palestine.
82. These well-recognized
fundamental
principles
are: first, that the question of Palestine is at the heart of
9

.‘_
. .
:_
;.
‘.

‘.-.
:.:.
:_
_-_
:_
.
:.:.:_
:.:.
--.
:..-~
:.
:::
.
I.-.:
-.

in the Middle East, as a matter of priority. In this
context, we have supported the call for an International
Peace Conference on the Middle East.

the problem of the Middle East, and no solution to that
problem can be envisaged without taking into account
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people; secondly, that the implementation
of these inalienable
rights of the Palestinian
people to return to their
homes and property and to exercise their right to selfdetermination,
including the establishment of a State of
their own, will contribute to a final solution of the
Middle East crisis; thirdly, that the participation of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, the sole and authentic representative of the Palestinian people, on an equal
footing is indispensable to all efforts at finding a solution to the Middle East problem; and, lastly, that no
just and lasting peace in the Middle East can be established without the withdrawal of Israel from the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since 1967,
including Jerusalem, and without the guarantee that all
States in the region can live within secure and recognized boundaries.

86. Our efforts so far to find a comprehensive solution
to the problem have not succeeded, mainly owing to the
arrogance and intransigence of Israel, which has deliberately defied the will of the international community.
The time has come to put an end to the situation and
to strive for a just, durable and comprehensive peace
which would enable the Palestinian people to exercise
their right in freedom and sovereignty in their independent homeland.
87. India, as the current Chairman of the Movement
of Non-Aligned
Countries and as a country which has
stood by the Palestinians in their legitimate struggle for
nationhood, stands ready to co-operate with the other
members of the Council in endeavours in that direction.

83. The Movement
of Non-Aligned
Countries attaches paramount importance to the achievement of a
just, comprehensive
and lasting peace in the Middle
East. It has been at the initiative of the non-aligned
countries that the majority of United Nations resolutions on the subject have been adopted. In past
years the non-aligned countries have been particularly
active in mobilizing international support against Israeli
actions in occupied territories and against Israel’s
invasion of Lebanon. It was on their initiative that
the seventh emergency special session of the General
Assembly was resumed to consider the rapid and grave
deterioration of conditions in the area. The ninth emergency special session on the question of the occupied
Arab territories was also convened to declare the Israeli
annexation of the Golan Heights null and void [resolution ES-9/Z]. At the Seventh Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, the
question of Palestine and the situation in the Middle
East were extensively examined. Fundamental principles for the solution of those problems were again
reaffirmed. The summit Conference also decided to
establish a committee at the level of heads of State
or Government to co-operate with the seven-member
Arab Committee in supporting the rights of the Arab
Palestinian people, in accordance with international
law and with the will of the non-aligned countries and
their peoples.

88. Mr. KHALIL
(Egypt) [inferpretation
from Arubit]: The events which took place from 15 to 18 May in
the Palestinian Ein El-Helweh camp in southern Lebanon demand more than an attempt to determine the
tally of victims or a description of the reasons why
those events occurred. That act of aggression, in fact,
cannot be viewed in isolation from what is taking place
in their occupied territories; it is an integral part of a
well-thought-out,
carefully formulated, comprehensive
plan for the years to come.
89. It is regrettable that we are meeting today not to
consider the means of making it possible for the Palestinian people fully to exercise their inalienable rights,
and that the Council will once again have to be content
with considering the consequences of events without
being able to remedy the root cause: that is, the persistence of Israel’s occupation of southern Lebanon
and other Arab territories and its relentless attempt to
eliminate the Palestinian presence in the region and
prevent the Palestinian people from exercising their
rights.
90. What happened in the Ein El-Helweh camp is only
one of many acts committed against the Palestinians.
This camp was surrounded by some 1,500 Israeli soldiers, armed to the teeth and supported by tanks. Then
those forces stormed the camp, and it is easy to imagine
what occurred thereafter. The information
which we
have so far proves without any doubt that the unarmed
population of that camp was surprised during the night.
The soldiers who took part in the aggression arrested
some Palestinians. It appears that so far the Israelis
have not disclosed how many. That attack was accompanied by explosions and the destruction of a certain
number of houses, which resulted in many injuries and
several killed, with the increased tension resulting from
such acts of terror.

84. The Security Council should take effective and
urgent action to prevent further bloodshed and misery
in the occupied Palestinian and other Arab territories.
The recent incidents in the Ein El-Helweh camp in
southern Lebanon are regrettable, and responsibility
for those atrocities lies squarely with the occupying
Israeli forces. The policies and practices of Israel in the
occupied Palestinian and Arab territories, in particular
the establishment of settlements, are illegal and inadmissible.

91. Furthermore,
the occupation
authorities
surprised us by creating and training what they call the
Palestinian National Guard. This so-called National

85. Above all, the Council should strive to find a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the situation
:_

,,- .

10

of IDF . . . was observed by UNIFIL.
Strikes and
other demonstrations,
usually accompanied by various forms of protest, such as the burning of tyres and
the erection of road barricades, were held on several
occasions in reaction to arrests of local inhabitants.”

Guard has frequently fired on the unarmed population,
including children, women and old people. It has also
fired on the mourners in the funeral procession of a
female victim. The mobilization
of such agents against
the Palestinians is a very dangerous development which
is clearly aimed at sowing discord and dissent in the
ranks of the Palestinians. We denounce unequivocally
this act on the part of the occupying authorities.

[S/16472, para.

151

96. During the period of the report, UNIFIL
recorded
some 22 incidents involving exploded or unexploded
bombs along the roads patrolled by the Israel Defence
Forces. The Secretary-General
also observed that the
Israel Defence Forces plan to establish “village committees” under Israeli guidance met with little success.
The Secretary-General
went on to say that for stated
reasons of security the Israeli forces engaged in the
practice of erecting road-blocks, cordoning off villages,
searching houses and detaining local inhabitants.

92. Egypt has frequently demanded that Israel respect the fourth Geneva Convention.’ We again call on
the Israeli occupation authorities to fulfil their obligations under that Convention. Similarly, we reaffirm the
need for the United Nations to be allowed to participate
more effectively in the protection of the unarmed people in these camps. We therefore ask the Council to
shoulder its responsibilities and ensure that this civilian
population does not remain the victim of the terrorism
of the occupying forces, whose acts we firmly condemn. The most recent events in Ein El-Helweh prove
the correctness of our claims and the urgent need to
take action.

97. The Israeli intrusion into the Ein El-Helweh Palestinian refugee camp outside Sidon last week was part
of such operations. It is the latest of a series of provocative acts undertaken by the Israeli forces since
their occupation of southern Lebanon to harass the
local population.

93. We started our statement by saying that the root
cause of the repetition of these unjust acts was the
Israeli occupation, the persistence of which threatens
to widen the circle of violence and to touch off, under
whatever pretext, a new cycle of aggression against the
Palestinians and their camps, to be followed by a complaint to the Security Council, the logical resort for
victims of aggression.

98. The speakers who have preceded me, in particular
the representative of Lebanon and the observer for
the PLO, have already given details of the deplorable
action taken by the Israeli forces against the Ein ElHelweh Palestinian refugee camp, which resulted in the
loss of innocent Palestinian lives and injuries to several
Palestinian refugees. The Israeli troops have also wantonly destroyed several refugee shelters, using demolition charges, and have arrested an unspecified number
of Palestinian refugees.

94. That will be to no avail, however, as long as the
Council’s resolutions demanding Israel’s withdrawal
accumulate but remain a dead letter. The evil thus
persists, because we are simply dealing with the symptoms without getting to the root of the conflict. We must
eliminate the imposed consequences of the Israeli occupation, accompanied by the harassment and murder of
Palestinian refugees, as well as by the policies of collective punishment, which should be vigorously immediate measures to protect the civilians, including the
Palestinian refugees, and to guarantee their safety and
security. This is the least that can be done to remedy
this situation, which derives essentially from the continued illegal presence of Israel in southern Lebanon.
The United Nations must act decisively to ensure compliance with its decisions guaranteeing complete Israeli
withdrawal from Lebanon to the internationally
recognized borders.

99, The Israeli resort to reprisals clearly points to the
difftculties which Israel is facing in continuing its occupation of southern Lebanon: With their overwhelming
superiority in weapons, the Israeli forces were able to
overrun southern Lebanon two years ago, but obviously they have not been able to crush the spirit of
the inhabitants of the area, who are valiantly resisting
the occupation of their land. The sinister Israeli scheme
to divide the population and recruit a mercenary militia loyal to Israel has also proved futile, as has been
pointed out in the Secretary-General’s
report.
100. Israel is finding it increasingly costly to maintain
its occupation of southern Lebanon. It is a measure of
Israel’s desperation that its forces have now resorted to
reprisals, in clear contravention
of international
law,
specifically the fourth Geneva Convention’ and Security Council resolution 513 (1982), which calls for respect for the rights of the civilian populations without
any discrimination
and repudiated all acts of violence
against those populations. In choosing the Palestinian
refugee camps as the target of their retaliatory measures, the Israeli forces have merely demonstrated once
again their unmitigated animosity and ruthlessness towards the Palestinian people.

95. Mr. Shah NAWAZ (Pakistan): Last month, on the
eve of the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
the SecretaryGeneral presented a report throwing light on the situation in southern Lebanon and the problems created by
the presence of the Israeli occupation forces there. The
Secretary-General
observed that:
“There was a noticeable increase of hostile reactions by the local population against the presence
of IDF. A growing resistance against the activities
11

107. There they go again. I am referring, of course, to
those countries on whose behalf the representative of
Kuwait has asked for this meeting. Those States apparently feared that their hypocrisy glands would atrophy.
Consequently,
it appears, they. decided to activate
those glands in order to revitalize them. The result is the
farce being played out here today, and members of the
Council know that it is a farce. What other construction
can one place on this grotesque spectacle that is being
performed here today-and
members of the Council
know that it is a grotesque spectacle, because some of
them have said so in private conversations, which, of
course, will prevent nobody from following here the
scenario that has been decided upon and from engaging
in the customary posturing.

101. In their scope, the Israeli actions in southern
Lebanon are not limited to simple retaliatory measures;
these are steps towards consolidation of Israel’s control and assertion of its dominance in the region. There
is every evidence to show that, far from abandoning its
adventurist action in Lebanon, Israelis pursuing relentlessly its .expansionist ambitions in the region. Israeli
policies in occupied southern Lebanon appear to follow
the pattern set earlier in the occupied .West Bank, Gaza
and the Golan Heights. As in the case of the other
occupied territories, the situation in southern Lebanon
will continue to cause tension and turbulence as long as
the illegal Israeli presence persists there.
102. The Council has a.solemn responsibility under its
resolution 509 (1982) to secure the withdrawal of Israeli
forces from Lebanon. This remains an immediate task
and indeed is’ a first step towards’ a,resolution of the
Middle East question, at the heart of. which lies the
denial of the national rights of the ‘Palestinian people.
In this regard, ‘a practical plan was -suggested by the
Secretary-General
in his report on UNIFIL.
It is a
matter of profound regret that despite the unambiguous
Council decisions calling for the withdrawal of Israeli
troops from Lebanon, the Secretary-General’s
plan
remains unheeded.

108. We are ostensibly here today to discuss the situation in the Middle East, based on the letter from the
representative of Kuwait, in his capacity as Chairman,
of the Group of Arab States for the month of May,
to consider the recent events in the camp of Ein ElHelweh. Of course, we have heard relatively little
about the events in Ein El-Helweh. We have heard
about many other things that do not seem to be’related
to the events of Ein El-Helweh. But, since the Council
has decided to accede to the request of the representative of Kuwait, I think it is only proper that this
farce be placed in its proper perspective. So let usfor a
few brief minutes address ourselves to the situation in
the Middle East at this time.

103. The incident of the Ein El-Helweh camp is but
the latest manifestation of the explosive situation which
prevails in the occupied West’Bank, Gaza, the Golan
Heights and southern Lebanon. It is not enough for the
international community to remain content with only an
expression of its concern over the continued aggravation of the situation in these areas, the root of which lies
in the Israeli occupation. It is incumbent on the international community
to bring irresistible pressure on
Israel to,respect the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, the implementation
of which is an indispensable requirement for the -establishment 0f.a just and
lasting peace in the region.

1091 I believe the Persian Gulf is an integral part of the
Middle East. There has been an ominous escalation of
tension in the Persian Gulf during the last few days.
Members of the Council are familiar with this. The
threat that this poses, not only to the peace and security
of the world but also to the economy of the world, needs
no elaboration. But, judging from what is happening
here today, I would imagine that the situation in the
Persian Gulf is marginal compared to the events of Ein
El-Helweh. How else can one explain the fact that the
Council, in its wisdom, is meeting on Ein El-Helweh
but so far has not deemed it necessary to convene on the
situation in the Persian Gulf to which I have just referred? But that, of course, is not surprising. After all,
the situation in the Persian Gulf is closely related to the
Iran-Iraq war, a war that has been going on now for
almost four years.

104. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]: I should like to inform members of the Council
that I have just received a letter from the representative
of Israel in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent
of the Council, to invite that representative to participate in the discussion withdut-the right to vote, in
accordance .with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
I
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Blum (Israel)
took a place at the Council table.
10.5. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from
sian]: .I call on the representative of Israel.

110. According to a report in The New York Times of
17 May 1984, that war has claimed some 600,000 casualties on both sides: some 300,000. Iranian casualtiesdead, wounded or captured-and
a comparable number
of Iraqi casualties in similar categories. That war has
also created a very serious refugee situation-of
more
than 2.5 million refugees on both sides-thus exceeding
even UNRWA’s
inflated numbers for the Palestinian
Arab refugees.

Rus-

106. Mr. BLUM (Israel): At the outset, Sir, permit me
to pay my respects to you and .to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency for the month of
May.

111. The Council has displayed precious little interest
in that war. Truth to tell, the Council has met on the
average of once a year, for rather brief and anaemic12

meetings, to discuss the Iran-Iraq war; that is as far
as its preoccupation
with that war goes. Thus, for
instance, on 31 October 1983, some seven months ago,
in its resolution 540 (1983), the Council, among other
things, requested the Secretary-General
to consult with
the parties regarding immediate and effective implementation of this resolution. And there we stand.

Iran. There has been reference in various international
press reports to the “migratory genocide’* practised by
the Soviet forces of occupation as the means by which
they seek to rid the country ‘of opposition and of its
population. But I am led to the conclusion that the
situation in Afghanistan is ‘of course marginal ‘when
compared to the events of Ein El-Helweh of last week.

112. I must conclude that the Iran-Iraq war, in a region that is an integral part of the Middle East, is also a
marginal phenomenon,
obviously subordinate to the
extraordinary events of Ein El-Helweh last week.

116. I do not even want to mention the periodic episodes that occur in Syria as a result of ‘which tens
of thousands of citizens of that country have been murdered and massacred by their own Government. What
does surprise me, of course,’ is that episodes such as
that of February 1982, at Hama, where more than
20,000 Syrians were murdered by their dwn Govemment, do not deserve the attention of the representative
of Kuwait and of the group for which he speaks. It does
seem rather odd that Arab blood ‘spilled on such occasions is apparently not worthy of consideration by the
Council. I know the answer, of course: we have heard it
many times before. It is a family affair, and there we are
not supposed to intervene. We have heard this on many
occasions in the past. I think it is a good answer, because otherwise I would have to suspect that the representative of Kuwait and the group for which he speaks
discriminate against Arabs.

113. To be sure, the Council ‘more recently did
address itself to one other aspect. of the Iran-Iraq
war-to the use of chemical weapons by some anonymous user, because we here in the Council are of course
not aware of the identity of the user of those chemical
weapons. So the Council on 30 March of this year met
for all of 10 minutes to discuss that situation and even
approved a presidential statement that was made -on
that occasion which decided, among other things, “to
keep the situation between Iran and Iraq under close
review” [2524th meeting, para. 31. How close, we have
all witnessed ever since. The fact that we were confronted here with a very serious breach of the 1925
Geneva Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War
of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare,’ it appears, warranted
the attention of the Council for 10 minutes only. I must
conclude that the use of gas by the anonymous user in
the Iran-Iraq war is obviously an event that is marginal
compared with the events at Ein El-Helweh of last
week.

1i7. What is the situation in Lebanon proper, where
there have also been some marginal events that have
not been brought to the attention of the Council by
the representative of Kuwait and by the group for which
he speaks? One marginal event occurred in Beirut on
17 March last when, according to reports from that city,
13 people were killed and 35 wounded. Another marginal event occurred on 14 April when 13 children
and 10 adults were killed and at least 50 people were
wounded in a day of indiscriminate
shelling’ of west
Beirut. Another marginal event occurred in Beirut on
12 May, last week, when savage shelling in the city
claimed 16 lives and ignited huge fires throughout the
capital only hours after hundreds of children had staged
the country’s first peace march.

114. Then there is another minor event in our region,
in the Middle East. It has been going on for more than
four years. I am referring to the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan. The harassment and terrorizing of the
population of that country by the Soviet invading forces
has been ominously stepped up in recent weeks. The
inhuman Soviet actions in Afghanistan have broken
new records with the Panshir ‘offensive launched’last
24 April. This is the third assault on the Panshir,Valley since 1982. It involves 20,000 Soviet troops supported by some 500 tanks, helicopter gunships ,and
about 100 Soviet tighter bombers. Similar operations
are under way in the Kandahar, Nangahar and Hat-at
regions of Afghanistan. This offensive by the Soviet
forces of occupation against the people of Afghanistan
is characterized by unprecedented high-altitude saturation bombing carried out by planes based in the Soviet
Union and in Afghanistan, and there are strong indications that the Soviet forces of occupation have also
been resorting to chemical warfare against the people of
Afghanistan.

118. Now, ,there have been hundreds, if not thousands, of casualties-fatalities
and injuries-in
Lebanon, primarily but not exclusively in Beirut, in recent months. The Council has not been galvanized into
action by the representative of Kuwait and by the group
for which he speaks, obviously because those events
were marginal. The central events of the Middle East
that affect the situation in the region are the events of
Ein El-Helweh of last week. Do I have to elaborate on
the meaning of all this?
119. The Arab Group wishes to feign unity where no
such unity exists, and it uses such pretexts as the one
which brought us here today to present a semblance of
unity. Such unity does not exist on the conduct of Libya
in the Sudan or in Chad, it does not exist on the IranIraq war and it does not exist elsewhere, so to cover up
their own internal dissensions, with which we are all
familiar, .we all have to go through this masquerade.

115. Moreover, a very serious refugee situation has
been created there. About one third of the population of
Afghanistan has reportedly left that country. Three
million people have fled to Pakistan-mainly
to the
Peshawar region-and
close to 2 million have fled to
13

120. What are the facts of Ein El-Helweh? With the
Council’s permission I shall for a few minutes return to
reality. For the past hour or so we have all visited
fantasy land. It is time to return to reality.

duced circumstances”
of their paymaster. And since
they are unemployed, of course the temptation to engage in the settling of scores with rival factions of the
PLO only increases.

121. The Israel Defence Forces have had reliable
information about the existence of large quantities of
arms and ammunition in Ein El-Helweh, and, acting on
that information, on the night of 15116 May, they conducted extensive search activities in Ein El-Helweh. In
the course of that operation one house was entered in
which arms and ammunition
were found. In the process, the searchers encountered some resistance, as a
result of which one resident of the house was injured
and was transferred to a local hospital and another
resident who tried to escape from the house was also
injured.

125. Let me again emphasize that all those events of
16 and 17 May involved only the local residents of the
camp. It was then that the two fatalities occurred in Ein
El-Helweh-two
fatalities, not the 60 to which reference was made in the letter circulated last week by the
Acting Chairman of the PLO Committee. I stress this
point because I think it is just as well to draw attention to the credibility of the signatory of that letter. We
are familiar with his customary truthfulness; he has
adhered to it in this letter too. The provocative statement which was made here today by the Chairman of
the PLO Committee falls in the same category of tiedibility.

122. After that, explosives and weapons were found
in the courtyard of a house located in the centre of Ein
El-Helweh. It was feared that those explosives were
booby-trapped and linked to some timing devices and
that their removal might risk explosions. For that reason, it was decided that the only safe course was
to supervise their immediate detonation, That detonation caused some damage to a small number of adjacent houses. The Israel Defence Forces spokesman has
already confirmed that Israel will assist the owners of
houses damaged by the blast to make the necessary
repairs.

126. Those are the facts, as distinct from fantasy,
from the “central event” in the Middle East which we
have been convened to discuss here today. And let me
say this in all candour: It is the willingness of the Security Council to be dragged into debates of this kind by an
irresponsible group of States that has done so much
over the years to diminish the prestige and standing not
only of the Council but of the United Nations as a
whole.
127. We have been told that the Council has met very
often in recent years on matters concerning Israel. That
is of course true. But we have not been told the reason
for those meetings: it is the kind of irresponsibility
demonstrated
here today by the group of States on
whose behalf the representative of Kuwait spoke, as
well as the well-known attempts of many other Members of the United Nations to divert attention from
inconvenient trouble spots around the world-some
of which I have mentioned here today and others of
which I have not. That, of course, is the reason for
this constant preoccupation by the Council with matters affecting my country-not
the centrality of those
matters.

123. In the course of the search the following weapons
and ammunition
were uncovered in Ein E%Helweh:
25 kilograms of explosives; 40 hand-grenades; electronic detonators; anti-vehicle mines; RPG’s; anti-tank
grenade launchers and grenades; flares; Soviet-made
Kalashnikov rifles; sub-machine guns and rifles, as well
as large quantities of magazines and ammunition.
124. On 16 and 17 May-that
is, the first and second
day after the arrests--demonstrations
and disturbances were staged by local residents in the camp. Those
events on 16 and 17 May involved only the local residents. They were characterized by attempts to settle
accounts between themselves, as is quite customary in
the underworld in general, throughout the world, and is
also characteristic of the practices of the various PLO
factions among themselves. We should all remember
that those disturbances and demonstrations are a direct
outcome of the ongoing conflict between the rival factions of the PLO terrorists, which are all represented in
Ein El-Helweh. Ein El-Helweh houses a great number
of those released from the Ansar Camp, hundreds of
them. It includes operatives of virtually all factions of
the PLO-supporters
of Abou Moussa as well as other
factions which are engaged in settling scores with one
another, often by violent means, just as they do elsewhere. in addition to this cause for disturbances and
exchanges of fire in the camp, there is the fact that
dozens of the camp’s residents who were formerly on
the payroll of the PLO now find themselves without this
source of steady income owing to the regrettably “re-

128. The problems involving the situation in the Middle East lie elsewhere. I have tried in my statement here
today to pinpoint some of them. The debate for which
we have been convened here today is a caricature of
what the Council should really address itseIf to when it
comes to the situation in the Middle East. Those of us
who are truly committed to the Charter and its principles, as distinct from those who abuse the Charter
and the Organization, can only voice regret over these
developments.
129. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation from Russian]: I wish to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter dated 21 May from the representative of Kuwait [S/2657.5] which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request the Security Council
to invite Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Permanent Observer
14

for the League of Arab States to theUnited Nations,
to participate in the consideration of the item entitled
‘The situation in the Middle East’, in accordance
with rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.”
If there are no objections, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to grant that request.
It was so decided.

130. The PRESIDENT [interpretation
from Russian]: I invite Mr. Maksoud to take a place at’ the

Council table and to make his statement.

131. Mr. MAKSOUD: I express to you, Mr. President, and through you to the other members of the
Council the appreciation of the League of Arab States
for the kind invitation extended to me to make a statement on the item on the agenda.
132. The statements made by the Chairman of the
Group of Arab States, the representative of Lebanon
and the Observer for the PLO have helped to bring out
the basic facts of the situation unravelling in Ein ElHelweh and throughout the Middle East. We subscribe
to the detailed analysis put before the Council and the
information provided to it.
133. The League of Arab States is deeply concerned
about the repetition of these incidents-in Ein ElHelweh, in the Bekaa, in the West Bank, in Gaza, in
the Golan Heights-because it confronts us with two
options. The first is this: every time there is an act of
aggression by the Israeli occupation forces, every time
these incidents are repeated, we come to the Security
Council; this entails a degree of redundancy and the
allegation that the debates of the Council are devalued
because of the constant repetition. The second option is
this: we do not have recourse to either the Council or
the other machinery of the United Nations to redress
the legitimate grievances of the Lebanese, the Palestinians and the Arabs in general concerning the constant
attacks and other measures by Israel against the occupied territories.
134. If we come to the Council, we are told by the
Israeli representatives that we are abusing the Council;
if we have recourse to non-diplomatic, non-political,
non-peaceful methods, then we are called terrorists. In
any case, the situation is a no-win situation. If the
Council is seized of this basic issue in the Middle East,
Israel complains that somehow the Council and the
United Nations are “ganging up” on Israel. If it cannot
get away with its arrogance, it resorts to a mendicant
approach. In both instances, it seeks to set itself up as
prosecutor andjudge at the same time. Hence the resort
by the Israelis in the United Nations, and particularly in
the Security Council, to filibuster, to deflect the Council from focusing on the issue before it. This is a technique, a tactic, a strategy, to cover up its creeping
annexation of the West Bank-as the Benvenisti report
has clearly stated-its attempts at creeping annexation

in the south of Lebanon, its attempts to create so-called
quislings within the occupied territories, in order to
frustrate efforts by the authentic representatives of the
people, in Lebanon or in the Palestinian movement, to
articulate their aspirations and to communicate their
grievances, as well as their rights, to the Council.
135. It may be said that the Middle East problem is not
Ein El-Helweh. Of course, the events in Ein El-Helweh
are a symptom. We ask: What is Israel doing in Ein ElHelweh? What is Israel doing in southern Lebanon?
Are there not resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982),
which are supposed to be operative? Yet the Israeli
occupation continues in southern Lebanon. The Israeli
representative has the audacity to state that what is
taking place in Ein El-Helweh, in terms of the aggression by the Israelis, in terms of their coercive measures,
in terms of their searches of homes, is a matter of right
as far as the Israel Defence Force is concerned. That
this is done in the name-the misnomer-of defence
forces is really beyond our comprehension.
136. How c&r Israel arrogate to itself the right to
determine what constitutes a crisis in the Middle East,
when it is the cause and the source of this crisis? On
what basis has the Israeli representative sought to render in biological terms our resort to the United Nations
by saying that we cover up our hypocrisy when we find
that our diplomatic glands are atrophying? First of all,
the use of biological terms as part of the diplomatic
vocabulary has occurred only once in this twentieth
century: such terms were used only by the Nazi racists,
who used them in order to steal a point. Those who
consider themselves to be the victims of nazism should
not repeat the semantics of nazism by resorting to insult, not only to the Arab Statesand the Arab Group but
to the members of the Council, in an attempt to preempt their judgement, distort their views and deflect
their debates, by saying they consider that the events in
Ein El-Helweh are not so important.
137. Whatever the yardstick by which we measure
events in the Middle East, whether in the Gulf region or
in any other region, there remains one central issue:
that Israel’s usurpation of Palestinian rights, its annexation of Jerusalem, its annexation of the Golan Heights,
its establishment and proliferation of illegal settlements, its continued occupation of southern Lebanon,
its attempts to create quislings in the occupied territories, these continue to be a major source of tension
and potential conflict in the region. That has been determined by the Security Council, by the General Assembly and by the international community. If the Israeli
delegation wants to challenge this international consensus, in the same way as it defies the international conscience, that is inherent in its ideological make-up and
in the pattern of its continuing behaviour.
138. At this moment we are discussing what actually
happened in Ein El-Helweh. Of course, this is not as
extensive a crisis as many other crises in the Middle
East. It is a manifestation of a deep-rooted crisis. The

way in which Ein El-Helweh is being used is an example. It is being used to bring about the cover-up that
Israel wants for its annexationist policies throughoutin the West Bank, in Gaza, in the Golan Heights, in
Jerusalem. All these constitute elements of an ideology
that is bent on expansion, that seeks to deflect the
opinion of the world community from the facts of its
aggression, expansion and annexation.

tered territories*‘. Then that term was abandoned by
the Israeli lexicon. It became “territories’‘-nebulous,
undetermined. Then, subsequently, it became “provinces” -Judea and Samaria-in preparation for the ultimate annexation.
144. Who is causing the continued disfranchisement
of the Palestinian people? Who is causing the continued
tension in the Golan Heights? Who is causing the continued tension on the internationally recognized borders of Lebanon? It is Israel’s annexation of the Golan
Heights, Israel’s occupation of southern Lebanon,
Israel’s proliferation of settlements in the occupied
territories, Israel’s terrorism against the elected
mayors of the various towns in the occupied territories.

139. It asks the world community-and we have been
asked this repeatedly: Why does the world community,
especially the Arab States, not recognize the right of
Israel to exist? I am going to answer this question,
because we have in many instances been deflected from
the real essence of the problem by the attempts to
masquerade under a show of concern and to blow issues
up out of all proportion. We ask those who ask us that
question: Which Israel are they asking the Arab States
to recognize? Which Israel are we asked to acknowledge?

145. We want to negotiate--of course we want to
negotiate-but Palestinian rights are not negotiable;
indeed, the international community has declared that
there is such a thing as Palestinian rights. The integrity,
unity, independence and total sovereignty of Lebanon
are not negotiable because the Security Council has
determined that Lebanon is entitled to the total restoration of its sovereignty over all its territory. Are the
Golan Heights negotiable? The Council has determined
that the Golan Heights are part and parcel of Syria.

140. Here we have a situation where the Israeli delegation and the Israeli ‘State assume that East Jerusalem is part of the capital of Israel. Are we asked
to recognize that as a fact? Are we asked to recognize
the settlements in the West Bank and Gaza? What are
those settlements for except to serve as a prelude to
annexation? What is the purpose of the settlements
,in the Golan Heights and the so-called annexation of
the Golan Heights as part of Israel? When does Israel
intend to withdraw from the south of Lebanon as has
been dictated by the Security Council? Which Israel are
we asked to recognize?

146. Therefore we are confronted with an entity
which refuses to spell out its parameters-which refuses to declare its borders. We are asked to recognize
a State in a state of becoming. In fact we are asked
to recognize a nucleus of an empire. We are asked
to negotiate, not as a matter of achieving results and
an outcome, which are acceptable and justifiable and
legitimate; we are asked to be co-opted into a negotiating process that tends to ratify conquest and annexation. That aspect of negotiations is totally rejected.

141. We have also been told several times that it is
important that the Arab States negotiate with Israel,
that they sit down with it around the table-words that
are acceptable in form but are very dangerous in substance. Negotiate what? We in the Arab States are
eager to negotiate. We want to‘negotiate, but not to
ratify conquests, not to ratify annexation, not to ratify
hegemony by military Israel in the occupied territories.

147. From this posture of Israel’s, its attempt at
hegemony, its eagerness to establish itself as a centre
for the feeding and arming of undercover activities in
many parts of Central America and to support every
coercive regime, we are faced with a situation whereby
this Israel comes to the Council, insults its judgement,
tries to deflect it from addressing the issues, introduces
tangential issues in order to reduce the importance of
Ein El-Helweh-in order to say that the Council is
being preoccupied with a marginal, peripheral element
in the Middle East equation-and has the temerity to
state that the Council is not dealing with the central and
more explosive issues in the Middle East.

142. They tell us not to set preconditions. Who has
established the conditions? Who has annexed Jerusalem and declared it unilaterally, ex cathedru, as the
capital of Israel? Who has claimed the right to establish
settlements in the West Bank and Gaza in complete
contravention of the articles of the Geneva Convention? Who is seeking to alter the demographic and
geographic character of the West Bank and Gaza and in
addition, as the representative of Lebanon has stated,
of southern Lebanon? Who have arrogated to themselves the right to occupy and then never admit that it is
occupation?

148. Upon reflection and thorough examination, one
must conclude that Israel constitutes the detonator of
many of these crises, because if we look at the whole
thrust and historical retrospect of what the Zionist ideology and the Israeli State since its inception have
sought to create-a distortion whereby the distinction
between one person and another is the ultimate ideological mystique, while notions of human integration
are considered alien to its ideology-it becomes apparent that the whole Zionist ideology has been created

143. The whole world community, except Israel, recognizes that the West Bank and Gaza are occupied
territories. Israel does not call them occupied territories or treat them as occupied territories: it treats
them as arenas for the fulfilment of an expanded Israel.
During the earlier period, they were called “adminis16

upon this basic philosophic perception. And in order to
stimulate further disruptive forces in the region, it has
sought to fan and elevate to a mystique certain religious
differences, creating them as constants instead of variables, because it wanted to introduce into the whole
lexicon and thought processes of the region a mirroring
of its own ideology instead of the human integration
that we have been seeking to achieve. Hence, when the
Israeli representative states in the Council that the Arab
world is not united, and therefore cannot be united, he
is trying to project into the Arab human situation a
reflection of the ideological anachronism that Israeli
ideology represents.

153. The Group of Arab States and the League of
Arab States come to the United Nations because we
believe, although there has not been enough evidence
to that effect, that through the machinery of the Council
it is possible to bring about a just and peaceful settlement, in accordance with the rights that have been
spelt out to the Member States as well as to the people
of Palestine. We come to the Council because of our
belief in the supremacy of the political and diplomatic
option, because we know that in the aftermath of the
Second World War, and the devastation that took
place, this remains the anchor for all those who have
been disfranchised-their
sole ray of hope that they will
not be rendered, as the Palestinians are being rendered,
helpless and desperate by an Israel that is defying all
the resolutions of the Security Council and is in contempt of the Charter of the United Nations.

149. Of course, the Arab world faces many problems.
We have emerged from colonialism as separate entities
because in the period of the colonial empires we were
divided by many colonial countries which exercised
different and varying degrees of colonial control over
our destiny. We did not have the opportunity, historically speaking, to emerge into one national liberation
movement, because we achieved our independence at
different times, at different levels and against different
colonial Powers. Yet when we achieved our independence we achieved it in order to formulate two basic
legitimacies: the legitimacy of our sovereign States and
the legitimacy of our Arab national consciousness. It is
that attempt at historic reconciliation between the urge
for our independence and sovereignty and the thrust of
our Arab national consciousness and aspirations that
has shaped the conduct of the League of Arab States.

154. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]: I call on the representative of Israel, who has
asked to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
155. Mr. BLUM (Israel): As always, I benefit from
the insights of Mr. Maksoud, and I listened attentively
to his statement. I think it was towards the end of that
statement that the root cause of the Arab-Israel conflict
became very evident, when he described my country as
one based on religious mystique. He and those for
which he speaks simply cannot reconcile themselves to
the notion that the Jewish people also is entitled to the
right of self-determination,
to the establishment of its
own State, to sovereignty and independence. The agelong aspirations of the Jewish people to the exercise of
self-determination
in its country have been relegated by
Mr. Maksoud to a religious mystique. This has been the
root cause of the Arab-Israel conflict all these years,
and this is why the countries for which Mr, Maksoud
speaks have not been willing to sit down with us all
these years, ever since the establishment of Israel in
1948.

150. We inherited social dislocations. Science, technology and the industrial revolution
challenged the
basic fabric of our society. It was a challenge that
we tried to accommodate.
Of course, there has been
social, economic and political dislocation when, in our
relationships with the industrial world, whether East or
West, we have attempted to find answers to pressing
problems. These critical problems in our society must
elicit understanding, sympathetic responses and assistance.

156. To be sure-and I want to make this crystal-clear
and to assure Mr. Maksoud of this-Israel’s
existence
and right to exist are not predicated on his willingness to
accord us such recognition. Israel’s right to exist is as
axiomatic as that of the various members of the League
of Arab States or, for that matter, of any other State
within the international
community.
But it is this unwillingness,to come to terms with the right of the Jewish
people to a State of its own, irrespective of boundaries
and territory, that has lain at the root of the Arab-Israel
conflict ever since 1948.

151. Instead, Israel has sought to exploit the dislocations. Instead of facilitating the peace process, in
accordance with various United Nations resolutions, it
has targeted the Palestinians for permanent disfranchisement, and in the small country of Lebanon it has
sought to settle major accounts in a small arena.
Through the disfranchisement
of the Palestinians, the
annexation of the Golan Heights, the proliferation
of
settlements and the occupation of southern Lebanon,
Israel has sought to stimulate destabilizing
factors
throughout the region, in order to arrogate to itself the
right to complete military and strategic hegemony.

157. Mr. Maksoud tried to explain away this rejectionist posture by referring to Jerusalem, the Golan
Heights and so on. What was the cause of his unwillingness to sit down and negotiate with Israel before 1967,
before the Six-Day War, before Israel came to control
East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights? There were
various other excuses and pretexts at that time. The
excuses vary; the root cause does not.

152. I do not want to dwell on the various plans that
confirm many of the annexationist policies of Israel,
nor to go into some slips of the tongue to give examples
of the racist approach that has been taken by the Israelis
towards Arab problems.
17

158. Therefore, we are treated to a strange logic
which speaks of Israel as the nucleus of an empire-this
coming from someone who speaks for 2 1 States extending over 5 million square miles, from the Persian Gulf to
the Atlantic, accusing of imperialism a State which is in
control of less than 20,000 square miles, less than one
half of 1 per cent of the territories of the Arab States,
and about 70 per cent of that other major empire of our
world, Switzerland! This is where a perversion of logic
can lead one when one becomes blind to reality and is
obsessed by one’s own hatreds.

of the question;
Mr. Maksoud.

161. Mr. BLUM
Mr. President.

by

165. This is why I say, with all due respect, that I find
his interventions,
including his intervention of today,
illuminating,
and this is why I stated at the outset of my
reply that, as always, I have today benefited from his
insight and from his wisdom.
166. The PRESIDENT
[interpretarion
from Russian]: Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Permanent Observer for
the League of Arab States to the United Nations, has
asked to make another statement. With the consent of
the Council, I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

159. Once this situation is created it is, of course,
perfectly possible to accuse Israel of every evil and all
the malaise that prevails in the Middle East. Israel, of
course, is responsible for the war between Iraq and
Iran; Israel, of course, is responsible for the escalation
of tension in the Persian Gulf; Israel is responsible for
the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan;Israel
is responsible for the tension between the two Yemens; Israel is
responsible for the tension between the various Gulf
States; Israel is responsible for the dispute between
Iraq and Syria; Israel is responsible for the ongoing
feuds between Syria and Jordan; Israel is responsible
for the hostility of Libya towards everybody elseLibya against the Sudan, Libya against Chad, Libya
against Tunisia, Libya against Egypt; Israel is responsible for the dispute in Western Sahara. I heard someone
in the delegates gallery say “Yes”. This is a new procedure. I should like to be enlightened, Mr. President,
as to whether this is the procedure that we are supposed
to160. The PRESIDENT:
I ask the representative
Israel to address the Council also.

it is not even being considered

167. Mr. MAKSOUD:
I was very hesitant about
making a further statement, but I think certain issues of
major importance have been raised and should not remain unanswered.
168. The Israeli representative
has stated that the
Jewish people have the right of self-determination.
The
issue is, how many of the Jewish people? There are
Jews throughout the world, citizens integrated into
their respective communities.
What do we mean when
we begin to classify religious identities throughout the
world as the focus for the creation of a right of selfdetermination?
This is a very important issue, because
it sets in motion the establishment of very dangerous
precedents, which would be destructive and unsettling,
and could be the precursor of various alienations within
a given body politic.

of
169. I am sure that the tragedies of anti-Semitism, the
pogroms and the results of the genocide in Nazi Germany have undoubtedly stimulated a measure of solidarity, leading-rightly
or wrongly-to
a desire for
self-determination.
But, if this notion of Jewish selfdetermination
is absolute, continuous and universally
applicable, that is a very new phenomenon.
It is no
longer confined to the notion of an Israeli State; it is the
precursor of a right to self-determination
which could
mean, if all Jews are entitled to exercise self-determination and if they determine that they want to go to Israel,
the nucleus of a much larger Israel than the one we are
faced with today.

(Israel): I am addressing the Council,

162. With the kind of logic that I have described,
everything becomes possible.
163. I must say I really have pity on Mr. Maksoud. He
comes before the Council and is in a no-win situation,
because he is faced with a dilemma. He has already
treated us in the past to more than one expose on that
dilemma: should he come before the Council and thus
devalue his appearances-which
is why he appears so
infrequently, I guess-or should he and the countries
for which he speaks resort to nondiplomatic
and nonpolitical methods? These are the options; these are the
alternatives.

170. Irrespective of the philosophical connotations of
this notion of Zionism-which
is challenged, by the
way, by many hundreds of thousands of Jews everywhere in the world who consider it to be a destabilizing
factor as regards their own sense of belonging as citizens in their respective countries-irrespective
of
the phiiosophical implications of this dangerous Zionist
concept, we are saying that, if there is to be recognition
of an Israel, it is important for the world community to
spell out clearly the borders, the frontiers of that State.

164. It has not even occurred to Mr. Maksoud that his
list is not exhaustive, and that there is a third way,
which is, in fact, the civilized way which is being pursued by civilized nations world wide and which is the
channel for achieving peace between warring nations:
sitting down. He has tried to ridicule the notion of
negotiations without preconditions; he spoke derisively
about it. But that is how disputes have been solved
world wide throughout the ages. That, however, is out

171. Jewish people throughout the world are citizens
of their respective countries-excellent
citizens who do
not presume that anti-Semitism is a permanent feature
18

ised by Mr. Maksoud. It has been rather persistent
over the years, but I am sure. that Mr. Maksoud will do
his very best to see to it that those countries for which
he speaks will not engage in anti-Semitism in the United
Nations, as some members of the League of Arab
States have done over the past few years, from the
rostrum of the General Assembly, in the Security Council and elsewhere. For instance, Mr. Treiki, who has
since been elevated to the rank of Minister for Foreign
Affairs of his country and,who is well known for his
expertise in the field of diplomatic
immunity,
made
a vulgar anti-Semitic attack on the Jews of New York
last December in the General Assembly. And I am
not aware of Mr. Treiki’s having been rebuked by
Mr. Maksoud and having been told by him that he
should not engage in “transient phenomena”.
Other
Arab representatives
from Syria, Jordan and other
countries have likewise been engaged in such antiSemitic rhetoric in this building. I would very much
hope that from now on, since Mr. Maksoud has decreed
that anti-Semitism is a transient phenomenon, he will
see to it that the members of the League of Arab States
refrain from this kind of rhetoric.

of human nature, but see it as an aberration that is
transient, temporary and condemnable. But Zionism, in
the way it has been articulated today, presumes the
permanency of anti-Semitism,
thus the permanency
of Jewish alienation, and thus the necessity for selfdetermination.
While the people of Palestine, disfranchised deliberately by conquest and by exclusion, are
denied the right of self-determination-paradoxically.
This is where right is subordinate to might.
172. The Israeli representative
states that excuses
vary, that Israel is in control of 20,000 square miles and
that the Arab States are in control of 5 million square
miles. That is the logic that the upnrtheid regime in
South Africa applies and that the white settlers in Rhodesia applied. I suppose, by that logic, if 20,000 square
miles is little compared with 5 million square miles,
what is 30,000 square miles, what is 50,000 square
miles, compared with 5 million? Ifall of them want selfdetermination
in Israel, then what is another million
square miles compared with the 4 million square miles
of the Arabs?
173. It is unbelievable. I cannot believe that even an
Israeli Zionist representative would utter such historical senselessness-I
want to be very careful, so
I avoided the word “nonsense”.

178. The State of Israel is a State of a people like any
other people, and it is time to wake up, Mr. Maksoud,
and realize that fact. But as I look around the world, to
my astonishment, I see a number of countries that in
their offtcial designation insist on being called the
adherents of a certain religion. There are a number of
States that insist on being called Islamic republics. But
that ‘has nothing to do with religion. I even know of
States whose very establishment is based on religion. If
Mr. Maksoud is interested, I could provide him with a
list of such States. It is not the State of Israel.

174. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]: I call on the representative of Israel, who has
asked to speak a second time in exercise of the right of
reply.
175.

Mr. BLUM

(Israel): I shall be very brief indeed.

176. I believe it has been very useful, again, to listen
to the second statement of Mr. Maksoud, because
I think it displayed his utter inability to countenance the
notion of the existence of the Jewish people. That, as
I claimed before, is really the fundamental problem: the
inability of Mr. Maksoud and of those for whom he
speaks to get accustomed to the idea that the Jews are
also a people entitled to self-determination,
sovereignty
and independence like any other people. That inability
has been the root cause of the Arab-Israel confhctbefore 1967, since 1967, all these years.

The meeting

rose at 7.25 p.m.

NOTES
’ Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949 (United Nations, Treary Series,
vol. 75, No. 973).
z United Nations publication, Sales No. E.83.1.21 ,chap. I, sect. A.
’ League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV (1929), No. 2138.

177. I should very much hope that anti-Semitism
is
indeed a transient phenomenon, as we have been prom-

19

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNTTED

NATIONS

PUBLICATTONS

United Nations publications
ma> be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences dipositaires
du
monde entier. Informer-vous
auprts de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes. New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Se&on de Yentas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00400

9D-6131~January

1993-3.050
