327 (IV). Voluntary transmission of
inf9hnation under part I of the
Stvbdard Form concerning Non•
Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Having noted with appreciation that more Members /esponsible for the administration of NonSelf-Governing Territories have voluntarily transmitted information on the geography, history,
people, government and human rights of the NonSelf-Governing Territories than in the previous
year, including in some cases information on the
development of self-governing institutions,
Recalli,ng the statement made in resolution 144
(II),12 adopted by the General Assembly on 3
November 1947, that the voluntary transmission
of such information and its summarizing by the
Secretary-General are entirely in conformity with
the spirit of Article 73 of the Charter and should
be therefore duly noted and encouraged,
1. Recommends that, when the revision is
undertaken of the Standard Form for the guidance of Members in the preparation of information
to be transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter, general information on geography, history, people arid human rights should cease to be
classified under the optional category of that
Form;
2. Erpresses the hope that such of the Members as have not done so may voluntarily include
details on the government 0f Non-Self-Governing
Territories in the information transmitted by them
under Article 73 e of the Charter.
263rd plenary meeting,
2 December 1949.

328 (IV). Equal treatment in matters
relating to education in Non-SelfGoverning Territories
The General Assembly
1. Invites the Administering Members to take
steps, where necessary, to establish equal treatment in matters related to education between inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
under their administration, whether they be indigenous or not ;
2. Invites the Administering Members, in cases
where for exceptional reasons educational facilities
of a separate character are provided for different
communities, to include in the information transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter full data
on the costs and methods of financing the separate
groups of educational institutions.
263rd plenary meeting,
2 December 1949.

329 (IV). Language of instruction in
Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the importance of preserving and
developing the languages of the indigenous peoples
of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, and
Noting the appreciable steps already taken in
this connexion by the Administerin~ Members,
12
See Official Records of the second session of the
General Assembly, Resolutions. page 56.

41

1. Invites the Administering Members
(a) To promote the use of the indigenous
languages in the Territories under their administration;
(b) To make these languages where and whenever possible the languages of instruction in elementary, primary and secondary schools, without
prejudice to the use of any other language;
( c) To include in their reports to the SecretaryGeneral information on the scope and results of
such steps;
2. Invites the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization to undertake
an over-all study of the question, more particularly the measures which might be taken with a
view to the speediest use of indigenous languages
as vehicles of instruction in schools, taking into
consideration the desires of the inhabitants and
taking account in such a study of the experience
of other States in this matter;
3. Expresses the hope that, in accordance with
the obligation accepted under Article 73 d of the
Charter, the Administering Members will collaborate with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in the conduct of
such a study.
263rd plenary meeting,
2 December 1949.

330 (IV). Eradication of illiteracy in
Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that one of the fundamental problems in Non-Self-Governing Territories is illiteracy,
Noting that the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization has agreed to
co-operate with the United Nations in giving
effect to the principles and obligations set forth
in Chapter XI of the Charter with regard to matters affecting the well-being and development of
the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Noting that the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization's plans for an
expanded programme of technical assistance ,o
under-developed countries include the offer of
advice and assistance on fundamental educational
services generally, including the conducting of campaigns against illiteracy, the holding of seminars
and experimental or demonstration projects in
fundamental education,
Considering that the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization is a
specialized 1gency qualified to study plans and to
recommend the most appropriate action for the
promotion, in collaboration with the Members concerned, of systematic campaigns against illiteracy,
1. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to communicate
to the Administering Members full information on
measures for suppressing illiteracy which could be
applied with satisfactory results in N on-Self-Governing Territories, and to communicate annually
to the United Nations an account of these measures
and of the extent to which its services in campaigns against illiteracy have been provided for
any of the Non-Self-Governing Territories at the
request of the Members concerned ;

2. Recommends that the Administering Members continue to co-operate with the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, when and where appropriate, with a
view to the practical achievement of the eradication of illiteracy in the Non-Self-Governing Territories;

3. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to take account
in its studies of the experience of various States
in this matter;
4. Invites the Secretary-General to collaborate
with the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Orgqnization in any necessary
studies, taking as a basis the information transmitted under Article 73 e, together with any
relevant supplemental information and any relevant studies undertaken by the Trusteeship Council with regard to Trust Territories.

3. Invites the specialized agencies concerned
to communicate annually to the United Nations
information on the progress of the work indicated in the previous paragraph which would be
of service in Non-Self-Governing Territories, including information on the extent to which their
serviL.J have been provided for any of the NonSelf-Governing Territories ;
4. Invites the specialized agencies to take account in their studies of the experieuce of various
States in respect of the problems enumerated
above;

5. Invites the Secretary-General to bring to the
attention of the Administering Members and the
specialized agencies concerned the comments made
during the discussions in the Special Committee
on Information transmitted under Article 73 e of
the Charter in relation to agriculture, education,
labour, public health and social welfare;
6. Invites the Secretary-General to collaborate
with the specialized agencies in any necessary
studies, taking as a basis the information transmitted under Article 73 e, together with any relevant supplemental information and any relevant
studies undertaken liy the Economic and Social
Council am! by the Trusteeship Council with
regard to Trust Tcrri,ories;
7. Z:llrthe,- im·itcs the Secretary-General, in his
analyses of information m1 Non-Self-Governing
Territories to be su,mtitted to the General 1\ssemLly, to select such aspects of economic, sociai and
educational problems as appropriately provide opportunities for possible co-operation with the specialized international bodies, as proviclecl in Article
7 3 d of the Charter, with a view to the improvement of economic, social ancl educational conclitio11s in the :\nn-5di-l ;m•crning Tcrritori,'s.

263rd plenary meeting,
2 December 1949.

331 (IV). International collaboration
in regard to economic, social and
educati.onal conditions in Non-SeliGoverning Territories
The General Assembly,
Having considered the summaries and analyses
of information transmitted under Article 73 e of
the Charter,
Having regard to the provisions of General
Assembly resolutions 13 220 (Ill) and 221 (Ill)
of 3 November 1948 concerning respectively liaison with the Economic and Social Council and
the collaboration of the specialized agencies i11
regard to Article 73 e of the Charter,

263rd plenary meeting,
2 Deccm/Jer 1919.

Having noted aspects of the programmes of the
Economic and Social Council and of the special
ized agencies which include within their scope
economic, social and educational conditions affeccting Non-Self-Governing Territories,

332 (IV). E'-'tah!ishmcnt of a Special
ConnniHcc cm Information trans-

miilled urnfor Article 73 e of the
Char!cr

1. Emphasizes the importance of promoting liic
technical training of the inhabitants of the 1\ 011Self-Governing Territories, and requests the .\dministering Members to co-operate when and
where appropriate with specialized international
bodies wi_th a view to examining the possiliiky
of prov1d111g adequate training facilities for thc,w
inh~bitants in the fielcls of economic development,
agriculture, eduC1tio11, laliollr, public health an:!
social welfare;

The General , lssclllbly,
l la'i'ing cunsid,rc,l the work of the Special
Committee 011 l11i(Jr111atiuu transmitted under
,\nick 73 e u: th,'. Charter which was constituted
by re~ulutirm 2 l 'I ( l l r J 11 adopted liy the Ccneral
Assembly 011 3 :\m·,·11111(']' ltJ-k,, and
Taking into a,count the possibilities of further
r1,11structive \1·urk I,\' such a Committee,
1. I Jee id ,·s to rrn1st.it1ttc a Special Committee
tor a thret·-year pvriud;

2. Requests the appropriate international bodies
to take full account oi conditions in the Non-SeitGoverning Territories in work unllertaken Lv
them in connexion with eco11omic clevelopmeut,
the world ccnsus of agricLtlture, the study of soil
erosion, the training of plllilic health 1,crsu1111vl.
the study of prolilcms of nutrition, the applic"
tion of international lalionr cunvcnti"ns, the proL
!em of niigrant labour in Africa, the dcvelopn w111
of social welfare servicts, the prevL'lltion anrl treat
ment of juvenile cleliuquency, the study of the
most appropriate means of imprm·i11g hu11Si11g in
tropical regions, and the problems of higher edt1cation;
13

2. c·uns,'d,rs tlut tltl' ~Jl<'Cial Co111111ittee should
i1e l'(Hl!JH>S<'(] ,1f tl1<1.<c .\lt"nti>crs of the United
:\'.;1ti,,i1, tr:u1.,;11i1ti11:· iniurrnation in accordance
\, itlt ,\rti,·k 13 ,. ,>l'tlll' c·11arler arnl of an equal
munlJer of rn111-,1drni11istering l\kmliers elected by
the l•ollrth Co1111,1iltl'e \Jll lithalf of the General
:\,sunl , u11 ;:, wi,le ,t geographical Lasis as
] <Oscii ,le-. Th,· 11, ,11:•dlllinistning l\lcrnbers of the
.C:peci;d l '01 lllllit ll'l' .,kill lie elected for a term of
three 1·c: 1 r:; . .\t the first elrction however two
'.\h-ndi;-rs shall lw ekctcd for a ter;11 of two ;cars,
and two ior a ,n111 .,f one vcar only. A separate
vote shall he taken tor each election;

See Official Records uf the third scssinn of the Grn

11
~:,"' ( I i7irinl I<c,,,,·d, of tl,c third session of t/ie Gentrlrl .·I 1·,-., u1l 1/_1', J),1rt l, l<1..·St)lutions, page 82.

era! Assembly, Part I, Resolutions. p.1g;c 83.

42

\

'
