UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

’

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1875) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The Middle East problem including the Palestinian question..

1

.. .. .. ... .. .. .

S/PV. 1875

NOTE
.

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date :
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions und
Decisions qf the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

’

1875th MEETING
Heid in New York on Friday,
President:

(United

16 January

Mr. Saiim A. SALIM
Republic of Tanzania).

2. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the representative of Mauritania.
In accordance with the
established practice, I request the representative of
Jordan to withdraw temporarily from the Council table
in order that his place may be taken by the representative of Mauritania.
I now invite that representative
to take that place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

Present: The ‘representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain
and Northern
Ireland,
United
Republic of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

The Middle
question

East problem

The meeting

including

the Palestinian

wus culled to order ut 3.50 p.m.
Adoption

The hgenda

HASSEN
(Mauritania)
(interpretation
There could no more felicitous time,
Sir, to discuss a problem of such capital importance
to international
peace and security than the period of
your presidency of the Security Council. Aware as we
are of the qualities you possess, your skill, your sense
of restraint and tact and your patience, we cannot
but be certain that this debate will be crowned with
success and will constitute an important stage in the
search for peace in the Middle East. May I therefore
congratulate you and tell you how happy I am to speak
in the Council at a time when you are its President.
For you are hot only a personal friend of mine but
aiso a worthy representative of Africa and the eminent
representative of a country with which mine maintains
the closest ‘possible relations of fraternal solidarity.

agenda (S/Agenda/l875)

1.

of the agenda

MWS adopted.

The Middle East problem including
Palestinian question

1976, at 3 p.m.

the

3.

Mr.

from

French):

EL

4. I should like also, through you, Sir, to thank the
membei-s of the Council for having been kind enough
to allow my delegation to participate in this discussion.
I should like, too, to congratulate the new members
of the Council and to wish them all success in carrying
out the important responsibility
entrusted to them by
the General Assembly.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken by the Council at previous meetings
[/870th-1874th
meetings],
I invite the representatives
of Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Mauritania,
Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic, the United
Arab Emirates and Yugoslavia,
in conformity
with
the usual practice and with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and the provisional rules of procedure, to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
In accordance with the decision taken by the Council
[/870th meeting],
I invite the representative
of the
Palestine Liberation Organization to participate in the
discussion.

5. I said just now that the present debate is of capital
importance tointet-national
peace and security. Indeed,
since the Second World War the problem of the Middle
East has really beeti the only one that might at any
time push the world into a third general conflagration. Since 1948 not a single year has passed when this
problem has not been considered, from one or another
of its angles, by the various organs of the United
Nations. All the attempts made by the Organization
from the very outset to find a solution to this thorny
problem have been compromised
by Israel’s intransigence and by the atmosphere of insecurity created
by its terrorist groups.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ahdel Meguid
(Egypt), Mr. Shuruf (Jordqn), Mr. All& (Sjwiun Arab
Republic) and Mr. Khuddoumi
(Pulestine Liberution
Orgunizution)
took places ut the Security
Council
ruble; Mr. Al-Shaikhly
(it-cry), Mr. Bishuru (Kuwuit),
Mr. El Husscn
(Muurituniu),
Mr. Jumul (Qatar),
Mr. Buroody (Suudi Arubiu),
Mr. Ghobash (United
Arub Emirutes) und Mr. PetriC: (Yugoslavia)
took the
pluces reserved f&r them ut the side of the Coun’cil
chumher.

6. We know what happened to Count Bernadotte, the
United Nations Mediator, when he simply proposed a
correction of the frontiers of the Zionist State. His
I

.

successor, Raluh Bunche. submitted to the General
Assembly- in September 1948 a plan which was also
rejected under Zionist pressure. Not only was it
impossible
to carry out that plan, but a General
Assembly resolution which was adopted on 9 December 1949’ and which called for the intemationalization
of Jerusalem met with an outright rejection on the
part of Israel. On 14 December of the same year-in
other words, one week later-the
Zionist authorities,
paying no attention at all to that United Nations
decision, declared that their parliament
would be
installed at Jerusalem.

through the intermediary of Mr. Jarring. The Egyptian
Government
accepted this initiative whereas Israel,
after having first accepted it, subsequently denounced
it.
11. In the discharge of his mandate of mediation
the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General
then visited the Middle East. He started by submitting
on 8 February 1971 an aide-mimoire
to Egypt and
Israel [S/10403, annex]. On 15 February, the reply of
Egypt [ihici., annex II], which was positive, was communicated
to Mr. Jarring. On 26 February, Israel
published its comments on the Egyptian reply as well
as its-~6Vlitipr~~oSals’[Ihid:;unnex
1111instead of giving
some positive reply to Mr. Jarring. These comments
and proposals made it quite clear that Israel did not
intend to withdraw from the Arab territories which it
occupied and which extended to the armistice line of
before 5 June 1967.

7. In 1956, during the night of 29/30 October, Israel
decided to invade the Sinai, Egyptian territory. There
was a further act of aggression on 5 June 1967. That
time it resulted in the occupation of a large part. of
Egyptian, Jordanian and Syrian territory. Since then
the Middle East problem has been in the forefront of
the concerns of the international
community.
From
that date to the present time, almost 100 resolutions
have been adopted by various bodies of the United
Nations rejecting the annexation of territory by force
and advocating a solution to the Palestinian tragedy.
Not only have all those resolutions been rejected by
Israel, but the Israeli policy of annexation and expulsion of peoples has been accompanied by a campaign
of denigration of the United Nations.

12. On 5 March 1971, the Secretary-General
made
an appeal to. Israel to ..consider this question more
carefully and to give a more favourable response to
the proposal of Mr. Jarring. Israel ignored that appeal.
On 4 February 1971, President Sadat proposed a twostage plan [see S/1014/],
which was designed to
facilitate implementation
of the provisions of resolution 242 (1967). Israel rejected that initiative as well.
On 4 October 1971, a new American six-point plan
for . the full implementation
of ‘the resolution
was
presented to the General Assembly. by the Secretary
of State, Mr. Rogers.* This plan was violently rejected
by Mrs. Golda Meir, who was at that time Prime
Minister of Israel.

8. Since 1967 the United Nations in fact has become
the favourite target of the Israeli leaders. The principle
of the Charter relating to the non-acquisition
of territory by force has already been described as immoral
by Mrs. Golda Meir on 30 August 1971 when she was
Prime Minister of Israel.

13. On 23 June 1971, the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity, at its eighth ordinary session, requested the
then Chairman,
in consultation
with the heads of
State and Government of Africa, to use their influence
to bring about the complete implementation
of resolution 242 (1967). It was pursuant to that recommendation
that a committee consisting of 10 African heads of
State was created. A sub-committee,
consisting of the
heads of State of the United Republic of Cameroon,
Nigeria, Senegal and Zaire, was instructed to get in
touch .-with the -two.. .parties. in order to facilitate
Mr. Jarring’s mission. Israel refused once again to
subscribe to the principle of the non-annexation
of
territory by force, using the pretext that its security
could be guaranteed only by expansion.

9. Despite this policy of arrogance and aggression,
the Egyptian Government, showing every desire to live
in peace and concerned to save mankind from a
generalized conflagration-concerns
and desires which
they shared with other countries of that region-at
the
beginning of 1968 proposed to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General a plan for the implementation of the Council resolutions.
Israel rejected that
proposal. Israel’s blocking of Mr. Jarring’s mission led
the French Government
to propose a policy of concerted action among the permanent members of ,the
Security Council in order to find a permanent soiu:tion of the problem of the Middle East. The Arab
Governments
welcomed . that initiative
and unreservedly accepted it. Israel simply rejected the French
initiative out of hand.

14. This brief outline of past events proves, if there is
any need of proof, that all the wars which have raged
in, the Middle East s.ince 1948, and more particularly
the war of 1973, were rooted in the intransigence of
Israel and its systematic refusal to work towards
peace on the basis of the decisions of the United
Nations and of the most sacred and fundamental principles of the Charter. Since the war of October 1973,
discussions in the United Nations on the Middle East
have differed from earlier ones because of their context

10. In the meantime, the Soviet Government
piesented a peace plan which was, in turn, also rejected
by Israel. It likewise rejected an American plan which
was presented on 9 December 1969 by the Secretary
of State, Mr. William Rogers [see S/9588]. In June
1970, the United States took another initiative. for
peace, requesting the parties concerned to observe
‘a cease-fire of 90 days, the period of calm to .be
employed in efforts to implement resolution 242 (1967)
-

2

_-.-

L-

_-...

and the circumstances in which they have been held.
This is particularly due to the Palestinian issue, which
in the past was relegated to second place, but has
today become important
not only because it is an
actual fact but because it is the prime cause of the
problem and the key to any solution of it.

that: was to highlight the military arrogance of Israel
and the vanity of its peaceful intentions and its struggle
for survival and for peace. This is certainly what the
international community has understood and what has
led it to recognize the rights of the Palestinians to
dignity and independence.

‘15. Now the rights of the Palestinians-rights
which
have received unanimous international
recognitionhave been defined as the basis for any peace in the
Middle East and it has been recognized that they should
be the foundation for any solution designed to put an
end to the hegemony exercised in that region. This
process of recognition, begun as a result of the October war and further strengthened by the dynamism and
determination
of the Palestinian people as well as of
its representative,
the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), has in today’s debate reached a crucial
stage for peace in that region, and hence for security
throughout the world. This is, in fact, the first time
that the Security Council has taken up the question
of the Middle East -with the full participation
of the
Palestinian people through their representatives,
and
1 am very pleased to welcome them here.

18. If Israel had really been motivated by a desire
for peace, it would have participated in this discussion,
whose main goal is to seek a soluiion of the problem
‘of the Middle East. but once again its absence unmasks
it.+ true intentions. To perpetuate the occupation of
Egyptian territories and those of Jordan and Syria,
and to maintain
refugee status of the Palestinian
people-these
are Israel’s genuine motives. This is the
situation the Security Council is in duty bound to
ctiange if it wishes to preserve peace in the region and
Security throughout
the world, because the same
conditions which led to the various wars in that area
still prevail in the Middle East since Israeli policies
have in no way changed.
19. Therefore the Security Council is today on the eve
of a very important and decisive stagein the search for
a settlement
of the Palestinian
question and the
establishment of a just peace in the Middle East. The
way to be followed is very clear. It has been clearly
marked out by the General zAssembly in resolutions 3236 (XXIX).
3375 (XXX). 3376 (XXX) and
3414 (XXX). The Council should indicate the way in
which these various resolutions are to be implemented.
The Council must try to eliminate
both the main
causes of tension in the region, namely. the occupation of Arab territories and the violation of the inaiienable national rights of the Palestinian people.

16. Therefore, there is now a fundamental difference
between the way in which we are now taking up the
question of Palestine and the way in which it was
debated 20 or 30 years ago. The international
community and the Security Council are henceforth fully
aware that the question of Palestine is not simply a
refugee question, it is not a question of knowing how
those refugeescan be.provided .with-food+rclothing
through international
assistance. They are aware now
that this is a really much more the question of a people
which has been expelled from its home and that it is
the root cause of the global problem we are discussing
today. They are aware now that any solution of this
unfortunate problem of occupation and annexation by
force must necessarily involve the restoration to the
Palestinian people of their legitimate national rights.
This is what gives particular
significance
to our
meetings today.

20. The occupation of Arab territories was the result
of the Israeli aggression of 1967 and was carried out in
contempt of international
law and the fundamental
principles of the Charter. The Palestinian tragedy is
well known. These are people who have been expelled
from their homes and dispossessed of their goods
and whose very existence is threatened by Israel.

17. It is, furthermore. historically rather ironical that
Israel was the one which contributed to this profound
change in international
opinion regarding the problem
of the Middle East. because the logic of contempt for
the rights of others and the .pse of military force to
occupy and consolidate the annex&G
of the tGritOry
could no longer be accepted by the international
community.
The 1967 occupation of Arab territories
by the Zionist authorities of Tel Aviv and the outright
denial of any rights to the Palestinian people were, in
fact. only a repetition of the aggressions of 1948 and
1956. In the course of these various acts of aggression,
Israel attained its military objective: namely, to occupy
the territories of three Arab.States. and $0 date.it .has
refused to withdraw from those territories, even within
the context of a political settlement, while continuing
to deny their rights to the Palestinian people. But those
aggressions did. in fact lead to a positive result. and

21. By restoring to the Palestinian
people their
‘inhlienable
national rights and by eliminating
the
c$nsequences of the Israeli aggression of 1967. which
l,e$ at that time to the occupation of Egyptian, Jordanian and Syrian territories,
the Security Council
.can lay the foundations for a just and lasting peace in
!r’ie region. The Arab countries have once again
demonstrated
their wish for peace and their sincere
desire to see the United Nations play its proper role
by ensuring thst each of its Members enjoys the
fundamental rights guaranteed by the Charter. Therefo’& it is clear that it is’not the Arab countries that
tiish to push Israel into the sea as the Israeli propaganda machine has for so long alleged’. Ii-is rather
I&&el that wishes to pursue through aggression and
intiinidation
its dreams of expansion at the expense
df the Arab countries of the area and of the PaIestinian
p’eople. No peace can be brought about. however. in
r,:
3

i

\

that part of the Middle East without justice, and there
can be no justice unless the legitimate national rights
of. the Palestinian people are restored to them and
unless Israel withdraws from all the occupied Arab
territories. This then is the challenge which has to be,
taken up by the Security Council today in its efforts
to establish stability once again in that region.

of States and peoples for a settlement of matters in
dispute in a new spirit, by means of negotiations, and
we have seen their desire to eliminate
the power
politics which characterized
the past, to eliminate
domination
and inequity and the sources of tension
likely to produce military conflicts that could have
unpredictable
consequences.
It has become even
clearer that the desires of the peoples of the world for
a better and more just world can be realized only
through the establishment
of new international
relations, with a truly democratic character based on
full equality among all peoples, and on respect for the
sacred right of every people to self-determination
in
accordance with its sovereign will.

,22. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative
of Mauritania for the very generous remarks he has
made about me and my country. I want to assure
him that the feelings of friendship he has expressed
are fully reciprocated. I should like to request him now
to withdraw in order that the representative of Jordan
may resume his seat.

26. In the present international
circumstances, any
attempts to solve matters in dispute by force can only
lead to further conflicts, endangering the peace and
security of the peoples of the world. That is why, to
bring about a just settlement of international disputes,
a great sense of responsibility
must be displayed.
There must be discussions and direct talks among the
parties concerned, on the basis of respect for the
right of every nation to self-determination
and for
the freedom and independence of every people.

23. Before I call on the next speaker. I should like
to inform the Council that I have-just received a letter
from the representative of Guinea containing a request
that she be invited, in accordance with rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure, to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. I
propose, if 1 hear no objection, to invite the representative of Guinea to participate in the discussion in conformity with the usual practice and the relevant provisions of the Charter and the provisional
rules of
procedure. There being no objection,
I invite that
representative to take the place reserved for her at the
side of the Council chamber. on the usual understanding that she will be invited to take a place at the
Council table when she wishes to address the Council.

27. My country believes that the prevention
of
conflicts, the settlement of problems in dispute by
political and peaceful means, and the elimination
of
the use of force in international
relations should
represent the primary objective of the entire international community. The United Nations and the Security
Council in particular can and must display a greater
sense of initiative and contribute more effectively to
the attainment
of that objective.
In a constructive
spirit, Romania intends to make a contribution to that
end.

DATCU
(Romania)
(intcrpr~~ttrtion
,fkonr
Mr. President, the Romanian
delegation
wishes first of all to associate itself with your statement
by conveying to the People’s Republic of China our
profound condolences on the heavy loss suffered by
the Chinese people with the passing of Mr. Chou
En-lai. the Premier of China. A distinguished leader
of the Party and the State, Chou En-lai devoted his
entire life to the fight for national and social liberation,
The progress and happiness of the Chinese people,’
the victory of the revolution
and the construction
of socialism in China were his goals. He worked for
equal rights and mutual respect among all peoples and
for the triumph of peace throughout the world. Chdu
En-lai was a good friend of the Romanian people.
On all occasions he fought to strengthen and develop
friendship and co-operation between the Chinese and
Romanian peoples. I would ask the representative,of
China to convey to the family of the deceased. an
expression ofour profound sympathy and condolences.

24.

Mr.

Frrrrch):

28. Romania
is particularly
concerned over the
evolution of the situation in the Middle East. We
are greatly disturbed by the continued state of tension
in that part of the world, which might have very
harmful consequences for world peace and security.
Our country is directly concerned in the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
a peace which can lead to the free and independent
development
of all the countries and peoples of that.
area, in accordance with their fundamental
aspirations. in accordance with their own interests and in
accordance with the interests of international
peace
and co-operation.
29. It is only natural that the grave situation in the
Middle East should be considered at this time in the
United Nations-in
the Security Council. the body
that has been entrusted by the Member States with
primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security. Consequently,
Romania
has been acting with determination
to put an end to
the conflict; and the Romanian Government and its
President.
Nicolae Ceausescu. have worked continuously and with perseverance to bring about a

25. Romania is participating
in this debate in the.
Security Council with a keen awareness of the complexity and gravity of the questions being considered
and also of the role the United Nations must play in
the settlement. We have witnessed the growing concern
4

just and viable settlement
that would lead lo the
establishment
of a lasting peace in the Middle East.

lishing new relations based on confidence and good
neighbourliness
among- all the peoples and States
concerned. Contemporary
international
reality has
shown that a settlement of the problem of the Pale&inian people in accordance with their national interests
is a sine clkttr 11011for a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East. That is why we consider that the United
Nations, and indeed the entire international
community, has a duty to see to it that justice is done with
respect .to the Palestinian
people. That can be
accomplished, by creating the political and material
conditions which will make it possible for them to
determine their own future, to establish an independent State and to enjoy all the rights which stem
therefrom.

30. The Romanian people, which has alwa);s had
fraternal feelings of solidarity with the Arab peoples
in their struggle to strengthen their independence
and national sovereignty. follow with deep sympathy
the efforts of those peoples to bring about their
economic and social progress, and we are indeed
delighted with the success that they have had.
31. When considering
all the complex problems
relating to the present situation in the Middle East,
Romania believes that a political settlement of the
conflict by peaceful means is necessary. In order to
achieve that end on the basis of resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), the following is necessary:
-First,
territories

35. The general principles in accordance with which
the problem of the Palestinian
people should be
resolved have already been set forth by the General
Assembly in resolution 3236 (XXIX).
The General
Assembly has also recognized that the Palestinian
people are a principal party in the establishment of a
just and lasting peace in the Middle East. Accordingly,
it has requested that the PLO, the representative of
the Palestinian
people, be invited to participate on
an equal footing with all other parties in ail the efforts,
deliberations
and conferences which take place on
the Middle East under the auspices of the United
Nations. The decision of the Security Council to invite
PLO to participate in the present debate is part of
the same effort.

that Israel withdraw its troops from all the
occupied during the 1967 war;

-Secondly,
that the right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination,
including the right to set up
their own independent State, should be recognized;
-Thirdly,
that a just and durable peace be brought
about which guarantees the existence and territorial
integrity and the right to free and independent development of all States in the area, including the Palestinian
State that is to be set up and the State of Israel.
32. Romania is convinced that the situation in the
Middle East cannot be settled without the withdrawal
of Israeli troops from occupied Arab territories. We
believe that no State has the right to send armed forces
into foreign territories and maintain them there to
impose its will, nor does any State have the right to
violate the independence,
sovereignty or territorial
integrity of another State. The experience of history
has shown that it is an illusion that the security of a
State can be ensured by the occupation of foreign
territory. That is why it is necessary for Israel to
abandon its rigid positions, to demonstrate realism and
to show that it understands that as long as the Arab
territories are occupied and aslong as the aspirations
and legitimate
rights of the Palestinian
people are
ignored a lasting peace in the Middle East cannot be
achieved.

36. We believe that an invitation
to the PLO to
attend this debate is entirely in accordance with one
of the axioms of contemporary international relations,
according to which viable solutions for international
problems cannot be worked out unless there is equal
and effective participation of ail interested parties.
37. With respect to the problem under consideration,
no one here would deny the fact that the Palestinian
question is a central element of the Middle East
situation. Acceptance of that fact necessarily entails
the obligation to consider related problems with the
parti’cipation of the PLO, the recognized representative of the Palestinian people.
38.” My country has given full support to the adoption of those decisions in accordance with which the
Palestinian people and their legitimate representatives
have been requested to state their views and to
participate in the political and diplomatic
processes
initiated to settle the Middle East conflict and all the
problems
relating to their interests and national
aspirations.

33. The occupation of foreign territory is in complete
contradiction
with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and with the provisions of other
fundanientai
documents of the Organization:
That is
why the Security Council should once again reaffirm
the principle of the inadmissibility
of the acquisition
and occupation of territory by force and should reaffirm
the need for Israel to withdraw from the Arab territories occupied in 1967.

39. We are indeed pleased that the PLO-the
sole
reeresentative
of the Palestinian people-has
been
invited to participate in the present debate. On behalf
ofbthe Romanian delegation I should like to extend a
cordial and friendly welcome to the delegation of
the PLO and to say that we are pleased to see it

34. The guaranteeing of ..Fhe independence,
sovereignty and territorial ‘integrrty of all the States’ in the
area-is an objective which can be attained by estab5

.

participating
on an .equal footing
Security Council.

in the work of the

understanding
in the Middle East, we do feel that.
greater and more effective use should be made of
the opportunities
and advantages inherent in the good
offices of the Secretary-General.
In our opinion, th.e
Secretary-General+
as representative
of the United
Nations at the Geneva Conference, should report to the
Security Council regularly on progress in the work of
the Conference.

40. However, we must say that we regret the absence
of Israel from this debate in the Security Council.
We believe that to ignore the, Organization
will
serve neither the cause of peace in the Middle East
nor the interests of the 1,sraeli people. We hope that
Israel will reconsider its position on this fundamental
question and will adopt a more realistic attitude.and
make a contribution
to the settlement of the Middle
East problem.
I
1,

47. The responsibilities of the United Nations, and in
particular those of the Security Council, with regard
to peace in the areawill not cease to exist if and when
the parties manage to begin bilateral or multilateral
negotiations.
Until a just and lasting peace is established, the Security Council should concern itself
actively and uninterruptedly’with
the problems of the
Middle East. In that way we will have the proper
organizational framework where ideas may crystallize,
where suitable solutions acceptable to all parties can
be put forward and where we can follow closely and
supervise the entire diplomatic process and attendant
efforts.

41. We believe that the confirmation
of the Pale&i:
nian component as an essential part of the Middle
East conflict represents a fundamental change which
has occurred in the situation in the area, and due
account must be taken of it in any effort to establish
a just and lasting peace. To ignore the interests and
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people would
only serve to perpetuate and aggravate the conflict,
and that would have unpredictable consequences for
peace and security in the area and indeed in the entire
world.

48. Romania considers that the primary objective of
the present debate in the Security Council should be
to explore and use the opportunities which the Security
Council has to intensify efforts to bring about a settlement of the entire problem of the Middle East.

42. The establishment of a lasting peace in the Middle
East is a major objective which can be attained if we
all make a constructive contribution,
if we all promote
and develop the positive trends that have been initiated
so far. It is an objective which can be attained if we
all work towards an over-all settlement of outstanding
problems.

49. As other participants in this debate have stressed,
conditions must be established for settling the problem
of the Palestinian people, a question which is at the
very core of the Middle East conflict. It has become
increasingly clear that any attempt to ignore or underestimate the political dimensions and real proportions
of the Palestinian problem might have grave consequences for peace and security in the area and in the
world. That is why the Security Council needs to take
a stand on the question of the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people and to promote the exercise of those
rights, including the right to establish their own independent State. In that way the Council, on the basis
of earlier resolutions, could offer principles and guidelines to be followed when dealing with all the fundamental aspects of the Middle East conflict.

43. The Romanian delegation is convinced that it is
necessary to act resolutely, using all means to pursue
and speed up the process leading to a political settlement of the problems of the Middle East. That implies
necessarily that the advantages offered by the negotiation method in the search for a viable political solution
must be used to the full, in accordance with the interests
and rights of each and all the peoples in the area.
44; It is only natural that the primary role in the
settlement of the Middle East problems must be played
by the peoples in the area. including’the
Palestinian
people, which are directly concerned in the establishment of peace in that part of the world.

I

45. .We must use all our strength and all means of
international
negotiation.
The
Geneva
Peace
Conference on the Middle East should be used as a
body where farreaching negotiations may take place,
with the participation
of the representative
of the
Palestinian people and representatives
of the other
States concerned. Efforts within the United Nations
should also be intensified and the contribution
of the
Organization
should be increased considerably,
as
should the contribution of the Security Council, so that
it can play its proper role in the settlement of the
conflict.

50. We believe also that the Security Council might
call for a resumption of the Geneva Peace Conference.
The Geneva Peace Conference would. in all probability, represent an important stage in the settlement of
the Middle East conflict if the presence and contribution of. all the parties concerned-including
the
representatives of the Arab Palestinian people-were
ensured and if the implementation
of all relevant United
Nations resolutions’were attended to. Accordingly, we
believe that the Council should also recognize the
right of the PLO to participate in the Geneva Peace
Conference on an equal footing with all the other
parties.

46. While we are very grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for his tireless efforts to restore peace and

5 I. We should like to express the firm belief that the
present situation need not continue and that. the

\

6

.

problems posed by the Middle E&t conflict can be
resolved bi joint ifforts on the part of all States, first
and foremost on. the part of those peoples most
directly concerned. The Romanian delegation believes
that this debate provides a historic opportunity to’
guide efforts aimed at bringing about a political settlement of the Middle East problem, and to take a*step
forward in that direction. For that to happen it is
necessary, of course. that all parties demonstrate a
constructive approach and show realism and a political
will to wdrk towards the objectives of peace and
justice.

among all the States of the region. We simply cannot
afford to allow our peace efforts to fail.
53. Romania is a country located very close to the
area of conflict; and we are determined to make a
contribution,, both in the Security Council and in other
iirteinational forums, to the adoption of decisions
iitied at promot’ing and bringing nearer the establishbent ~of a just atid lasting peace in the Middle East,
ih’&cordance with the interests and aspirations of all
the States and peoples in the area and in conformity
w,ith the imperatives of peace and security.

52. The work of the Council should find concrete
expression in a resolution opening the way to a settlement of the conflict in the Middle East, which should
be brought about as soon, as possible by means of
negotiations so ,as to facilitate the development of
every people in the area and peaceful co-operation

..
‘I

-

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United Nations
world. Consult
COMMENT

UNTTED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente darts les libmiries et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estdn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidotas
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirljase a: Naciones Unidas, Section de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

00300

83-60801-h%+'

1984-2.200
