S/2015/74

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 January 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
I. Introduction and Mission priorities
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), by which the Council decided to establish the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and requested that I report at regular
intervals on the implementation of its mandate. It covers the activities of UNMIK
and developments related thereto, from 16 October 2014 through 15 January 2015.
2.
The priorities of the Mission remain to promote security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and in the region. In furtherance of its goals, UNMIK
continues its constructive engagement with Pristina and Belgr ade, all communities
in Kosovo and regional and international actors. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) continue to perform
their roles within the framework of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) . The
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) continues to be present in Kosovo,
in line with the statement by the President of the Security Council of 26 November
2008 (S/PRST/2008/44) and my report of 24 November 2008 (S/2008/692). The
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes work closely with the Mission.

II. Key political developments
3.
The main political developments in Kosovo during the reporting period were the
achievement of a coalition agreement, the establishment of the Assembly of Kosovo
and the formation of a new Kosovo government, which brought to an end six months
of political stalemate following the parliamentary elections held on 8 Ju ne 2014.
4.
On 19 November, the leaders of the Democratic Party of Kosovo and the
Democratic League of Kosovo, HashimThaçi and Isa Mustafa, held a joint meeting
with President Jahjaga and announced that they had reached an agreement to form a
coalition. On 8 December, the leaders of the two parties signed an agreement which,
inter alia, designated the President of the Democratic League of Kosovo, Isa Mustafa,
as the new Prime Minister, and the President of the Democratic Party of Kosovo,
HashimThaçi, as a Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs as well as
the coalition’s Presidential candidate to succeed President Jahjagain the first semester
of 2016. The agreement also provided that the Deputy President of the Democratic
Party of Kosovo, Kadri Veseli, would be nominated for the position of President of the
15-00928 (E)

020215

*1500928*

S/2015/74

Assembly. On the same day, the constitutive session of the Assembly was reconvened
for the third time since the general elections of 8 June; the members elected Mr. Veseli
as President of the Assembly, with 71 votes in favour, 42 votes against and one
abstention.
5.
On 9 December, the Serbian Civic Initiative signed an agreement with the
Democratic Party of Kosovo and the Democratic League of Kosovo to join the
coalition government. The agreement provides for the Initiative’s representation
through a Deputy Prime Minister and two Ministers, namely, the Minister for
Communities and Returns and the Minister for Local Government Administration. It
refers to the establishment of the association/community of Serb municipalities
within a period of three to five months from the start of government. It also includes
provisions concerning the “special management” of past and future privatizations of
enterprises; the appointment of Kosovo Serbs in the K osovo police and other
institutions; and the need to discuss possible air and rail links between Belgrade and
Pristina as part of the European Union-facilitated dialogue.
6.
On 9 December, the Assembly of Kosovo approved the new coalition
government, which comprises 21 ministers, including 2 women ministers, and
3 deputy prime ministers (one each from the Democratic Party of Kosovo, the
Democratic League of Kosovo and the Serbian Civic Initiative). In addition to the two
ministries headed by Kosovo Serb representatives, the Ministry of Public
Administration is led by a representative from other non-majority communities,
namely, a Kosovo Turk.
7.
On 16 December, the Council of the European Union, in its conclusions on the
Enlargement and Stabilization and Association Process, called upon Kosovo to
adopt all prescribed legal changes arising from the initialling, in July 2014, of a
stabilization and association agreement. In the conclusions, the Council urged
Kosovo to focus in particular on the rule of law, including taking steps to ensure
greater independence of the judiciary and intensifying efforts against organized
crime and corruption. The Council also stressed the importance of the process of
normalization of relations between Pristina and Belgrade and pr iority completion of
the steps necessary for establishing a specialist court in the context of the
investigation by the EULEX Special Investigative Task Force into the war crime
and organized crime allegations contained in the January 2011 report of the Sp ecial
Rapporteur for the Committee on Legal Affairs and Human Rights of the Council of
Europe, Dick Marty.
8.
Also in December, the Assembly of Kosovo adopted the law on the Kosovo
budget for 2015. During the final session on the draft law, Assembly member s
belonging to the Serbian Civic Initiative walked out to protest the failure of the
Committee on Budget and Finance to take into account amendments proposed by
the Initiative during the review process. The 25 per cent increase in civil servant
salaries promised by the outgoing administration during the 2014 parliamentary
election campaign was not reflected in the final budget.
9.
In Belgrade, the Government of Serbia, which had expressed concern at
continued delays in the resumption of a high-level political dialogue in Brussels,
welcomed the establishment of the new Kosovo authorities and affirmed its
readiness to engage at the earliest opportunity. During the reporting period, some
progress was made in the technical-level dialogue, including establishing more
consistent arrangements for the travel of Serbian and Kosovo officials, which came

2/20

15-00928

S/2015/74

into force on 1 December. Further progress in the implementation of the previously
reached agreements on, inter alia, the judiciary, energy, the integrated management
of crossing points and freedom of movement is expected once the fully fledged
political talks resume.
10. Outside the dialogue framework, the Serbian Prime Minister, Aleksandar
Vučić, and the outgoing Prime Minister of Kosovo, Hashim Thaçi, met in New York
on 4 December, on the margins of the Security Council session. The Government of
Serbia also hosted two regional meetings of a European Union-Western Balkans
ministerial forum in which Kosovo officials participated.
11. On 10 December, the Constitutional Court of Serbia declined, by a majority
vote, a request by the Democratic Party of Serbia to review the constitutionality of the
First Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations of 19 April
2013, arguing that the agreement is a political, not a legal, document.
12. On 14 January, Prime Minister Vučić visited Kosovo on the occasion of the
Orthodox New Year. Addressing the public in the Shtërpcë/Štrpce municipality, one
of three municipalities he visited, Vučić stated that the Government of Serbia would
maintain its support for the Serb community in Kosovo and underlined the
importance of Serbs remaining in Kosovo and sustaining their homes and
livelihoods. Among others things, he stated “We want to live well with our Albanian
neighbours and together we have to seek a better life and a better common future as
we will be living in the same space even 100 years from now... we have to build
peace.”
13. At the same time, Belgrade continued to express concern about the announced
intention of the Kosovo authorities to transform the Kosovo Security Force into the
“Armed Forces of Kosovo”. Belgrade officials asserted that that would violate the
1999 Kumanovo Military Technical Agreement and Security Council resolution
1244 (1999). A draft law on the Kosovo Armed Forces, submitted to the Kosovo
Assembly in 2014, is yet to be considered by the Assembly. In the meantime, KFOR
has indicated that that it will continue its engagement with the Kosovo Security
Force within its existing mandate, namely, to conduct crisis response oper ations in
Kosovo and abroad, include civil protection operations within Kosovo and assist the
civil authorities in responding to natural disasters and other emergencies.
14. On 13 January, the Kosovo Assembly Committee on Internal Affairs approved,
during its first reading, the draft law on the prohibition of joining armed conflicts
outside State territory. The adoption of the draft law was treated as a priority and
follows several high-profile police operations recently carried out against the
organized recruitment of persons to fight in the conflicts in the Syrian Arab
Republic and Iraq.

III. Northern Kosovo
15. In northern Kosovo, main developments centred around the finalization of the
2015 municipal budget proposals. Extensive talks were held amon g all interested
actors to find suitable compromises on the inclusion of salaries for health and
education personnel and on the overall budgetary allocations. On 30 October, as
requested by central authorities in Pristina, the municipal assemblies adopted
reduced budgets, leaving aside health and education sector salaries. The

15-00928

3/20

S/2015/74

Government of Serbia included financing for the four northern Kosovo
municipalities in the 2015 budget for its Office for Kosovo and Metohija. While full
agreement on the issue of funding public services in the Serb-majority
municipalities may have to await the outcomes of the high-level Belgrade-Pristina
talks in Brussels, the employees in the local public health and education sectors
have been expressing concern about their uncertain future.
16. In North Mitrovica, the moratorium on construction activities in the ethnically
mixed neighbourhood of Kroii Vitakut/Brdjani, agreed on 2 July 2014, was
breached on several occasions. On 20 October and 22 December, work resumed at a
Kosovo Albanian’s house, but was halted following an intervention by the Mitrovica
North Administrative Office authorities. The construction of two apartment
buildings funded by the Belgrade-sponsored Interim Municipal Council resumed in
the same area on 22 October.
17. On 19 November, with the alleged aim of implementing agreements reached in
the European Union-facilitated dialogue, the Zubin Potok Municipal Assembly
adopted a decision to establish a power distribution company for northern Kosovo.
The decision was subsequently annulled by the Kosovo Ministry of Local
Government Administration.
18. On 8 December, the Mayor of Zubin Potok, who is the subject of an ongoing
EULEX investigation, returned to Kosovo and appeared before international
prosecutors. He was ordered to be placed under house arrest for 30 days, a measure he
successfully appealed on 23 December. Another suspect, the former Mayor of Zubin
Potok, also appeared before EULEX prosecutors in North Mitrovica Basic Court on
1 December and was released pending a future trial. On 11 November, a EULEX
international judge confirmed the indictment against a Kosovo Serb political party
leader, Oliver Ivanović, and four other Kosovo Serbs from the north accused of
serious crimes alleged to have been committed in 1999 and 2000. The main trial
commenced on 18 December. Mr. Ivanović has been in detention on remand since
28 January 2014; the detention was subsequently extended until 26 February 2015.
19. UNMIK continued its active facilitation role between communitie s and
officials in northern Kosovo, as well as with international organizations and Kosovo
authorities. It focused in particular on efforts aimed at preventing and reducing
tensions and promoting cooperation among local authorities, in particular in North
and South Mitrovica.

IV. Security
20. The overall security situation in Kosovo remained stable during the reporting
period, although some increase in the number of incidents in the ethnically mixed
areas was observed. A number of peaceful demonstratio ns were held in various parts
of Kosovo, mainly to protest against the prevailing social and economic conditions.
On 4 December, a protest by the War Veterans Association in Pristina to demand a
special quota for the admission of children of veterans to th e University of Pristina
turned violent and led to confrontations between demonstrators and the Kosovo
police.
21. In addition, there appears to be a significant increase in the number of
irregular migrants from Kosovo to Western European countries. This trend has been

4/20

15-00928

S/2015/74

reported across Kosovo and has affected, in particular, the Kosovo Roma, Ashkali
and Egyptian communities. According to data collected by OSCE, by the end of
November 2014, approximately 2,000 people from those communities had left
Kosovo, ostensibly owing to poor economic and living conditions and limited
access to employment and social services. The Ministry of Internal Affairs has
launched a campaign to raise the awareness of communities on the potential
consequences of illegally crossing into the European Union. In addition, the Kosovo
police has stepped up efforts targeting individuals involved in the smuggling of
migrants.
22. In December, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) completed
the implementation of the seven-year Kosovo Small Arms Control Initiative. The
initiative assisted Kosovo institutions in countering uncontrolled possession and
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. In addition to the development of the
legislative framework for weapons regulation and co ntrol, over 1,500 firearms were
removed from circulation in 2014. The proliferation of small arms nevertheless
remains a concern in Kosovo.
23. On 25 December, a Serbian national was arrested in Pristina with some 12 kg
of explosive materials in his vehicle. The UNMIK police facilitated an exchange of
information between the local investigative authorities and their counterparts in a
number of European countries and the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL).
24. Some increase in the number of potentially ethnically motivated incidents was
also observed. In November, eight Kosovo Serb-owned houses in Lëvoshë/Levoša
village, Pejë/Peć municipality, were burglarized while residents were away
observing an Orthodox festival. On 6 January, a bus with Serb internally displaced
persons on their way to celebrate Orthodox Christmas at the Church of the Holy
Virgin in Gjakova/Đakovica town was hit by a stone. Several arrests were made in
relation to the incident.
25. The number of incidents affecting religious sites in Kosovo has also slightly
increased, compared with the previous period. Out of 20 recorded incidents,
15 involved Christian Orthodox sites, four involved Islamic sites and one involved a
Dervish site.

V. Rule of law
26. UNMIK continued to monitor the situation and exercise some responsibilities
with respect to the rule of law. It maintained technical cooperation with respective
authorities in Kosovo and Belgrade and facilitated requests for mutual legal assistance
from non-recognizing countries. UNMIK continued to provide document-certification
services, both to Kosovo residents and at the request of non-recognizing States,
primarily for the certification of civil documents. A total of 665 such documents were
processed during the reporting period.
27. UNMIK also facilitated communications between the Kosovo authorities and
INTERPOL and its member States. During the reporting period, it received
33 requests for international wanted notices and issued 9 INTERPOL red notices.
UNMIK facilitated the participation of the General Director of the Kosovo police in
the eighty-third session of the INTERPOL General Assembly, in November.

15-00928

5/20

S/2015/74

28. Publicized allegations of corruption in respect of a few former and present
staff members of EULEX were responded to swiftly by the new Head of Mission of
EULEX, who affirmed that the body investigates any allegations seriously and on
their merits. An independent expert was also appointed by the High Representative
of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, who visited Kosovo
from 10 to 14 December as part of his inquiries.
29. The responsible authorities in Belgrade and Pristina continued to pursue new
sources of information and conduct investigations with respect to 1,655 remaining
missing persons from the period from 1998 to 2000. On 18 November, during the
38th meeting of the Working Group on Missing Persons, held in Belgrade,
representatives of the Belgrade-based Association of Families of Kidnapped and
Missing Persons in Kosovo and Metohija and the Pristina-based Coordinating
Council of the Associations of Missing Persons and Families in Kosovo appealed
for increased engagement and support from the authorities in Pristina and Belgrade
on the matter. The families also appealed to the European U nion to place the issue
of missing persons on the agenda of the European Union-facilitated dialogue in
Brussels.
30. From 9 to 10 December, the Serbian authorities and EULEX carried out an
assessment of an alleged gravesite in the Petrovo Selo-Kladovo municipality
(Bor District in central Serbia). Representatives of the families of missing persons
from Belgrade and Pristina, the Kosovo Department of Forensic Medicine and the
International Commission on Missing Persons were also present.
31. On 3 November, the Kosovo Constitutional Court rejected a request submitted
by the Ombudsperson for a constitutional review of the President ’s decree on the
continuation of the mandates of the three international judges of the Constitutional
Court. In its decision, the Court concluded that the mandate of international judges
derives from an “international agreement” between Kosovo and the European Union
ratified by the Assembly of Kosovo.

VI. Returns and communities
32. According to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNCHR), as at the end of 2014, there was a total of 17,113 internally
displaced persons in Kosovo. The number included 9,286 Kosovo Serbs, 7,084
Kosovo Albanians, 710 Kosovo Roma, Ashkali and Egyptians and 33 from other
communities. The number of voluntary returns continued to show a declining trend.
UNHCR registered 149 individual voluntary minority returnees to Kosovo in
October, November and December 2014, namely, 76 Kosovo Serbs, 63 Kosovo
Roma, Kosovo Ashkali and Kosovo Egyptians, 5 Kosovo Gorani and 5 Kosovo
Albanians.
33. Overall in 2014, there were 631 voluntary returns from parts of Serbia,
Montenegro and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. In October, the
International Organization for Migration (IOM) completed the European Unionsupported Return and Reintegration, Phase III project, with a total of 210 houses
constructed for returnees. IOM has been retained as the implementing agency for
phase IV of the project, which is expected to complete about 250 houses fo r
displaced families and provide them with comprehensive return assistance.

6/20

15-00928

S/2015/74

34. A progress report issued by OSCE in December highlighted the challenges
faced by Kosovo’s institutions in facilitating voluntary returns. In the report, it was
noted that positive steps had been taken to protect and promote the rights of
minority communities, which represent most of the displaced persons and returnees,
but that the legislative framework, such as the Law on the Protection of the Rights
of Communities, was still insufficient in addressing the needs of displaced persons
and returnees. It was noted in particular that delays in the resolution of property
claims and lack of effective enforcement of court decisions were among the key
obstacles to returns.
35. The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) has conducted and issued the
results of its first multiple indicator cluster survey in Kosovo. The conduct of the
survey should permit the inclusion of Kosovo within an internationally comparable
assessment and enable evidence-based policymaking and monitoring of the situation
of women and children in Kosovo. The World Health Organization (WHO) hosted a
high-level environmental health mission to Kosovo, with site visits to Mitrovica,
Obiliq/Obilić and Pristina. The mission presented preliminary findings on social
inequalities in environmental health, which complemented the community
vulnerability assessment conducted by the United Nations Kosovo Team in 2013.
36. UNMIK continued to monitor issues affecting minority communities through
field visits and engagement with local stakeholders. On 6 November, my Deputy
Special Representative held an introductory meeting with the Mayor of the
Gjakovë/Đakovica municipality. They discussed, among other issues, the demolition
of five local Kosovo Serb-owned houses. On the occasion of All Souls’ Day,
1 November, the municipal authorities also facilitated the visit of Kosovo Serb
internally displaced persons from the area to the municipality.
37. On 12 November, 32 students from the Lidhja e Prizrenit primary school and
the Vëllezërit Frashëri high school in the Deçan/Dečani municipality visited the
Visoki Dečani Monastery as part of an OSCE project to increase awareness among
young people of the importance of preserving cultural heritage. On 18 November,
the Mayor of Rahovec/Orahovac municipality visited, for the first time since his
election in November 2013, the Sveti Vrać Monastery in Zoqishtë/Zočište village
and discussed ways to improve relations between the monastery and the local
community and property-related issues.

VII. Cultural and religious heritage
38. Cooperation among representatives of the Serbian Orthodo x Church and those
of other religious communities, as well as central and local authorities, continued
during the reporting period. In particular, the municipality of Gjakovë/Đakovica
initiated work to upgrade the water drainage system at the Serbian Ortho dox Church
of the Holy Virgin. The Abbot of Visoki Dečani Monastery, the Mayor of
Deçan/Dečani and the Commander of KFOR also inaugurated an upgraded road,
which will facilitate easier access to the monastery’s main water source.
39. The Implementation and Monitoring Council, which includes the Kosovo
authorities, representatives of the Serbian Orthodox Church and other
denominations, as well as the European Union and OSCE, convened one meeting
during the reporting period. Discussions focused mainly on inst itutional responses
to several hate graffiti incidents at the Visoki Dečani Monastery. At the request of

15-00928

7/20

S/2015/74

the municipality, KFOR engineers demolished an illegal structure in the special
protective zone near the Visoki Dečani Monastery in late October. Howev er, on
17 December, a new illegal construction was observed in the special protective zone
around the monastery, at the previously established illegal fish farm. On 6 January,
President Jahjaga and Prime Minister Mustafa visited the monastery to participat e in
the Orthodox Christmas celebrations.
40. On its part, UNMIK has donated some equipment to the Council on the
Cultural Heritage of the Historic Centre of Prizren, which continues to suffer from a
lack of resources. In violation of the law and applicabl e administrative instructions
in force since 2013, the establishment of the Council for the Protection of the
Village of Hoçë e Madhe/Velika Hoča continued to be delayed. On 12 January, an
ad hoc commission established by the Rahovec/Orahovac Municipal Ass embly
reviewed the applications for membership in the Council. A total of six applications,
four from Kosovo Serbs and two from Kosovo Albanians, were submitted to the
Hoçë e Madhe/Velika Hoča village presidency for final selection. The village
presidency is to select two Kosovo Serbs, while the Serbian Orthodox Church is to
nominate its representative by 20 January, which would complete the establishment
of the Council prior to the next session of the Rahovec/Orahovac Municipal
Assembly in late January.

VIII. Human rights
41. In November, UNMIK, supported by the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and the United Nations
Development Coordinator in Kosovo, organized “Open Day on Women, Peace and
Security in Kosovo”, marking the occasion of International Day for the Elimination
of Violence Against Women. Progress was acknowledged in several areas, including
the adoption of the Kosovo action plan for the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), which includes a commitment by the Kosovo authorities to
provide 51 per cent of the budget allocated to the implementation of the plan.
During the event, the government’s formal recognition, in March 2014, of survivors
of sexual violence during the Kosovo conflict as a separate category in the relevant
Kosovo legislation was highlighted. At the same time, full implementation of the
legal framework continues to be hindered by a range of institutional factors,
including inefficient coordination, overlapping mandates, insufficient financial
allocations and limited accountability measures. The findings and recommendations
from the Open Day will form part of the global study on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).
42. Under the UN-Women/UNDP/European Union joint project on women and
peace and security, in support of the implementation of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000), UN-Women has been assisting the Agency for Gender Equality in
conducting research on the participation of women in local and central institutions and
political parties. The research is part of the preparation of the first monitoring report
on the implementation of the action plan for the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). On behalf of the Security and Gender Group, UN-Women
implemented the 16 Days of Activism against Gender Violence between 25 November
and 10 December.

8/20

15-00928

S/2015/74

43. The first phase of the Common Voice Forum initiative was completed during
the reporting period. The Forum is a multi-ethnic initiative that brings together
representatives of all of Kosovo’s communities for the advancement of inter-ethnic
dialogue, conflict prevention and civic awareness. The initiative was launched in
April 2014 with the funding support of the Secretariat a nd UNDP Kosovo and
UNMIK support on the ground. The Office of the United Nations Development
Coordinator has prepared a proposal for a second year of funding support for
consideration by the Secretariat (Department of Political Affairs selection
committee).
44. On 26 November, the third monitoring cycle in respect of the implementation
of the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities in Kosovo
concluded with the adoption of a resolution of the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe. In November 2014, the Office of Good Governance in the Office
of the Prime Minister established an ad hoc ministerial technical working group to
coordinate the implementation of the recommendations pursuant to the resolution.

IX. Observations
45. I welcome the constitution of the Kosovo Assembly and the formation of the
new government in Pristina. The elections in 2014 marked a political milestone and
the diversity reflected in the composition of the government is a testament to the
progress achieved and should give new impetus to the efforts to build a multi -ethnic
and democratic Kosovo. I wish to commend President Atifete Jahjaga for her
steadfast role in facilitating this outcome through intense and continued engagement
with leaders of Kosovo political parties.
46. With key institutions in place, the Kosovo authorities should now move
forward in addressing the many challenges still facing Kosovo. One important step
would be for the government and the Assembly to move swiftly on the adoption of
the legislation concerning the establishment of the specialist court to try cases
arising from the findings of the European Union Special Investigative Task Force,
as agreed between Kosovo and the European Union. I urge Kosovo ’s political
leaders to redouble their efforts in strengthening a broad public understanding and
consensus around this issue, given its importance to Kosovo ’s future. Sustained
efforts should also continue in respect of the rule of law and in promoting genuine
long-term reconciliation among Kosovo’s communities.
47. Just as importantly, I look forward to early, full and earnest engagement by
Belgrade and Pristina in the European Union-facilitated dialogue at the leadership
level. This will be crucial in sustaining the engagement at the technical level and in
moving forward on the implementation of the outstanding provisions of the 19 April
2013 agreement. The core issue in this respect remains the establishment, in
accordance with the agreement, of the association/community of Serb
municipalities. It is important that the momentum achieved through strong
leadership from both Belgrade and Pristina during the past two years be encouraged
so as to further constructive and results-focused engagement during the next phases
of the dialogue.
48. The reports of population outflow from Kosovo during recent months are a
cause for concern. In that context, I welcome the efforts of the Kosovo authorities to
address the issue of migration. I am also encouraged by the stated commitment of

15-00928

9/20

S/2015/74

the new Kosovo government to improve social and economic opportunities for all in
Kosovo.
49. I welcome the swift steps taken by the European Union to address corruption
allegations within EULEX. It is important that these allegations not be used to
undermine the important role that EULEX still plays in Kosovo and that all parties
continue to fully cooperate with that body. In addition, close coordination and
cooperation among all international actors should be strengthened to ensure
stability, improved confidence among communities and maximum progress in the
Belgrade-Pristina dialogue and the implementation of related agreements.
50. I wish to thank my Special Representative, Farid Zarif, for his skilful
leadership of the Mission, and all UNMIK staff for their dedicat ed service. I also
thank our long-standing international partners, including KFOR, EULEX, OSCE,
the European Union and members of the United Nations family, for their important
contributions and close cooperation with UNMIK.

10/20

15-00928

S/2015/74

Annex I
Report of the European Union High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to the Secretary-General
on the activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo covering the period from 16 October 2014 to
15 January 2015
1.

Summary
The European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continued to
undertake monitoring, mentoring and advising activities and to implement its
executive functions in line with its mandate regarding the rule of law. Verdicts were
pronounced in a number of cases involving the Mission’s judges and prosecutors,
including in the “Passport case”, in which eight defendants received heavy prison
sentences. In terms of monitoring, mentoring and advising activities, the Mission
continued to advise Kosovo authorities on irregular migration. In addition, it
continued to monitor the selection procedure for the Chief State Prosecutor and the
recruitment process of the Director General of the Kosovo Correctional Service. The
Mission also consistently recalled the need to rapidly address the lack of quorum in
the Kosovo Judicial Council.
In northern Kosovo, the surrender of two wanted Kosovo Serbs helped to ease
tensions and sent a positive message in terms of rule of law in the region.
Lastly, EULEX continued to facilitate the implementation of dialogue
agreements. Particular emphasis was placed on the process of registering and
issuing licences to companies intending to import controlled goods through the
northern crossing points and the continuing implementation of the agreemen t on the
integrated management of crossing points.

2.

EULEX activities, October 2014 to January 2015

2.1

Executive
War crimes
On 6 November, a panel of one local and two EULEX judges at Pristina Basic
Court acquitted three Kosovo Serb defendants of all charges listed in the indictment
relating to events in April 1999 in the municipality of Novo Brdo/Novobërdë. The
case was prosecuted by a local prosecutor in the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office.
On 19 December, a EULEX judge released six of the defendants in the
“Drenica case” on bail. In opting for less restrictive measures, the Court considered
that the defendants had already been in detention on remand for over 18 months.
The Court also noted that the vast majority of the evidence supporting the
prosecution’s case had already been presented in the main trial. The decision was
upheld by the Court of Appeals.

15-00928

11/20

S/2015/74

Main developments in organized crime and corruption
On 18 December, a panel of one local and two EULEX judges at Pristina Basic
Court found eight defendants guilty in the “Passport case” and handed down prison
sentences ranging from 1 to 12 years. The case relates to the theft of around
€1,400,000 in the context of a public supply contract for biometric passports at the
Kosovo Ministry of Internal Affairs. The case was prosecuted by a EULEX
prosecutor.
Other serious crime cases
On 30 October, a panel of one local and two EULEX judges at Pristina Basic
Court started the trial in the “Millionaire case” against two defendants charged with
trading in influence for having allegedly accepted a bribe in order to exert influence
over officials of the Privatization Agency of Kosovo in a tender process in 2009.
The case was investigated by the Kosovo police and led by a EULEX prosecutor
from the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office.
On 31 October, a panel of one local and two EULEX judges at Pristina Basic
Court started the trial against a defendant charged with having ordered the murder,
in 2007, of Kosovo police officer Triumf Riza and with the illegal possession of a
large amount of weapons. The case was investigated by the Kosovo police, with
EULEX assistance on telephone forensics, and led by a EULEX prosecutor from the
Kosovo Special Prosecution Office.
On 7 November, a EULEX judge at Mitrovica Basic Court held an initial
indictment hearing against eight Kosovo Serbs indicted for, inter alia, endangering
United Nations and associated personnel and attacking official persons performing
their duties. The incidents took place in Zubin Potok on 30 May 2012 and 3 April
2012 when a EULEX convoy was stopped at a roadblock and not allowed to pass.
On 10 November, a panel of three EULEX judges at Mitrovica Basic Court
convicted and sentenced a defendant to 11 years’ imprisonment for a murder that
took place in Mitrovica South in January 2013. The case was prosecuted by a
EULEX prosecutor from the Mitrovica Basic Prosecution Office.
On 19 November, a panel of one local and two EULEX judges at Pristina Basic
Court started the trial against five defendants suspected of stealing around $1,000,000
worth of luxury items from a jewellery shop in Manama on 10 September 2013. The
case is being prosecuted by a EULEX prosecutor from the Kosovo Special
Prosecution Office.
On 21 November, a EULEX prosecutor from the Kosovo Special Prosecution
Office filed an indictment against a former member of the Kosovo Liberation Army
for Presheva, Medvegja and Bujanov suspected of having shot at and seriously
injured several police officers in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia during
two attacks in 2004 and of possessing a large quantity of weaponry. On 3 December,
a EULEX judge at Gjilan/Gnjilane Basic Court held an initial hearing during which
the defendant pleaded not guilty on all counts.
On 8 December, a panel of three EULEX judges in Mitrovica Basic Court
sentenced a Kosovo Serb to 10 years’ imprisonment for attempted aggravated
robbery and unauthorized ownership, control, possession or use of weapons. The
crime took place in the municipality of Zvečan/Zveçan in October 2011. Another

12/20

15-00928

S/2015/74

person was sentenced to three and a half years’ imprisonment for robbery, while a
third defendant was acquitted. The case was led by a local prosecutor from the
Mitrovica Basic Prosecution Office.
Also on 8 December, a panel of one local and two EULEX judges at Pristina
Basic Court found two persons guilty of attempted blackmail and sentenced the first
one to a suspended prison sentence of one year and six months and the second one
to a suspended prison sentence of six months. The defendants had attempted to
blackmail the injured party by threatening to publish a video containing private
moments of him and one of the defendants if he did not give them two hectares of
land in Pejë/Peć. A third person was acquitted. The case was led by a local
prosecutor from the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office.
On 10 December, EULEX supported a Kosovo-wide anti-smuggling operation
led by the Kosovo police during which a large number of Kosovo police officers
searched 38 locations (3 in the north and 35 in the south) and arrested 17 persons.
The Kosovo Border Police and Kosovo Customs also took part in the operation. The
preparation of the operation included a financial investigation, which allowed for
the confiscation of assets linked to criminal activities.
On 23 December, an initial indictment hearing was held in Mitrovica Basic
Court against two Kosovo Serb defendants in the case relating to the murder of
Kosovo police officer Enver Zymberi. The case is being led by a EULEX
prosecutor.
Allegations found in the report by the Special Rapporteur for the Committee on
Legal Affairs and Human Rights of the Council of Europe
In 2011, the Special Investigative Task Force was set up to examine the
allegations found in the January 2011 report by the Special Rapporteur for the
Committee on Legal Affairs and Human Rights of the Council of Europe, Dick
Marty, entitled “Inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking in human organs
in Kosovo”.
In a statement delivered on 29 July 2014, the Lead Pro secutor of the Special
Investigative Task Force, Clint Williamson, explained that the Task Force had found
compelling evidence to file an indictment against certain former senior officials of
the Kosovo Liberation Army responsible for an organized persecut ion campaign
against minorities, including abductions, illegal detentions, enforced
disappearances, unlawful killings, sexual violence, forced displacements and the
desecration and destruction of churches and other religious sites. In addition, Lead
Prosecutor Williamson stated that compelling evidence that these individuals were
also responsible for the killing of fellow Kosovo Albanians labelled either as
collaborators with the Serbs or as political opponents of the Kosovo Liberation
Army has been uncovered.
Work on the investigative findings of the Special Investigative Task Force
continued during the reporting period.
The Special Investigative Task Force continues to work with victim advocacy
groups, injured parties and individuals in order to gather information and evidence
for the case. Cooperation with judicial and law enforcement authorities in the region
and elsewhere continues to be productive, and investigative and operational
activities are moving forward. On 11 December, the European Union ann ounced

15-00928

13/20

S/2015/74

that David Schwendiman of the United States of America had been nominated as the
new Lead Prosecutor of the Task Force.
In parallel, the planning for the establishment of the Specialist Chambers that
will deal with the allegations arising from the investigations of the Task Force
progressed. A planning team was set up and is taking the preparatory work forward.
Department of Forensic Medicine
Starting in November, families of missing persons found in Raška, Serbia have
been visiting the Kosovo Department of Forensic Medicine to view the clothing and
artefacts of their relatives.
On 29 October, EULEX forensic experts at the Department of Forensic
Medicine executed a court order at Cabrat cemetery in Gjakova/Đakovica and
conducted an exhumation of 14 graves in order to correct wrongly associated
remains that had been found in Serbia in 2001. The exhumation was preceded by
several meetings with the Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning and with
municipal officials, including the Mayor of Gjakova/Đakovica, who gave her
support to the exhumation. The remains were taken to the Department of Forensic
Medicine for further identification and DNA analysis.
In November, EULEX forensic experts at the Department of Forensic Medicine
conducted site assessments in the areas of Mitrovica South, Vushtrri/Vučitrn and
Gjilan/Gnjilane. No remains were found at the sites. In December, they conducted a
site assessment, under the authority of the Serbian War Crimes Prosecutor, in Petrovo
Selo, Serbia. However, no remains were found at that site either.
Property rights
The final session of the Kosovo Property Claims Commission was held on
15 and 16 December, marking the successful completion of the Commission ’s
mandate. During that session, the last remaining 193 cases were adjudicated. In
total, the Commission has decided on over 43,000 claims resulting from the Kosovo
conflict in respect of private immovable property. Around 22 claims are still to be
reprocessed owing to certain processing errors identified in the course of the
implementation of decisions, but they will ultimately be included in the
Commission’s decisions from the December session and will not require a further
session. It is estimated that all cases in the courts of first instance will be c losed by
the end of March. From 16 October 2014 to 15 January 2015, the Appeals Panel of
the Kosovo Property Agency received 28 new appeals and adjudicated 30 appeals,
leaving at the time of reporting a total of 320 cases that are still to be decided.
During the reporting period, the Special Chamber of the Supreme Court for
matters relating to the Privatization Agency of Kosovo closed 414 cases in trial
panels and finalized 55 cases at the Appellate Panel level.
2.2

Strengthening
The Mission provided advice to the Kosovo Border Police in dealing with
irregular immigration. There has been a steady increase in the already high number
of young persons, but also in the number of families, who try to irregularly migrate
to Western Europe. In accordance with the freedom of movement agreement
between Belgrade and Pristina, they can legally cross into Serbia with the sole use

14/20

15-00928

S/2015/74

of their Kosovo identity cards. Authorities are aware that the majority of such
persons intend to use Serbia as a transit point in order to irregularly migrate to
Western Europe but are limited in the actions they can take in order to prevent them
from doing so. EULEX supported the Kosovo Border Police in intensifying efforts
by screening and profiling travellers, conducting interviews to de termine travel
plans and, ultimately, by encouraging them not to travel to Western Europe by
irregular means. To achieve this, the Kosovo Border Police informs travellers of the
risks and implications of irregular migration to European Union countries. The
Mission also advised the Kosovo Border Police on the strategic use of the media to
help to curb irregular migration.
The Mission intensified advice to the Ministry of Internal Affairs with regard
to asylum seekers. The majority of these persons continue to leave the reception
centre for asylum seekers after a short while, often during the interviewing phase,
and continue on their way to Western Europe.
In October, EULEX advised the Kosovo police on crowd control operations
that took place in Pristina and in Mitrovica in response to events relating to the
abandoned Serbia-Albania football game. The Mission also provided advice to the
Kosovo police during the planning phase of an operational plan for the Albania Flag
Day celebrations that took place on 28 November. According to the Mission’s
assessment, Kosovo police command and operations were conducted in a
proportionate and professional manner.
EULEX facilitated the delivery of training to Kosovo Customs, the Kosovo
Border Police and the Kosovo Police Narcotics Directorate in the field of risk
profiling of air passengers. The training focused on identifying narcotics, prohibited
goods and individuals connected to religious or political extremism. This is
particularly relevant with regard to Kosovo youths joining extremist groups in the
Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq.
The ongoing lack of quorum in the Kosovo Judicial Council, a by-product of
the six-month-long political stalemate, remains a matter of serious concern. EULEX
continues to encourage the recently formed government to address this as a matter
of urgency.
The Kosovo Prosecutorial Council, with a considerable delay of four months,
finalized the amendments in regulations pertaining to the selection procedure for the
Chief State Prosecutor, following the July decision of the Constitutional Court to
suspend the selection process. The vacancy notice was re-published in early
December. EULEX will continue to closely monitor the selection process.
On 10 November, the new Director General of the Kosovo Correctional
Service assumed his duties. During the recruitment process, EULEX had provided
advice about the procedure. The abuse of daily medical treatments in Pristina by
high-profile prisoners, which requires considerable Kosovo Correctional Service
staff resources, has continued to be of concern.
Following an official complaint from the Kosovo police about the performance
of the Prisoner Escort Unit of the Kosovo Correctional Service, EULEX monitored
several prisoner escorts to Mitrovica Basic Court, including some of the high-profile
“Drenica Group” prisoners. While the overall quality of the work of the Prisoner
Escort Unit was assessed as positive by the Mission, there was significant concern

15-00928

15/20

S/2015/74

over the preferential treatment extended to members of the “Drenica Group”. EULEX
gave extensive advice to the Kosovo Correctional Service to remedy that issue.
EULEX supported the Anti-Corruption Agency in launching the anti-corruption
pledge card campaign on International Anti-Corruption Day on 9 December. In
particular, the Mission assisted with designing and printing the pledge card and with
recording television spots on high public officials in Kosovo.
On 14 January, a Serbian delegation headed by Prime Minister Vučić visited
Kosovo. EULEX assisted and advised the Kosovo police in view of and during the
high-level visit. Numerous Kosovo police units and departments were engaged in
the operation along with the Serbian authorities, who carried out security functions.
The performance of the Kosovo police was assessed as excellent; all units displayed
a high level of professionalism and worked in partnership to provide a safe and
secure environment for both officials and the public. The Kosovo police also
maintained a high degree of flexibility at both the command and operational levels.
No significant incidents were reported.
2.3

The north
In northern Kosovo, the Mission continued its efforts to reach out to local
actors and to communicate its rule of law mandate in that region. On 15 December,
the Head of Mission and Deputy Head of Mission visited Mitrovica North, where
they met with mayors, the Kosovo police regional command north, the Director of
the Mitrovica Detention Centre and civil society representatives.
Overall, the situation remained calm but fragile, with few incidents in the
reporting period. The main disruptions were gatherings on both sides of the main
bridge in Mitrovica after a Serbia-Albania football game in Belgrade, which was
followed by other skirmishes in the northern part of the city.
Tensions also remained in ethnically mixed residential areas in Mitrovica
North. As second responder, EULEX monitored tensions relating to illegal housing
construction in Brdjani/Kroi i Vitakut, a known hotspot for ethnic tensions since
2009. The verbal moratorium of June 2014 on construction activities in that area has
been breached several times. An assessment shared by all relevant actors is that
there is no immediate threat of escalation of conflict, but the issue remains a matter
of concern for stability and might spark tensions.
EULEX continued to exercise its executive functions in a number of judicial
cases that are also attracting wide attention. On 1 December, a former elected
official in northern Kosovo was arrested after having appeared voluntarily for an
interview with a EULEX prosecutor. A EULEX judge at Mitrovica Basic Cou rt
ordered the defendant to report once a week to police stations in Mitrovica North
and Zubin Potok.
Another Kosovo Serb, an elected official in northern Kosovo, was arrested and
put under house detention by order of a EULEX judge after having appeared
voluntarily for an interview with a EULEX prosecutor on 8 December. On
19 December, the Court of Appeals terminated his house detention. The case relates to
his suspected role in facilitating the escape of a Kosovo Serb from the Zubin Potok
police station on 12 March 2014.

16/20

15-00928

S/2015/74

On 18 December, the first hearing in the case relating to a Kosovo Serb
politician accused of war crimes was held. Members of Oliver Ivanović ’s Civic
Initiative “Serbia, Democracy, Justice” and civil society have continued to show
discontent with the fact that he remains in detention on remand.
The Mission maintained its monitoring, mentoring and advising efforts by
providing advice to the Kosovo police. Particular focus was placed on principles of
intelligence-led policing and community policing and their implementation in
respect of countering human trafficking in the north. EULEX is advising the Kosovo
Police Inspectorate on its plans to extend services to a wider audience by
establishing an office in Mitrovica North.
2.4

Dialogue implementation
With regard to the implementation of the agreement on the integrated
management of crossing points, reached in the European Union -facilitated dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, since 15 October, there has been no permanent
EULEX presence at the four southern crossing points. The Mission is present at the
crossing points during the day on a daily basis or several times a week, depending
on the size of the crossing point. Counterparts were given the contact details in case
of urgent matters during the absence of EULEX.
Over recent months, EULEX supported efforts by the dialogue team regarding
the registering and issuing of licences to companies intending to import controlled
goods through the crossing points Rudnica/Jarinjë and Bërnjak/Tabalije, for which
the deadline was 31 December 2014. An agreement was reached between Belgrade
and Pristina to resolve the various issues.
In December 2014, the collection of customs revenues at the two northern
crossing points, which had started 12 months earlier, in December 2013, amounted
to €4.472.621; the aforementioned sum has been transferred to the Development
Fund.
During November and December, EULEX conducted an inspection of the
Kosovo police unit responsible for the protection of religious and cultural heritage
sites, as well as an inspection of the state of the respective sites. The assessment
also included meetings with religious representatives, wherever possible. The
overall assessment is that the performance of the unit is satisfactory and
professional. The above notwithstanding, the security infrastructure at some of the
sites could be improved (for instance, with better lighting or closed -circuit
television). The Mission will follow up on the issue with the Kosovo police.
With a view to establishing a reliable civil status system, EULEX continued
monitoring the use of the certified copies of the civil registry books through field
visits to the regions. Overall, 84 out of 136 civil status main and satellite offices
were visited in 2014. The assessment visits will continue in 2015.

3.

Other key issues
At the end of October 2014, local and international media reported on
allegations of corruption against former and current EULEX staff members. These
allegations have been investigated for months; the investigation will continue until
the facts are established. In the context of the ongoing joint EULEX -Kosovo

15-00928

17/20

S/2015/74

judicial investigation, the European Union had already agreed to partially lift the
immunity of one former staff member before the publication of the allegations.
EULEX is also fully cooperating with the independent and experienced legal
personality Jean-Paul Jacqué, who was appointed by the High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to review the implementation of the Mission’s
mandate, with a focus on the handling of the corruption allegations.
All the above notwithstanding, the allegations will not distract the Mission
from carrying out its core responsibilities and common efforts with local institutions
in building the rule of law in Kosovo.

18/20

15-00928

S/2015/74

Annex II
Composition and strength of the police component of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 January 2015)
Country

Number

Austria

1

Germany

1

Hungary

1

Italy

1

Pakistan

1

Russian Federation

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

1

Total

8

Composition and strength of the military liaison component
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo
(as at 15 January 2015)
Country

15-00928

Number

Czech Republic

2

Republic of Moldova

1

Poland

1

Romania

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

2

Total

8

19/20

S/2015/74

20/20

15-00928
