S/PV.7445

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7445th meeting

Tuesday, 19 May 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Murmokaitė . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lithuania)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Kawar
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Laro
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2015/331)

15-14506 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1514506*

S/PV.7445

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2015/331)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Somalia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, Prime Minister
of the Federal Republic of Somalia, who is joining
today’s meeting via videoconference from Mogadishu.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Nicholas
Kay, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia; and Mr. Maman Sidikou, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia and Head of the African Union
Mission in Somalia.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Kay
and Mr. Sidikou, who are joining today’s meeting via
videoconference from Addis Ababa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/331, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kay.
Mr. Kay: I wish to thank you, Madam President,
for this opportunity to brief the Council. I am glad to
be doing so with my friend and colleague Ambassador
Maman Sidikou. Yesterday we briefed the African
Union Peace and Security Council together, which
is why we are joining the Council today from Addis
Ababa. The African Union-United Nations partnership
in Somalia is unique, strong and essential for success.
Let me begin by thanking the Council for its
continued support to the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and to the peacebuilding
and State-building process in Somalia.

2/8

19/05/2015

When I spoke to the Council in February, I said
that I was both excited and worried about the year
ahead. I was excited because, after too long a pause,
there was the prospect of political progress again.
And indeed, momentum has been regained. Somalia’s
third Government in less than three years is hard at
work, and the Federal Parliament has begun its sixth
session. Somalia’s federal, regional and local leaders,
parliamentarians and people from all walks of life are
building a federal State, step by step, through dialogue
and reconciliation. The prevailing environment of
mistrust accumulated over nearly 25 years makes the
task difficult and painstaking; but it must continue, and
it deserves our sustained support.
Federal President Hassan Sheikh Mohamoud, as
well as the Prime Minister, Speaker and the leaders
of Puntland, Jubba and South-West Administrations,
have reiterated their determination to deliver Somalia’s
Vision 2016 plan without any extension of the term
of the Federal Parliament or President in August
and September 2016, respectively. There are several
important targets the Government has set for itself in
the coming months, including completing the formation
of interim regional administrations and assemblies;
advancing the constitutional review; establishing the
National Independent Electoral Commission (NIEC)
and the Boundaries and Federation Commission; and
finalizing priority legislation on political parties,
citizenship and elections.
Once Parliament has approved the nomination of
commissioners for the National Independent Electoral
Commission, the NIEC will face a compressed timeline
to discharge its duties. Upon its establishment, the
Commission will need to decide swiftly on how to
implement its mandate. The United Nations will
deploy an electoral assessment mission to advise and
determine, in close collaboration with stakeholders, the
nature and extent of United Nations electoral support
in Somalia. The United Nations — together with the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, and the European Union and Member
States — continues to support the formation of the
interim regional administrations. Many challenges
remain, in particular ensuring inclusivity. More needs
to be achieved in terms of local reconciliation. Women,
minorities and youth must be well represented as part
of that inclusivity.
Progress on federalism has not been matched by
similar progress on the constitutional review process.

15-14506

19/05/2015

The situation in Somalia

On 6 May, the Chairperson of the independent
Constitutional Review and Implementation Commission
resigned, but there should be no let-up in moving the
process forward. The United Nations is supporting
the commissioners and other relevant institutions in
starting the constitutional review process in earnest
without further delay. I am also concerned about the
timetable for elections in Somaliland, which were due
next month. The recent decision by the House of Elders
to postpone elections for 22 months until March 2017
is a disappointment. The United Nations has joined
other international partners in urging a reconciliation
of this timetable based on a political consensus among
all Somaliland stakeholders.
The security of United Nations staff in Somalia
remains a priority. Tragically, on 20 April a terrorist
attack in Garoowe claimed the lives of four UNICEF
staff members and three Somali guards. Al-Shabaab
targeted individuals who were working hard to improve
the lives of Somali children and families. It was, as
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamoud said, “an attack
against the future of the country”. We honour our fallen
colleagues by continuing their work. We have to ensure
a balance between our duty of care to staff and the
delivery of our mandate to support the Somalis.
Overall, the United Nations — agencies, funds and
programmes and mission combined — have on average
1,400 people deployed throughout Somalia. We must
ensure adequate protection for these teams. In that
regard, I want to thank the Council for its support to
the expansion of the United Nations guard unit, which
provides vital protection to United Nations staff within
the Mogadishu International Airport compound and the
new offices we have moved into in Mogadishu city. This
is the first time a Security Council-mandated mission
has operated from outside the airport zone since 1995.
I remain concerned about security in Somalia
and about the threat posed by Al-Shabaab to the
wider subregion, demonstrated by the heinous attack
on Kenya’s Garissa University College in April. We
need to monitor closely and be able to respond to any
sign that Al-Shabaab is benefiting from their links to
extremist groups in Yemen and from the instability
there. Counter-terrorism requires efforts on many
fronts. I hope that the coming weeks will see even closer
cooperation among Member States to address this threat
at the subregional level, including measures to prevent
and counter violent extremism. With so much at stake
between now and 2016, we can expect Al-Shabaab to

S/PV.7445

do everything it can to derail the political process in
Somalia.
Renewing the joint Somali and African Union
offensive against Al-Shabaab is an urgent priority.
I once again pay tribute to the courage of the Somali
national army and our African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) colleagues. The African Union and the
United Nations recently completed a joint mission to
Somalia to assess the benchmarks for a United Nations
peacekeeping mission and the impact of the surge of
AMISOM troops, and to provide recommendations on
the next steps in the military campaign. My colleague
Ambassador Sidikou and His Excellency the Prime
Minister will brief further on this.
The development of the Somali national army and
the Somali police is an imperative for both the defeat
of Al-Shabaab and the AMISOM exit strategy. The
Guulwade (Victory) Plan referred to in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2015/331) seeks to train and equip
the national army for joint operations now. It provides
a sound framework, but business as usual will not be
enough to support it. A robust architecture for the
delivery of international support to the national army
is needed, and we are consulting all partners on the
options. A similar plan for the police, including regional
police, is also needed.
I am encouraged that the mechanisms created in 2014
to support the implementation of the “New Deal” Somali
Compact are starting to perform. The Government has
exercised leadership in bringing all partners together.
A portfolio of seven programmes, aligned with the
Federal Government’s priorities and donor resources,
and with a value of over $100 million, has been approved
for inclusion in the United Nations Multi-Partner Trust
Fund. I thank all donors who have pledged support, and
further encourage them to support Somalia’s recovery
through these mechanisms. However, the alignment
and coordination of international assistance behind
Somali leadership is uneven. Of the funds generously
pledged at Brussels in 2013, only about 10 per cent have
been committed through the Compact architecture.
I encourage all Somalia’s partners to adhere to our
collective commitments, and especially to increase
their use of national systems.
Although Somalia’s financial system remains
high-risk, the Federal Government and its international
partners are taking steps within the New Deal
framework to ensure robust oversight of the overall
governance architecture. There is still a long way to

15-145063/8

S/PV.7445

The situation in Somalia

go, but I am pleased to report that a Treasury Single
Account is now in place, creating a single channel for
national revenues and payments.
There is work to do on human rights as well. This
year, Somalia will need to report on progress made on
their commitments in the universal periodic review. I
note with concern that there has been a marked increase
in executions and death sentences handed out in 2015
despite Somalia’s commitment to put a moratorium
on executions. I also remain concerned about threats
and intimidation of journalists in Somalia. I welcome
the African Union’s report on allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse by AMISOM soldiers and
commend the work of the investigations team. As the
Council has already noted, there is now a need to follow
up. Ambassador Sidikou will brief further on this.
The humanitarian situation in Somalia remains
alarming. The numbers speak for themselves. Some
730,000 Somalis continue to be unable to meet their most
basic daily food needs; an additional 2.3 million people
are at risk of sliding into the same situation; among
them, over 1.1 million Somalis remain displaced, the
majority women and children. This situation requires
constant attention, adequate funding and continuous
upgrades to our analytical and forecasting capabilities.
One third into the year, the humanitarian appeal is only
12 per cent funded, having received only $100 million of
the $863 million needed. The situation could be further
compounded by a poor rainy season, if that happens,
the closure of the Somali remittance operators and
the escalating conflict in Yemen. Between 27 March
and 14 May, Somalia received nearly 7,000 arrivals, of
whom the vast majority, about 92 per cent, were Somali
nationals, many of them with refugee status in Yemen.
The United Nations is actively supporting efforts to
assist those returning.
The high-level partnership forum in Mogadishu
planned for 29 July will be an opportunity for Somalia
and its partners to come together to agree on priority
action between now and 2016. But continued progress
between now and then will take sustained attention and
commitment from all sides. I believe that UNSOM’s
mandate remains relevant for the coming year. As the
federalism process moves forward, we will adjust the
focus of our efforts. Our work in Somalia’s regions will
become ever more critical, and we will seek to maximize
our support to existing and new administrations within
our mandate for providing good offices and strategic
policy advice. That requires logistical and security

4/8

19/05/2015

support in difficult circumstances. I look forward to
the strategic review of the United Nations Support
Office for the African Union Mission in Somalia that
is also scheduled for July. It will help us to establish
what is feasible, including for supporting emerging
administrations where UNSOM does not have a
presence. We will continue to update the Council on
the adequacy of security arrangements. Finally, we
will keep under review the preparations for an electoral
process in September 2016, and provide further advice
on the implications as required.
While it is too soon to celebrate definitive success
in Somalia, I believe we would be missing a strategic
opportunity if we failed to appreciate just how much
the Somalis and the international community are
achieving. As we cast our eye over the wider region and
beyond, where else do we see a country, once mired in
conflict, that now has progressively better functioning
governance, where political dialogue is replacing
the rule of the gun and, most importantly, where
violent extremism is being successfully countered?
A country that refugees once fled in their millions is
now receiving refugees from other countries, such as
Yemen, and welcoming home its own citizens. It is
an honour for me to work in such a context and with
such dedicated international partners and brave United
Nations colleagues. The world should not squander
this opportunity. We should reinforce success with
increased engagement and resources in the coming
period, and I am grateful for the Council’s continued
support.
The President: I thank Mr. Kay for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Sidikou.
Mr. Sidikou: I am honoured and pleased to address
the Security Council today on the situation in Somalia.
I would like to brief the Council on three important
developments — the prevailing security situation in
Somalia; my thoughts on the recently concluded joint
African Union-United Nations benchmarking exercise;
and the outcomes of our investigation of sexual
exploitation and abuse and the steps that the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has taken to
ensure an effective prevention and response regime.
There have also been significant political developments,
especially relating to the federalization process, the
constitutional review and the electoral process, that my
Office has been supporting, together with the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and

15-14506

19/05/2015

The situation in Somalia

the Federal Government of Somalia, as my good friend
and colleague Nick Kay discussed in his briefing this
morning.
With regard to the security situation, the overall
prevailing security situation in Somalia can be described
as having elevated terrorism threat levels characterized
by a rise in Al-Shabaab activities, mainly owing to
an increased number of attacks involving improvised
explosive devices and targeted assassinations. Overall,
Al-Shabaab activities are likely to continue, since its
intention of carrying out terrorist attacks and its ability
to do so have not diminished. Targeted assassinations
seem to be their preferred tactic, owing to their high
effectiveness and low cost. In response, however,
we — and by that I mean AMISOM, together with
our Somali counterparts — have boosted our joint
operations, especially in urban centres, in order to
continue to disrupt Al-Shabaab activities.
In terms of offensive operations, I should emphasize
that AMISOM troops, together with the Somali
national army, have not relented in our efforts to defeat
Al-Shabaab. Operation Eagle and Operation Indian
Ocean have shown that AMISOM’s offensive operations
against Al-Shaabab can produce positive results,
particularly in reducing that terrorist group’s territorial
control. I would also like to assure the Council that we
will be reinvigorating operations against Al-Shabaab
as part of the outcomes and recommendations of the
recently concluded joint African Union-United Nations
mission, and that there will soon be a more prominent
resumption of offensive operations in some areas. For
obvious operational security reasons, I will leave it at
that.
I would now like to turn to the second issue,
relating to my thoughts on the outcomes of the joint
African Union-United Nations mission on benchmarks
for a United Nations peacekeeping operation in
Somalia, and its recommendations for the next steps
in the military campaign begun last month in Somalia
from 14 to 25 April. AMISOM, the African Union (AU)
Commission and UNSOM have initiated consultations
with the troop-contributing countries and are working to
secure their necessary buy-in on the recommendations.
The joint mission reviewed the benchmarks for a
United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia
as outlined in resolution 2124 (2013), and found that,
while progress was being made on various benchmarks
at varying speeds, the situation in Somalia as a whole
would not be conducive to the deployment of a United

S/PV.7445

Nations peacekeeping operation until the end of 2016,
at the earliest. It is gratifying that, in its draft report,
the joint AU-United Nations mission appreciates
that, with the targeted support of partners, there has
been considerable success in reducing Al-Shabaab’s
territorial control and degrading its leadership. That, in
turn, has created the essential space for the unfolding
of the political process, especially the federalization
process, albeit with uneven progress across the regions.
The joint offensives of AMISOM and the Somali
national army have also provided the space needed
for stabilization efforts in the recovered areas, despite
the fact that a number of important factors have posed
challenges to it. While the joint operations were able to
recover territory, Al-Shabaab has still retained certain
capabilities, mostly employing asymmetric warfare
tactics, that have affected the population’s confidence in
the army and AMISOM and impeded further necessary
action against it, largely because AMISOM does
not have the configuration and resources to respond
accordingly. In particular, the force’s effectiveness
was undermined by a lack of most of the force enablers
and multipliers authorized under resolution 2124
(2103), including the helicopters capable of giving it
the degree of agility and flexibility it needs to adjust
to Al-Shabaab’s change of tactics. Given the extent of
the threat and the status of the political process, ending
the surge in uniformed personnel before the end of
2016 could run a serious risk of reversals that could
derail Vision 2016’s objectives and risk the success of
the investment that has been made by all concerned.
Finally, therefore, AMISOM’s continued presence is
potentially required until the end of 2016.
I therefore welcome the recommendation to extend
the surge with a structured, targeted reconfiguration
of AMISOM designed to respond to evolving realities.
That extension will enable AMISOM to achieve three
interlocking objectives. First, it will allow the Mission
to resume offensive operations against Al-Shabaab,
which will be conducted under an enhanced AMISOM
chain of command, in a cross-sector manner when
necessary, with specialized capabilities based on the
use of Mission assets, including helicopters which may
be generated from within or without the continent while
recognizing the limitations and risks involved.
Secondly, the extension will enable the consolidation
and stabilization of the recovered areas, which will
require a gradual shift to police and necessitate an
agreement on the rebalancing of AMISOM uniformed

15-145065/8

S/PV.7445

The situation in Somalia

personnel numbers at the right time, dictated by an
agreed sequencing of operations that is continually
adapted. The enabling of policing will free up troops
for area security operations, which is a requirement
for stabilization. In addition, the establishment of a
joint AMISOM/UNSOM civilian presence will further
enhance the recovery and stabilization efforts.
Finally, the extension will enable AMISOM to
secure main supply routes and other routes connecting
with newly recovered areas and interim regional
administrations, which will ensure free access within
and through the newly recovered areas, which in turn
will facilitate governance and the delivery of services
and humanitarian assistance. It will also enable
freedom of movement and force protection for military,
Government and local authorities and enable resupply
and access for commercial and market traffic.
While the foregoing are noble objectives to which
I am sure the Council will give its blessings, I would
like to highlight some key assumptions on which these
laudable objectives are premised and to which we need
to give more careful consideration. If AMISOM is to
achieve these objectives and if we are to make the right
decisions at this crucial point in our support to Somalia,
we will need to make some hard decisions regarding,
in particular, first, our support to the Somalia security
forces. The contribution, assumed by the Somali
national army on the basis of resolution 2124 (2013), did
not materialize fast enough. When it did materialize,
the sustainability of the required follow-through
operations was severely constrained by a combination
of shortage in resources and considerable weaknesses
in the chain of command. Today, the Somali authorities
have developed the Guulwade (Victory) Plan, which
we should all support in a coordinated manner. This is
critical if we are to turn the Somali national army into
a more effective partner to AMISOM.
Secondly, we will have to make a decision regarding
the logistical support package to AMISOM. Although
it has significantly evolved, logistical support has seen
shortfalls that have been an important element among
many that contributed to the lack of a sustained pace
in operations. The approach in logistical support must
therefore take a new direction. The planned strategic
review of the United Nations Support Office for
the African Union Mission in Somalia (UNSOA) is
therefore critical and should, inter alia, recognize the
need for an expansion of UNSOA’s quantitative and
qualitative capacities as well as the need to adapt the

6/8

19/05/2015

Support Office to the nature of AMISOM operations,
as well as to its other clients.
Thirdly, the benchmarking exercise proposed two
recommendations on the role of the AMISOM police
component. The first is the deployment of formed police
units to provide operational and logistical support and
bolster the confidence of the national police force. The
second is to deploy individually deployed police officers
to provide support for the vetting, recruitment, training
and mentoring of local Somali police personnel.
As Somalia continues to work towards establishing
rule of law institutions, the Federal Government has
signed memorandums of understanding with the
interim regional administrations. This is a timely
development, and AMISOM police will support the
recruitment, vetting, training and deployment of 600
police officers for each of the administrations. The role
of AMISOM police in support of Somalia necessitates
the establishment of a support package for the Somali
police force that comprises elementary infrastructure,
rudimentary equipment and sustainment items required
to commence policing operations in the regions. The
final report of the benchmarking exercise jointly
developed by both the AU and the United Nations will
be submitted to the Security Council soon, and I look
forward to the Council’s consideration and endorsement
of the report’s recommendations.
I would like to conclude by addressing the outcomes
of the independent investigations of allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse allegedly perpetrated
by AMISOM personnel as reported by Human Rights
Watch in June 2014. As I have stated on several
occasions, I would like to reiterate solemnly before
Council that AMISOM’s leadership is committed to
enforcing the African Union’s zero tolerance policy.
We will continue to respect the dignity of all Somali
women and girls and uphold the religious and cultural
values of Somalia as AMISOM continues to implement
its mandate to restore peace and stability in the country.
Beyond concluding that two of the allegations
contained in the Human Rights Watch report are
indeed cases of proven sexual exploitation and abuse
perpetrated by AMISOM soldiers, the investigation team
made a number of observations and recommendations
to strengthen existing mechanisms that the AU
Commission and the troop- and police-contributing
countries to AMISOM have put in place to address
sexual exploitation and abuse. These recommendations

15-14506

19/05/2015

The situation in Somalia

are informing our response and we have already taken
the following specific actions.
I have issued directives to the Force Commander,
the Police Commissioner and other senior
Mission leadership to immediately implement the
recommendations contained in the investigation report.
We have moved all the shops out of the AMISOM
base camp. We are restructuring the camp to prevent
unauthorized access by AMISOM personnel to Somalis
living within the Mission area. The AU Commission
has recruited and deployed a Conduct and Discipline
Officer to the Mission. We are instituting a hotline
in AMISOM in order to specifically respond to the
challenges for victims and witnesses that were noted in
the investigation report.
As a means of encouraging more reporting of sexual
exploitation and abuse cases and confidence-building,
the AU Commission, with input from AMISOM, has
developed a whistle-blower policy that we expect will
be passed by the policy organs of the AU this year.
The Commission, with input from AMISOM, has also
prepared a draft annex to the existing memorandum
of understanding between the Commission and the
troop- and police-contributing countries intended to
set up a more robust response to sexual exploitation and
abuse and improve prevention efforts, accountability
and reporting of the troop- and police-contributing
countries on sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as
to ensure that victims receive the support they need.
Given that conduct and discipline is primarily a
responsibility of the troop- and police-contributing
countries, the Commission has shared the detailed
report with those countries and requested their response
and comments on the findings ahead of a meeting with
them and Somalia in order to agree on the concrete
steps to be taken to implement the recommendations
contained in the report.
The President: I thank Ambassador Sidikou for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the Prime Minister of
Somalia.
Mr. Sharmarke (Somalia): There has been
political change in Somalia in recent months, as Special
Representative Kay and Ambassador Sidikou informed
the Security Council. There has been some tangible
progress, and the Federal Republic of Somalia has put
forth the Gullwade (Victory) Plan designed to rapidly
enhance the capacity of the Somali national army to

S/PV.7445

fight Al-Shabaab alongside the African Union Mission
in Somalia, in order to respond to the call to make the
Somali national army more effective in joint operations.
I urge our partners to support this plan so as to enable
the army to then assume more responsibility to secure
the country.
A crucial component of the plan and the delivery
of Somalia’s defence sector is the process of integrating
regional militias into the Somali army. With the
beginning of the operation of the National Integration
Commission, under the auspices of the Ministry of
Defence, on 12 May, we will now begin to see some
real momentum and tangible progress in this priority
area. The agreed allocation of regional Mission forces
to be transferred to the Somali national army indicates
a clear and strong commitment on the part of regional
organizations to embrace the federalization of our
armed forces. This is related to the integration of 2,880
from Jubbaland, where Al-Shabaab still maintains
several strongholds. As I speak, the Defence Minister
is in Jubbaland to kick-tart the integration process.
Another pressing priority is the integration of
3,000 militia personnel allocated from Puntland. The
Puntland forces are already fighting Al-Shabaab, which
has established another stronghold in the Galgala
Mountains, following the pressure of the military
campaign in south-west Somalia last year. Puntland
is expected to be the ultimate theatre of fighting
against Al-Shabaab due to the difficult terrain, which
provides shelter for the group shelter. We need to defeat
Al-Shabaab and to prevent it from consolidating and
spreading its presence in Puntland, before the situation
becomes too serious to handle.
The Al-Shabaab threat in Puntland is heightened
by the events unfolding in Yemen. If extremist
elements come and take root in Puntland together with
Al-Shabaab, it will be very difficult to dislodge and
defeat them in future. We have a window to address
this situation now. I therefore appeal to the Security
Council to authorize the United Nations Support Office
for the African Union Mission in Somalia to extend
a non-lethal support package to the additional 3,000
personnel from Puntland, earmarked for the integration
of the Somali national army. That would bring the total
number of army troops benefiting from the United
Nations support package to 13,900.
Looking ahead, it is also vital that we incorporate
into this process the integration of regional police
forces. That will play a central role in accelerating the

15-145067/8

S/PV.7445

The situation in Somalia

transition to policing piracy, at the federal and regional
levels alike, which we all know is essential to long-term
stability in Somalia.
On the political front, Vision 2016 remains the
policy framework that encapsulates our political
objectives. There has been progress in moving ahead
with the process in the central regions, and the federal
structures are taking shape quite rapidly. The last
remaining state, Hiiraan state, is about to be kickstarted in the next week or so.
The Federal Government is also continuing to
engage regional leaders. At our last meeting in Garoowe,
progress was made in the constitutional review process,
including the security sector, power- and work-sharing
and the issue of force integration. Federal and state
leaders agreed to establish a committee to review
work-sharing arrangements and to move forward on the
constitutional review process.
Progress under the New Deal Compact has
been quite positive. On 2 April, and a concessional
facility approved in principle six joint projects to be
implemented by the Federal Government of Somalia
and six organizations with the support channelled
through the United Nations or through partner transfers.
This is a crucial step towards unlocking resources and
accelerating the delivery of tangible results.
In May 2015, the Council of Ministers nominated
members of the National Independent Electoral
Commission, the Judicial Service Commission and
the Boundary Commission. The operationalization of
these Commissions is a top priority for the Federal
Government, and we expect the Federal Parliament to
endorse them very soon.
Efforts to establish new structures in the regions
are progressing. A reconciliation conference is ongoing.

8/8

19/05/2015

Planning has begun for the organization process towards
cooperation of federal states in the last remaining state.
The establishment of the Jubbaland Parliament
was a welcome development. However, there have been
some issues that arose from the process. The Federal
Government is working closely with the Internal
Jubba Organization and opposition leaders to find
compromise and accommodations to solve the crisis
over the formation of the Jubbaland regional assembly.
Last but not least, the Federal Government is
working very closely on repatriation with Kenya so as to
have an orderly return of our refugees from the Dadaab
camp. We are also working with authorities in Yemen to
assist the swift process of refugee returns to Somalia.
We are faced with a situation that is of great concern to
the United Nations and all parties in the region: that of
dealing with the human cost of the violence in Yemen.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees expects 100,000 refugees from Yemen in
Somalia over the coming six months. Somalia is already
home to approximately 1 million internally displaced
persons. We do not have the internal resources or the
capacity to absorb additional refugees. We therefore
appeal to the Council to mobilize the United Nations
system and donors so as to develop a contingency plan
on the ground for the refugees fleeing from Yemen.
I thank the Council for this opportunity to address
it and I hope that it will consider our appeals.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

15-14506
