S/PV.8729

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8729th meeting

Thursday, 20 February 2020, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Aougi
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. King
Ms. Mogashoa
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Clay
Ms. Norman-Chalet
Mr. Dinh

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(S/2020/123)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-04496 (E)
*2004496*

S/PV.8729

The question concerning Haiti

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(S/2020/123)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite the representative of Haiti to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Helen La
Lime, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti, and Ms. Marie Yolène Gilles, Executive
Director of Fondasyon Je Klere.
Ms. La Lime and Ms. Gilles are joining today’s
meeting via video-teleconference from Port-au-Prince.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2020/123, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Ms. La Lime.
Ms. La Lime: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to again address the Security Council and
provide an update on the situation in Haiti.
Since July 2018, the political impasse has paralysed
the functioning of Haitian institutions, aggrieved the
country’s economy and fuelled continued insecurity.
Over the course of the past months, I have worked
alongside the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of American States and
the Apostolic Nuncio to Haiti to create an environment
conducive to reaching a negotiated resolution of the
crisis, one that would catalyse a reform effort aimed
at restoring the population’s confidence in the State,
ensuring that the most vulnerable receive much-needed
basic services, and laying the groundwork for the timely
holding of elections.
2/18

20/02/2020

During two rounds of negotiations held at the
Representation of the Holy See in Haiti in mid-December
2019 and late January 2020, a consensus emerged
on the contours of a political agreement articulated
around four elements: the criteria for the formation of
a Government, the contents of a reform agenda, the
sequencing of a Constitutional reform process, and the
definition of an electoral calendar. Despite progress
regarding the nature of the reforms to be undertaken,
including that of the Constitution, political actors
have yet to settle on a formula that would lead to the
designation by President Moïse of a consensual prime
minister and the formation of a new Government.
The lack of agreement on this matter, as well as
on the remaining length of President Moïse’s term,
threatens to needlessly prolong a situation that has
already lasted too long. Haiti is about to enter into
its second year with a caretaker Government, its
economy is forecast to sink deeper into recession, and
4.6 million of its citizens are now estimated to require
humanitarian assistance. The effects of the strained
economy and the prolonged political polarization risk
further affecting the integrity and effectiveness of such
key institutions as the Haitian National Police. To avoid
a greater deterioration, Haitian leaders need to rise to
the occasion and commit to a way out of this impasse
that will best serve the interests of their people.
A political agreement notwithstanding, the road
towards improved governance through systemic reform
will be arduous. Indeed, at the root of the recurring
political and socioeconomic crises that Haiti has
experienced in its modern history lie such entrenched
factors as consistently high levels of poverty, pervasive
gender inequalities, limited access to basic social
services, severe natural-resource depletion, and the
scourge of gangs, corruption and impunity.
Since the Security Council’s adoption of resolution
2476 (2019) in June of last year, the peace and security
and development pillars of the United Nations have
worked tirelessly to develop a joint vision and a holistic
approach to our intervention in Haiti. The results of these
efforts are reflected in the 13 February report of the
Secretary-General before the Council (S/2020/123) and
are encapsulated in an integrated strategic framework
planning document that articulates a focused strategy
aimed at assisting Haitian institutions to address the
root causes of instability in the country.
20-04496

20/02/2020

The question concerning Haiti

The deployment of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti (BINUH) on 16 October 2019 opened a
new chapter in the relations between Haiti and the United
Nations, one premised on a deeper and more targeted
collaboration. Our collective success will be measured
by the progress made in achieving the six benchmarks
annexed to the report of the Secretary-General, which
focus on facilitating a political consensus; addressing
gang violence; strengthening the police, justice
and corrections sectors; promoting human rights;
helping address unemployment and socioeconomic
grievances; and encouraging the presence of the State
in communities through the provision of basic services
and efforts to enhance resilience.
In that respect, the recently published joint BINUHOffice of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights public report on allegations of human
rights violations and abuses perpetrated in the Portau-Prince neighbourhood of Bel-Air between 4 and
6 November 2019 provides an example of the crosscutting nature of the work currently undertaken by the
United Nations in Haiti. Not only does the document
analyse an example of the expansion of lawlessness
in certain neighbourhoods of the Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area, but it also makes recommendations
to State authorities on how to improve access to justice
for victims, enhance accountability and interdict the
action of criminal gangs.
Only through a combination of strong national will
and steadfast international support can Haiti surmount
the multifaceted crisis with which it is contending.
I remain confident that the United Nations, in its
new configuration, is uniquely placed to help State
institutions address the factors that catalyse cyclical
periods of instability in the country and ensure
that Haiti is once again on the path to stability and
sustainable development.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. La
Lime for her briefing.
I now call on Ms. Gilles.
Ms. Gilles (spoke in French): The Fondasyon
Je Klere (FJKL), which I have the great honour of
representing here, is pleased to participate in this
meeting of the Security Council on the situation in
Haiti. In accepting the invitation to deliver this briefing
on the overall human rights situation in Haiti to the
Council under the Belgian presidency, I seek to embrace
the values that the FJKL upholds.

S/PV. 8729

The FJKL is an active Haitian human rights
organization that prepares Haitians to become
responsible leaders and to participate in public life in
order to revitalize a nation State that is founded on the
principles of human rights and sustainable development.
Our organization conducts a human rights training
programme at the national level. The FJKL also aims
to promote and protect human rights in Haiti through
its programme for the monitoring of public institutions
such as Parliament, the judicial and penal systems,
the executive and the police. It conducts inquiries and
denounce grave human rights violations, and it provides
legal assistance to the voiceless and the underprivileged.
Haiti is today facing widespread and systematic
violations of human rights. State authorities are failing
to uphold both their positive and negative obligations
to protect and respect human rights. The right to life
has been cheapened. Appalling killings and heinous
crimes are committed daily, with total impunity. To
date this year we have already noted 31 violent deaths,
but the actual figure is likely higher. The State is losing
its monopoly of the use of legitimate violence. Entire
areas are controlled by armed gangs, which are often
better armed and better equipped than law-enforcement
authorities.
The authorities, in an attempt to survive politically,
often rely on gangs and use gang-warfare strategies.
That is what we have been seeing for two years in the
Martissant area, some 3 kilometres from the Palais de
Justice and less than 5 kilometres from the presidential
palace. The same situation exists on national road No.
1 and in the Carrefour Shada area, which is controlled
by the Chiens Méchants gang, which has ties to the
authorities and whose rival is the Tête de Mort gang.
The same situation prevails in other areas. More
than 150 armed gangs are active throughout the country.
In Port-au-Prince alone there are 23 active gangs; in
Pétion-Ville, 30; in Croix-Des-Bouquets, 17; and in
Artibonite, 20. Nearly a third of the national territory is
controlled by armed gangs.
Freedom of movement is not guaranteed, nor is
the right to the physical integrity and dignity of the
human being. Roads are dangerous. As armed-gang
fiefdoms have become inaccessible to the police, the
gangs have taken full control of the civilian population
living in those areas and of those they have kidnapped,
who are often subjected to the worst atrocities. They
are carrying out numerous appalling acts — murders,

20-044963/18

S/PV.8729

The question concerning Haiti

beheadings, rapes, kidnapping for ransom, diversion of
supplies, abductions and forcible confinement.
Young university students, schoolchildren and
the civilian population, gripped by terror, hesitate to
go outside. Kidnapped persons and those seized while
using national roads are abused and forced to pay
ransoms that further impoverish their families. Women
are gang-raped both anally and vaginally. Such scenes
are sometimes filmed and posted on social networks by
armed gang members with their faces covered, in an
act of defiance to law-enforcement authorities, which
are powerless in the face of the fast-rising tide of such
acts of cruelty. In Haitian culture, gang rape and anal
rape are the worst crimes that can be committed against
women, so rape is used as a political weapon.
The courts in Port-au-Prince, the largest jurisdiction
in the country, have been closed since September 2019.
There has therefore been a considerable increase in
incidents involving prolonged preventive detention and
the illegal release, without due process, of criminals
arrested by the police, as a result of political interventions
with respect to Government representatives within the
judiciary and unscrupulous prosecutors.
Access to judges, the right to a fair and equitable
trial and the right to be tried within a reasonable
time frame are now just empty words. Such rights
do not exist.
Everyone knows that death squads are a form of
State terrorism. We witnessed a wide range of acts
similar to those carried out by death squads during the
“lock mode” period and when major anti-Government
demonstrations are taking place.
People in vehicles with no registration plates are
opening fire on demonstrators, as well as on groups of
people viewed as opposing the authorities, in Port-auPrince, Cap-Haïtien and Saint-Marc and many other
areas of the country, killing and injuring many.
Beheadings and mutilations of captured political
adversaries are filmed and posted on the Internet by
armed gangs known to have ties to the authorities.
All of this, and this is just a partial list, reflects
the fact that these crimes are being committed with
the support, at least tacit, of the Government, and the
perpetrators enjoy official impunity.
I wish to draw the Council’s attention to the need
for good governance and the fight against corruption in
4/18

20/02/2020

Haiti. Haiti is one of the rare countries in the world where
a man or a woman who has never worked a day in his or
her life and who takes up an elective post in Parliament
or the executive branch can become a millionaire in two
or three years. They can openly display their wealth
without any fear. Indeed, in February 2018, as a result
of the efforts of the international community, the law on
wealth declaration was adopted in order to contribute
to transparency in public life. However, an inquiry
carried out by FJKL from February 2008 to February
2018 on political figures, civil servants and other public
servants who had declared their wealth showed that the
implementation of the law deviates from the practices
and norms set out therein. Nearly 90 per cent of the
individuals working in the executive branch had not
filed their assets disclosures upon leaving office, along
with 93 per cent of Senators and Deputies.
The management of the PetroCaribe funds,
following the performance audit by the Haitian
administrative court, is marked by cases of
mismanagement, overcharging, theft, corruption,
embezzlement, favouritism and illicit enrichment.
That funding, at nearly $4 billion, would represent a
significant opportunity for Haiti. Yet the current Head
of State was implicated by the court in those acts of
corruption, which constitutes the greatest obstacle to the
holding of fair and equitable trials on the management
of those funds — a trial that the Haitian people very
much want to see.
The country has been operating without a budget
for two years, with a Government that resigned almost
a year ago. The constitutional order broke down in
January due to the failure to hold elections on the
constitutionally prescribed dates. The country therefore
finds itself in an undeclared state of exception, which
is liable to reinforce personal power, administrative
mismanagement, theft, the plundering of scarce State
resources and corruption.
Against that backdrop, the country is facing a
grass-roots uprising against the Haitian National Police
hierarchy. Just yesterday, police officers attempted to
set fire to the law firm of the Chairman of the Board of
Directors of Fondasyon Je Klere. They set fire to five
vehicles, two generators and motorcycles in the firm’s
parking lot. Although the movement is controlled by
the mafia sector of the Police, the claims presented
are nevertheless fair and deserve consideration. That
body, which was established 25 years ago, needs to be
20-04496

20/02/2020

The question concerning Haiti

audited. The efforts of the United Nations in recent
years to strengthen it have proved to be a bitter failure.
From that perspective, the Fondasyon Je Klere has
the following recommendations for the Security Council
to help Haiti. First, it must contribute to the success
of the transition period in order to ensure a return to
democratic order, broken since 13 January. Secondly,
the firepower of armed gangs must be weakened.
Thirdly, it must help organize the trials of PetroCaribe,
the La Saline and Carrefour-Feuilles massacres and
cases of rape. Fourthly, we need to effectively wage the
fight against corruption. Fifthly, we need to audit the
police with a view to boosting its credibility among the
people and ensure that it can discharge its mission to
protect and serve.
I apologize for going on so long; as they say, I could
not be brief.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Gilles
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
I thank Special Representative La Lime for her
comprehensive briefing on the situation in Haiti. The
United States is grateful for the excellent work that
she and her team have done in support of political and
economic stability in Haiti. I also thank Executive
Director Gilles for her briefing and support for good
governance and human rights.
The United States reiterates the essential role
of civil society and condemns reprisals against it. In
January, we observed the 10-year anniversary of the
devastating earthquake that killed more than 200,000
Haitians and 102 United Nations personnel. The United
States stands with the people of Haiti, not only as they
continue to recover from that tragedy but also as we
work together to build a better future.
While today’s briefing outlined intense efforts to
promote dialogue, the United States remains concerned
by the lack of real political progress. The United States
has made clear that Haiti’s leaders must come together
to find an inclusive solution. Political and economic
stability will follow only when Haiti’s leaders set aside
their differences, and both build and support Haiti’s
State institutions.

S/PV. 8729

Despite months of political gridlock and
deteriorating humanitarian and economic conditions,
Haiti is operating without a seated Government
following the expiration of the terms of most members
of Parliament. I therefore repeat that there must be
dialogue, and there must be a political accord. Time
is of the essence. Haiti must hold legislative elections
as soon as technically feasible, ultimately forming
a fully functioning Government that is responsive to
the needs of its people. The Haitian people must have
a voice in selecting their leaders. Furthermore, while
constitutional reforms are necessary and welcome, they
must not become a pretext to delay elections.
We also reiterate the importance of the efforts of the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) and
the role of the good offices of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General La Lime in bringing the parties
together. But we must also stress that only Haiti’s
leaders, both in the Government and the opposition,
can make the decisions that are necessary to break the
political impasse and address the underlying drivers
of instability.
Many of the benchmark targets and baselines
outlined in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2020/123) will be frozen in place as long as Haiti’s
political stalemate persists. Political polarization has
affected governance and inhibited important decisions
by the Government. We acknowledge the additional
progress made by the Haitian National Police (HNP)
and its increasing professionalization. However, the
HNP continues to face increasing operational pressures,
budget constraints and governmental inaction. As the
Secretary-General’s report notes, without timely and
sufficient funding, the HNP cannot fulfil its public
safety mandate.
We continue to call for accountability for human
rights abuses and corruption. In that connection,
we reiterate the need for the Government of Haiti to
investigate and prosecute those responsible for the La
Saline and Bel Air violence. We also note with concern
that key social indicators point to rising vulnerability,
with food insecurity, a weak health sector and general
household resilience all trending in the wrong direction.
In the coming weeks, Haiti’s leaders must set
aside their differences. While they work to that end,
the United States remains committed to the success of
BINUH and, above all, to the people of Haiti as they
work to address their nation’s challenges.

20-044965/18

S/PV.8729

The question concerning Haiti

20/02/2020

Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Helen La Lime, and Ms. Marie
Yolène Gilles for their briefings. We regret the attack
on the office of the foundation run by Ms. Gilles. We
hope that the details of that incident will be investigated
as soon as possible. Indeed, tomorrow, the Dominican
Republic, alongside several members of the Security
Council, will hold an Arria Formula meeting on
reprisals against women human rights defenders and
women peacebuilders who cooperate with the Security
Council and its subsidiary bodies.

peace mission — MINUJUSTH — and establish the
political mission on 16 October 2019. Sadly, we can
see the chaos that has resulted today: a deep-seated
constitutional crisis, rampant violence caused by
the illicit trafficking and unmeasured proliferation
of small arms, light weapons and ammunition,
which are contributing significantly to organized
crime — including gangs, in turn leading to assaults,
kidnappings and murders — and thereby jeopardizing
the security gains achieved over the past 15 years by
the peace missions and exposing the population to high
levels of insecurity.

The Dominican Republic would like to take this
opportunity to lend its support to Haiti’s President,
Jovenel Moïse, in his quest for an inclusive dialogue
with the objective of establishing a consensus-based
Government. It is of great concern for the Dominican
Republic to see the deep social, economic and political
crisis in Haiti and the lack of progress in holding a
national dialogue that would lead to the formation of
a national unity Government capable of taking the
country out of this multidimensional crisis.

It has also led to a humanitarian situation that has
been exacerbated by the lack of access to basic services
for the majority of the population, including, according
to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, a forecast that, by this coming March,
4.6 million Haitians — approximately 40 per cent of
the population — will suffer severe food insecurity,
with 2.1 per cent of children suffering from severe
acute malnutrition.

According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2020/123), the progress achieved during the
reporting period is very minimal on essentially all
the six benchmarks. That, in turn, indicates that the
process to improve the country’s ability to achieve
political stability, peace and security and sustainable
development is at a standstill. Due to its profound
impact on economic growth and social stability, the
political crisis has become the fundamental driver of
that stagnation.
This situation is among the reasons that we
expressed our disagreement here in the Security
Council with regard to the withdrawal of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) in the midst of an elections process
that remains undefined, fragile and without an agreedupon road map. The establishment of new peacekeeping
configurations in countries in conflict should not be
based solely on cost, but on an objective analysis and
the presence of sound institutions capable of assuming
the transferred responsibilities.
Despite our repeated warnings to defer the
operationalization of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti (BINUH) until after the elections and
prioritize finding a solution to the political crisis before
the transition, the Council proceeded to withdraw the
6/18

This widespread crisis situation is hardly
encouraging for BINUH to fully implement its mandate
and move forward a sustainable development agenda.
We regret that the situation of insecurity has already
claimed the life of a BINUH independent contractor.
We hope that the decision to withdraw MINUJUSTH
in the conditions I have just referred to, without an
adequately equipped police force, will serve as a
lesson to illustrate what the Council must not repeat in
another country.
In order to help the Haitian people at this unfortunate
juncture, BINUH must thoroughly examine the root
causes of the crisis and subsequently, while working
to improve the current conditions, join forces with the
country team and the Government in their activities
to eradicate the underlying sources of the problems.
Accordingly, strategies and projects will be established
on sound foundations serving as a pillar based upon
which, in the long term, Haitians can take control of
their own destiny.
In conclusion, we thank the United Nations, the
Organization of American States, the Caribbean
Community, the European Union and the Apostolic
Nuncio of the Holy See in Haiti for their contribution
to the dialogue process. We also acknowledge the work
of the Permanent Representative of the United States
to the United Nations, Ambassador Kelly Craft, in
20-04496

20/02/2020

The question concerning Haiti

her search for solutions to the Haitian crisis. We call
on all national actors to iron out their differences and
work together in the search for peaceful and inclusive
solutions that will open up the path leading towards
better living conditions for all the people of Haiti. The
unity of a country in times of crisis must be the focus of
concerted efforts to ensure the well-being of a people.
We call on the international community not to lose
hope in the transformations that its efforts will bring
about and to continue supporting the Haitian people to
alleviate the humanitarian crisis that is affecting the
best of Haiti — its people.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Permit me, on behalf of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, to express our sincerest condolences to the
Government and the people of Haiti on the deaths of
babies and children in last week’s fire at the Orphanage
of the Church of Bible Understanding in Port-auPrince. Our prayers and thoughts are with the families
of the victims.
We welcome and thank today’s briefers for their
very informative presentations.
The current situation in Haiti is unquestionably
dire, which today’s briefings underscored. The
international community has a formidable task in
providing comprehensive and sustained support to assist
Haiti in the alleviation of its difficulties, specifically
the ongoing political impasse, which has paralysed the
country. The resolution of Haiti’s constitutional crisis
is paramount in that regard, and the first step towards
restoring some semblance of stability in the country.
Accordingly, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
calls on all Haitian parties to urgently engage in
inclusive dialogue in a spirit of good faith, with a view
to resolving the protracted crisis. The inability to reach
an immediate political settlement by the parties can
result in the recurrence of violence. Furthermore, the
concomitant breakdown of law and order could have
detrimental effects in the region.
Given Haiti’s kinship in our Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) family and our shared history, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, together with CARICOM,
is duty-bound to exhaust all possibilities to assist
the people of our sister Caribbean nation in finding
a peaceful solution to the present crisis. We remain
steadfast in that endeavour.

S/PV. 8729

My delegation is mindful of lingering issues
that plague Haiti, in particular the institutional
shortcomings relating to the rule of law, including the
need to reappoint, or replace, 32 judges and address
graft and the limited participation of women in political
processes, which is far-removed from the Constitution’s
mandated quota of 30 per of women in the Government.
The prevalence of sexual and gender-based
violence against women and girls and the associated
lack of accountability and the impunity by members
of the society, as well as those assigned by State and
international bodies to protect the Haitian people, are
exceedingly tragic. Those situations, coupled with the
increase in food insecurity, the exploitation of Haitian
children and the adverse effects of climate change
require urgent attention. As Haiti navigates uncharted
waters, having recently transitioned to the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti, the cross-cutting
nature of peace, security and development needs to be
reflected and prioritized.
Before I conclude, it would be remiss of me not
to stress the importance of reparations for Haiti.
As we commence the second half of the Decade
for People of African Descent 2015-2024, let us
not lose the opportunity to address the genesis of
Haiti’s underdevelopment and encourage appropriate
recompense for Haiti. The fact that Haiti was made to
pay, rather than receive, reparations for its experiences
of mass enslavement remains lamentable. More
pertinently, given that 80 per cent of its national budget
was extracted for reparatory payments up until the
mid-twentieth century meant that significant vacuums
were created in its efforts at nation-building.
The persistent underdevelopment of Haiti, rooted
in those past experiences, remains crucial when
considering its current reality.
As the first free black nation in the Western
hemisphere, Haiti is a cornerstone of our Caribbean
civilization. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines stands
in solidarity with our Haitian brothers and sisters and
remains optimistic that, as the country traverses this
new course in its unique history, it can achieve greater
success in its goals of bringing hope to its people by
building peace, stability and sustainability. We must
accompany Haiti in its noble pursuit of prosperity and
never abandon its people.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-

20-044967/18

S/PV.8729

The question concerning Haiti

General for Haiti and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti, Ms. Helen La Lime, for her
briefing. I also welcome to today’s meeting Ms. Marie
Yolène Gilles, Executive Director of Fondasyon Je
Klеrе, in her capacity as civil society representative.
I also thank her for her useful insight on the situation
in Haiti, in particular the gravity and extent of human
rights violations and sexual and gender-based violence.
The current crisis in Haiti is, first and foremost, a
political crisis, and France welcomes the efforts of the
Special Representative to help resolve it. We deplore the
fact that, despite the involvement of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH), the political
conference for a solution to the crisis, held from 29 to
31 January, in which the country’s political forces, the
private sector and civil society took part, was unable to
reach an agreement that would allow a return to a regular
constitutional and democratic framework. I recall that
the legislative elections that had been scheduled for
2019 did not take place and that Haiti now lacks any
parliamentary representation, which, given Haiti’s
political history, cannot be sustained. France again
calls on President Jovenel Moïse, and all the country’s
political forces, in particular the opposition, as well
as civil society and the private sector, to engage with
determination in a genuine national dialogue that places
Haiti’s interests above political interests and allows for
the holding of free and democratic legislative elections.
Certain root causes have led to the current stalemate
in Haiti. I will mention three of them.
The first is corruption. For several months, Haitian
civil society has clamoured for transparency to combat
corruption, which destroys the trust of citizens in their
institutions. The fight against corruption and impunity
must be an absolute priority for Haitian politicians in
order to rebuild the trust of the people.
The second structural challenge is economic
hardship. The stalemate in the fall of 2019 had an even
greater impact on the country’s economic and social
situation, which was already very fragile. The growing
financial insecurity of millions of Haitians makes
it challenging for the various social forces to find a
solution to the political crisis. Haiti’s international
partners should continue to mobilize in order to provide
humanitarian aid to meet the most urgent needs.
The third root cause of the stalemate is insecurity.
The Haitian society currently lives in a state of
extreme insecurity, in particular as a result of gang
8/18

20/02/2020

activity, as Ms. Gilles so vividly explained. The need
for security goes hand in hand with the fight against
impunity. I recall, in particular, the La Saline and Bel
Air massacres, which gave rise to damning reports by
the United Nations. Those responsible must be found,
prosecuted and punished in legal proceedings, in line
with international human rights standards. All human
rights abuses observed during the fall demonstrations
must be investigated, whoever the perpetrators might
be. The same goes for the perpetrators of sexual
violence, as Ms. Gilles mentioned.
We all know that the multidimensional nature of
the crisis in Haiti makes its resolution particularly
complex. BINUH’s mission, as outlined by the Security
Council, remains relevant, namely, providing support
for political dialogue and governance and strengthening
the rule of law, including in the areas of law enforcement,
justice and human rights. France commends the work
conducted by BINUH, since its establishment four
months ago, together with the entire United Nations
country team. The Council should therefore remain on
high alert and take appropriate measures, especially if
the situation in Haiti continues to deteriorate.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Helen La Lime, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti and
Head of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti,
and Ms. Marie Yolène Gilles, Executive Director of
Fondasyon Je Klеrе, for their briefings.
I thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH)
(S/2020/123) four months after its inception, replacing
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti.
BINUH has turned the page on 15 years of peacekeeping
efforts in the country.
The transition from a peacekeeping mission to
a special political mission came at a critical time of
difficulties and challenges related to the situation in
Haiti and the aspirations of the friendly Haitian people.
To ensure a successful transition, BINUH must receive
full support and the necessary resources to achieve
its objectives and make an effective contribution to
stability in the Republic of Haiti.
We monitor with concern the stressful political
situation in Haiti, which has become increasingly
complex since 13 January, given the constitutional
crisis and the institutional vacuum in the country,
due to a delay in holding the elections and the end of
20-04496

20/02/2020

The question concerning Haiti

the Parliament’s mandate, which has hampered the
adoption of a budget and the regular functioning of
State structures and institutions.
Given that the political crisis is linked to major
economic and social challenges, its continuation will
have negative impact on the security situation in the
country. It will fuel societal violence, encourage
impunity and violate human rights. Consequently, the
crises will compound the daily suffering of the Haitian
people and the country will remain unstable.
Against that backdrop, the United Nations and
the Security Council have an important role to play in
supporting Haiti with a view to breaking this vicious
circle and achieving stability and lasting peace. In
that context, my delegation believes that there is a
need to encourage constructive dialogue between all
the political and civil society components in order
to address the root causes of the crisis and envisage
the practical solution to overcome it. In that regard,
we appreciate the tireless efforts of BINUH towards
a convergence of views among the political parties,
as well as regional efforts with a view to reducing
tensions and encouraging parties concerned to start
direct discussions and comprehensive national dialogue
to resolve the crisis. Such efforts must be carried
out with full respect for the sovereignty of Haiti and
independence of its national decisions.
We underline the important role of BINUH in
continuing the critical work that was carried out by the
United Nations. However, we note that its task does not
include the peacekeeping element. That is why Haiti
must now be responsible for maintaining security,
implementing laws and promoting the role of national
security institutions in order to realize security and
stability. We also commend the efforts of the Haitian
National Police in combating crime. We stress the
need to address the logistical challenges that the police
face by providing them with equipment and continued
training programmes. In that context, the support
provided by the United Nations and the international
community is crucial. In order to make that effort more
effective, there is a need to focus efforts on combating
corruption and impunity by allowing access to justice
and adopting the necessary legislation with a view to
promoting the rule of law.
We believe that one of the conditions for achieving
stability in Haiti, in addition to comprehensive
socioeconomic development, is success of the

S/PV. 8729

democratic transition. That is why the responsibility
for resolving the current crisis in Haiti falls on the
shoulders of the Haitians, regardless of their political
affiliation. They must engage in political dialogue,
reject violence and seek consensus. We reiterate our
support for BINUH and its joint work with the United
Nations country team in implementing the benchmarks
in BINUH’s mandate. We hope that its work will allow
stability and security to return to that friendly country
and that the aspirations of the Haitian people will
be met.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Ms. Helen La Lime, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti,
for her briefing on the situation in the country and
the work of the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti (BINUH). We agree with the assessment of the
situation in Haiti contained in the first report on the
work of the special political mission (see S/2020/123)
during an extremely important period for the country.
The withdrawal of the United Nations peacekeeping
mission coincided with an uptick in political activity.
Disagreements between the branches of State power
prevented the appointment of a Government and
Parliament and it was not possible to hold timely
elections. The lack of a fully functioning Government
complicates all aspects of life, from ensuring security
to meeting normal business and humanitarian needs.
We welcome the emergence of various initiatives to
promote direct public dialogue in order to overcome the
crisis. Our consistent position has been that sustainable
peace, in any country, can be guaranteed only through
a frank and inclusive discussion on resolving critical
problems and overcoming differences by taking the
views of all parties into account, and Haiti is of course
no exception. In that context, the mission’s efforts
to assist Haitians in establishing dialogue are very
important. We believe that this should remain a top
priority for the United Nations. In such a critical period
in the country’s history, resources and time must not
be squandered on tasks whose success will ultimately
depend on the country’s political stability.
We take note of the report’s assessment of the work
of the Haitian National Police. That institution currently
has a special responsibility. At a time when the path of
mutual understanding has yet to be taken, society must
see police as reliable defenders. It goes without saying,
however, that the inalienable right of all Haitians to

20-044969/18

S/PV.8729

The question concerning Haiti

peaceful assembly and freedom of expression must be
exercised in strict compliance with national legislation.
The challenges facing Haiti are not unique. With
the withdrawal of the United Nations peacekeeping
mission, Haiti’s political leadership and law enforcement
agencies have not only gained greater independence
from international assistance, but have also assumed full
responsibility for the country’s fate and the security of
its citizens. The Government and society have entered a
critical phase of development that will not be any easier
than before. Awareness of national responsibility will
inevitably lead to an increase in social activity.
At the same time, we must avoid simplistic
conclusions about the root causes of what is happening,
which is primarily due to chronic and unresolved
critical socioeconomic problems, rather than the
political ambitions of opponents. Regrettably, Haiti is
a clear example of how the foundations of governance
are undermined in the heat of political struggle. This
should have a sobering effect on those who continue to
promote reckless schemes to weaken the foundations
of statehood in other Latin American countries, with
potential risks for the entire continent. We see no
alternative to negotiated settlements in overcoming
disagreements in the States of the region that have
faced domestic political challenges, whether in Haiti
or elsewhere. We categorically reject double standards
and interference in Latin American affairs.
What is needed today is responsible international
support for Port-au-Prince in order to ease social
tensions and prevent Haiti from sliding into a fullfledged internal conflict. The primary task of finding a
format and modalities for dialogue that are acceptable
to all warring parties comes first. In that context,
we welcome the targeted efforts of international
mediators, which are in line with the priorities of
BINUH. We will continue to work to ensure that the
outcome of the Security Council’s efforts leads to a
genuine normalization of the situation in Haiti and to
strengthening its sovereignty and self-sufficiency.
Ms. Mogashoa (South Africa): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this very important
meeting to enable Council members to interact,
for the first time, on the activities of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) since its
establishment in October 2019.
10/18

20/02/2020

The delegation of South Africa aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the representative of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
My delegation wishes to express its appreciation
for the informative and detailed briefings of Ms. Yolène
Gilles, Executive Director of the Fondasyon Je Klere,
and Ms. La Lime, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti and Head of BINUH. We
also wish to thank Ms. La Lime for her tireless work
and efforts in the region. Finally, we welcome the
delegation of Haiti to the Chamber.
Given recent developments in Haiti, I wish to
focus my statement on the political situation there, the
humanitarian conditions and the work of BINUH since
its establishment.
On the political situation, we welcome the efforts of
the various parties in Haiti, including consultations with
civil society, to come up with solutions to the political
impasse and to address the unrest across some parts
of Haiti. The efforts to appoint a new Prime Minister
and the plans to hold parliamentary elections before the
end of 2020 and presidential elections in 2021 signal
political will to resolve the crisis. Furthermore, we hope
that ongoing efforts to increase the participation and
role of women in decision-making processes will soon
bear fruit, resulting in a more inclusive Government
for Haiti.
We welcome the support of regional bodies and
configurations such as the Caribbean Community,
the Organization of American States and the Haitian
Conference of Catholic Bishops, as well as the role of the
Holy See and the European Union, and the ongoing role
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the United Nations Development Programme in
facilitating dialogue alongside all Haitian stakeholders.
Despite some progress in overcoming the political
stalemate, serious challenges remain. The inability to
appoint a Parliament is having a negative impact on
the situation on the ground. We also take note with
concern of the Secretary-General’s assessment that
polarizing messages broadcast nationally over radio by
both opposition and Government supporters, including
incitement to violence, had most likely exacerbated
political tensions. In that regard, we urge parties to
refrain from actions and rhetoric of a divisive nature
that will prolong and further deteriorate any prospect
for constructive dialogue and negotiation.
20-04496

20/02/2020

The question concerning Haiti

South Africa is concerned about the rising levels of
violence, including kidnapping and sexual and genderbased violence against women and children. In addition,
the impact of the crisis on the justice system and its
institutions continue to hamper much-needed judicial
and legal reforms, thereby impacting the monitoring of
human rights and the maintenance of international law
and human rights standards. We welcome the efforts of
the Haitian National Police and the support of BINUH
in combating that violence. In particular, we commend
the efforts of the Haitian National Police to develop
a database of sexual assault complaints in order to
accelerate case processing. That is an affirmation that
the situation is urgent.
Regarding the humanitarian situation, my delegation
remains concerned about the negative impact that the
political crisis is having on the economy. Although
there have been efforts to address food insecurity, they
remain insufficient, especially as the situation on the
ground continues to worsen. In particular, the limited
access to essential services such as clean drinking
water, basic health care and medical services, education
and training for children and young adults negatively
impacts the population and undermines their right to a
decent life.
The crises in Haiti are inextricably interlinked. We
therefore urge all parties to continue to engage to agree
on a new constitution that reflects the aspirations of all
Haitians and will contribute to reforms to address the
humanitarian situation.
Let me conclude by highlighting my third and final
point on the significant contribution of BINUH. We
commend the efforts of BINUH in implementing its
mandate, particularly in terms of combating community
violence as well as sexual and gender-based violence.
We urge the United Nations and all Haitian stakeholders
to support B1NUH, especially in its advisory capacity
in working with local authorities.
South Africa will continue to support the presence
of BINUH in Haiti as a contribution to the country’s
stabilization efforts to overcome the current challenges
through an inclusive national dialogue in support of
national consensus on the country’s priorities. The
critical role played by the entire United Nations system
in addressing the challenges faced by Haiti, including
building the capacity of its various institutions, is
essential to Haiti’s stability and democratization in the
long term.

S/PV. 8729

Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I would like to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General La Lime for her briefing. We
also listened carefully to the briefing by Ms. Gilles.
Today is the first time that the Security Council has
been briefed on the situation in Haiti since the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) was
established. China appreciates the work of BINUH in
helping Haiti to restore stability. Despite the extensive
support of the United Nations to maintain peace and
promote development in Haiti, the political crisis in the
country is yet to be resolved. As the Secretary-General
notes in his report (S/2020/123), the political crisis in
Haiti has led to increased political polarization and a
vacuum in the functioning of national institutions.
Amid the rampant gang violence and frequent
violent incidents, the security situation has become of
even greater concern. The deteriorating economy has
posed enormous challenges to people’s livelihoods
and has exacerbated the humanitarian situation, about
which China expresses its concern.
China calls on the Haitian authorities to commit
to resolving differences properly through consultation,
strengthening the rule of law and its own development
capacities, settling the current political crisis as soon as
possible and creating conditions conducive to necessary
reforms. All those involved in the Haitian issue should
put the interests of the Haitian people first, respond
more vigorously to their demands and try to regain
their trust.
The
international
community,
particularly
countries with significant influence on Haiti, should
step up attention to the political, economic and
humanitarian situations in Haiti and help it to maintain
stability, promote economic growth, improve people’s
livelihoods and implement the 2030 Sustainable
Development Goals.
Haiti still has a long way to go to achieve stability
and development. We hope that the Haitian Government
will chart a course towards greater self-reliance and
effectively assume responsibility for maintaining
national security and stability and promoting economic
and social development.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): I too would first like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
La Lime for her comprehensive briefing and Ms. Gilles
for her insightful comments.

20-0449611/18

S/PV.8729

The question concerning Haiti

This is the first time that the Security Council is
discussing the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti (BINUH) as a special political mission and is
a good opportunity to take stock of where we stand.
I would therefore like to limit my statement to four
aspects in that regard, since previous speakers have
already covered a great deal.
First, I would like to say that we too are worried
about the persistent political deadlock and we urge all
political actors to find a lasting solution to break the
stalemate and alleviate the suffering of the population.
We would like to encourage the Haitian Government
and opposition to continue an inclusive national
dialogue to reach agreement on arrangements that
can build societal consensus on the revision of the
Constitution, the implementation of reforms and a
realistic electoral framework to allow preparations for
credible and transparent elections. I would also like
to commend Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral La Lime, the Organization of American States
and the Catholic Church for their efforts to assist the
parties to engage in direct talks so as to find a solution
to the crisis.
Turning to my second point, we are alarmed that
the prolonged political stand-off, aggravated by the
ensuing economic downturn, has created an enabling
environment for gang-related violence. We know that
some political actors and businessmen have close ties
with criminal gangs. We strongly condemn all actions
that undermine the democratic processes and the rule of
law and call on all stakeholders to refrain from acts that
could contribute to instability. That includes incitement
to violence, hate speech and threats.
We deplore the scant progress made in pursuing
accountability for recent human rights violations, such
as the events in La Saline, Bel Air and Grand Ravine,
and corruption scandals. In that context, we would
like to highlight the important role of civil society in
urging the authorities to ensure accountability. I thank
Ms. Marie Yolène Gillis for a very captivating briefing
in that regard. Let me also say that we condemn all
attacks on civil society and all reprisals against civil
society for speaking out in support of the truth and
recalling facts on the ground.
Thirdly, I will comment briefly on the issue of
the police. Looking back at the progress achieved
over the past 15 years, we welcome and salute the
increasing self-sufficiency of the Haitian National
12/18

20/02/2020

Police (HNP) in providing security across the country,
while recognizing that certain gaps still exist, for
example, in tackling gang-related crimes and managing
large-scale civil unrest. We are concerned by reports
that underline a lack of trust in the police. It is key that
the Haitian National Police improve its relationship
with the population through outreach and communityoriented policing and that BINUH continue its efforts
in that regard.
We are concerned by the Secretary-General’s
observation that “the Haitian National Police budget
has not increased since 2017, leaving the institution
unable to address serious financial and operational
challenges” (S/2020/123, para. 27). We are also
concerned about recent events that point to a tendency of
polarization inside the HNP, including acts of violence
during public demonstrations of police officers. In our
view, it is imperative to further augment the capacity
of the Haitian National Police and render it more
effective so as not to lose the gains achieved by the
peacekeeping operations.
Fourthly and lastly, the transition to a
non-peacekeeping United Nations presence in Haiti
clearly occurred at a time when the country found
itself in the midst of a multidimensional crisis. It is
therefore even more important that all United Nations
actors closely coordinate their activities in order to best
support the country in overcoming this crisis.
Germany emphatically supports the new approach
to the benchmarks, which reflects the mutually
supportive relationship between the peace and security
and development pillars of the United Nations system.
We welcome the engagement of the Peacebuilding
Fund in Haiti as well as the joint work of BINUH and
the United Nations country team in developing an
integrated strategic framework to identify the United
Nations key areas of intervention in Haiti.
Without addressing the root causes of violence and
conflict, such as the deeply entrenched socioeconomic
disparities, a lack of access to basic services, impunity
for crimes, the dire humanitarian situation and
continued human rights violations, the return to lasting
political stability that Haiti so desperately needs will
not be possible.
We very much support the work of BINUH — a
strategic political United Nations presence that will advise
and assist the Government of Haiti in tackling the many
challenges that lie ahead. However, the future of their
20-04496

20/02/2020

The question concerning Haiti

country clearly lies, first and foremost, in the hands of
the Haitians themselves. The international community
stands ready to contribute and assist them in their
efforts to renew the social contract between the Haitian
State and its citizens.
Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
both the briefers this afternoon.
The United Kingdom welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s first report (S/2020/123) on the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH). The United Kingdom is encouraged that
BINUH is making a good start despite the complex and
challenging operating environments that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and many
other Council members this afternoon have described.
First, with regard to the transition from the United
Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti to BINUH,
we welcome the pace at which BINUH has staffed
its office and the steps taken towards greater United
Nations integration. We are looking forward to the
finalization of the integrated strategic framework,
which is an opportunity to translate the global United
Nations reforms into a more strategic approach on the
ground in Haiti that will be more able to support Haiti
in addressing the root causes of instability.
With respect to the benchmarks and targets, we
welcomed the United Nations efforts to establish
baselines and incorporate the benchmarks and
targets into the integrated strategic framework. Clear
delineation of responsibilities will be critical.
Turning to the substance of the Secretary-General’s
report, the ongoing political impasse in Haiti remains a
source of enormous frustration for the Security Council
and, above all, for the Haitian people. It is vital that all
parties now re-engage in direct talks to find a solution
to the political deadlock. The issues of constitutional
reform and credible, transparent elections should be a
fundamental element of these talks.
With other State institutions paralysed, maintaining
the functionality of the Haitian National Police is
absolutely critical. We welcome the progress made
in this area by previous United Nations mission, but
as other speakers have noted, significant challenges
remain. In particular, sustainable solutions are needed
to resourcing the Haitian National Police, and we
encourage the Haitian leadership to address this
challenge as a priority.

S/PV. 8729

On the humanitarian front, the United Kingdom is
relieved that there have been no new cases of cholera
reported since February 2019. However, we remain
deeply concerned by the broader humanitarian situation
and especially the acute vulnerability of women
and children.
The United Kingdom welcomes the validation of
the national action plan for human rights. However, we
also remain deeply concerned about the overall human
rights and rule-of-law situation in Haiti, in particular
with regard to prison conditions, pretrial detention,
court functionality and the scant progress in pursuing
accountability for recent violations. We also share
South Africa’s concern regarding incitement to violence
on Haitian media. Such incitement risks undermining
prospects for progress on the political front and puts
Haitian lives at risk.
In conclusion, this new United Nations
configuration provides, as we see it, the opportunity for
a fundamentally new era of United Nations cooperation
with Haiti — one geared towards sustaining peace
and advancing development. We urge all parties to do
everything possible to ensure that this opportunity is
not lost.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I join others in thanking
the briefers.
Haiti is facing a continuous political crisis,
intertwined with social economic challenges that in
turn affect the security situation. A great deal of work
has been done, but the challenges remain and need to
be addressed. We urge all parties to pursue an open and
inclusive dialogue, demonstrate political will and take
a constructive approach to discussing the most pressing
issues as a road map for reform and a constitutional
revision process. That is where the solution can be
found and that is what the people of Haiti expect from
their political leaders.
It is important to define the electoral calendar
and create conditions for legislative elections to be
held. In that regard, we welcome the United Nations
Development Programme training programme to
ensure the success of the forthcoming elections and to
help increase women’s political participation, since the
ratio of women parliamentarians in the legislature is
ranked among the lowest in the world.
Mobilizing domestic forces and translating the
plans into action enables the international community

20-0449613/18

S/PV.8729

The question concerning Haiti

to support national efforts. Haiti will require continued
assistance in the course of achieving stability and
development. The Latin American region offers useful
experience in terms of how to build effective and
sustainable agreements.
We commend the role and efforts of the Haitian
National Police in maintaining peace. Recent reports
about the rising level of violence, including kidnapping,
hijacking, robberies and gang-related criminality,
among other things, are extremely worrisome. We
condemn the involvement of gangs in the protests and
their contribution to escalating violence. Given the
complex and challenging environment, the response
capability of the Haitian National Police needs to be
increased in order to conduct effective operations
against gang members and to fulfil their mandate fully.
We welcome the progress in implementing the 2018
legal aid law. However, despite that progress, more
needs to be done in pursuing accountability for recent
human rights violations and corruption scandals and
to effectively fight impunity in Haiti. Progress is also
needed in strengthening access to justice and reparation
for victims and respect for human rights.
The recent report of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on the
Bel Air incident reveals a trend in the resurgence of
gang-related violence in Haiti; lack of accountability
for serious human rights violations and abuses,
including by the police; as well as the absence of the
State in certain urban areas, preventing authorities
from ensuring protection. It is important to make full
use of the accountability system to ensure that all cases
are properly investigated and perpetrators brought
to justice.
The goal of a stable Haiti with fully functioning,
unified State institutions and authority can be achieved
only through a Haitian-led and -owned political process.
Finally, I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Helen La
Lime, and her team for their important work. We
encourage everyone to continue their efforts to work
together, rebuild mutual trust and ensure stability and
development in Haiti.
Mr. Dinh (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2020/123) on the United Nations Integrated Office
in Haiti (BINUH). I also want to thank the Special
14/18

20/02/2020

Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Helen
La Lime, and Ms. Marie Yolène Gilles for their
informative briefings. My delegation wishes to make
the following points.
First, we are concerned about the multifaceted
difficulties and instability in Haiti, which have had
an adverse impact on the livelihood and enjoyment
of human rights of the Haitian people. In the context
of the current political impasse, we call on political
parties in Haiti to engage in national dialogue towards
compromise and find a peaceful way out of the political
impasse for the sake of the sustained stability and
development of Haiti. We welcome the convergence of
views on a number of important issues, as expressed
by delegates during the recent political conference, and
urge all parties concerned to make further efforts to
overcome remaining differences.
Secondly, the Government, Parliament and all
political parties bear the primary responsibility to
serve the people in the country. In this regard, we look
forward to bold and necessary measures by the Haitian
authorities to address poverty and socioeconomic
instability, prevent violence, organized crime and
corruption, and ensure security and the rule of law.
Thirdly, we commend the work of the United
Nations Integrated Office and United Nations country
team in Haiti. In this connection, we call on the
international community and countries in the region,
to continue to support socioeconomic development in
Haiti, especially viable projects boosting job creation,
women’s and youth empowerment, education, capacitybuilding. We welcome and look forward to deeper
cooperation between the United Nations and Haiti
through a new partnership, as the Secretary-General
stated recently.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, we would like
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Helen La Lime, for her important briefing,
and all United Nations personnel for their tireless work
and dedication. I would also like to thank Ms. Marie
Yolène Gilles for her update on recent developments in
the situation in Haiti.
We are confident that the people of Haiti can
determine their own future, which the Security
Council is supporting through the presence of the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) as
a special political mission in Haiti. The challenges are
tremendous. However, putting in place a functioning
20-04496

20/02/2020

The question concerning Haiti

Government also gives the Haitian people the chance
it deserves to be an independent and thriving State.
On that note, I would like to bring the following three
points to the attention of the Council.
First, with regard to inclusive national dialogue, we
note with deep concern that the mandates of the lower
house of parliament, at least a third of the Senate, and all
elected municipal officials expired on 13 January 2020,
without any renewal. This basically leaves a vacuum
in the promotion of dialogue between executive and
legislative bodies. The Marriott and Kinam Accords are
important steps in the right direction. However, these
agreements are not enough. We need a more sincere,
effective and concrete plan for inclusive national
dialogue. We share the Secretary-General’s concern
about the urgent need for constitutional and structural
reforms in Haiti to deliver economic opportunities and
services to its population and improve the legitimacy of
its State institutions.
Secondly, with regard to economic and social
challenges, as stated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2020/123), during the 2018-2019
fiscal year, Haiti’s gross national product contracted
0.9 per cent, its national currency depreciated by 22 per
cent, and inflation reached 20 per cent by the end of
the fiscal year. Right now, 3.7 million Haitians are
food insecure, including 1 million people in emergency
status. Meanwhile, 2.1 per cent of children are affected
by severe acute malnutrition, and 3 million children are
unable to go to school. The prolonged political standoff,
aggravated by the ensuing economic downturn, is
creating a downward spiral that encourages gang
violence and other related social issues. We also need to
address these challenges immediately in order to prevent
any undoing of progress made towards the achievement
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Thirdly, with respect to BINUH’s benchmarks,
33 per cent time of the Integrated Office’s mandate has
already elapsed, but it is still far away from achieving
most of its benchmarks. We need to accelerate progress
by further strengthening BINUH’s engagement to
reach every level of Haiti’s Government. We believe
that fulfilment of the benchmarks is not BINUH’s
responsibility alone. BINUH and the United Nations
country team serve as catalysts for the country’s
improvement. The Government and people of Haiti
should exercise full ownership and responsibility in
striving to fulfil the benchmarks.

S/PV. 8729

We believe there is still hope for Haiti. We welcome
the implementation of the 2018 law on legal aid and
the finalization of the new national social protection
and promotion policy, which aims to reduce poverty
and inequality. We also commend the efforts made by
the Haitian National Police to maintain stability in the
country, including in the war against gang violence,
despite the lack of resources, personnel and equipment.
Much has been done, but there are still, of
course, many challenges that need to be addressed.
The international community needs to continue
encouraging and supporting Haiti so it can achieve
stability and prosperity.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): Allow me
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations and Head of the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH),
Ms. Helen La Lime, and Ms. Marie Yolène Gilles, for
their briefings.
Over the past few months, we have followed with
concern the evolution of the sociopolitical situation
in Haiti. In addition to the disagreements over the
formation of a Government since 13 January 2020, the
parliament has remained non-functional, following the
departure of the members of the Chamber as a result
of the failure to hold the elections scheduled for 2019.
That is regrettable, as it is precisely a peaceful and
inclusive electoral process that could bring about the
long-awaited stability in Haiti.
At the same time, the socioeconomic situation
remains difficult, with a food crisis that continues to
give cause for concern. According to the World Food
Programme, a third of Haiti’s 11 million people are
malnourished, and about 1 million of them are severely
malnourished. Regrettably, United Nations specialized
agencies are experiencing difficulties in mobilizing
the funds needed to finance the 2019 Humanitarian
Response Plan.
My delegation remains convinced that a solution to
the current crisis in Haiti can be achieved only with the
will of the Haitian people to find consensual solutions
through dialogue. In this regard, the support of the
international community and of the United Nations is
invaluable in accompanying national efforts aimed at
restoring and strengthening the population’s confidence
in public institutions and at creating acceptable
conditions for the restoration of lasting peace and
stability in the country, making it possible, inter alia,

20-0449615/18

S/PV.8729

The question concerning Haiti

to attract foreign investment, which the country greatly
needs in order to revive its economy.
My delegation encourages the Haitian authorities
to make efforts towards national reconciliation and
appeals to all stakeholders to refrain from violence
and resolve their differences by peaceful means. We
urge the authorities to address the underlying causes of
instability and poverty and ensure that justice is done
for the violence, crimes and human rights violations
and that those responsible are held accountable before
the courts.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the appeal
to the members of the Security Council on the need
to find an urgent solution to the political, economic
and humanitarian situation being experienced by the
Haitian people.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Belgium.
We are very concerned about the situation in
Haiti. The political impasse has contributed to a
socioeconomic and humanitarian crisis that is hitting
the most vulnerable hard. Belgium stresses the
importance of political responsibility and urgently
calls for an inclusive and open dialogue with a view to
organizing free, fair and transparent elections.
According to a United Nations survey, nine out of
ten Haitians support dialogue. That is a strong message
to the political class. Haitian civil society organizations
are playing a constructive role, and we commend such
organizations as the Fondasyon Je Klere for their
important work. The 2018-2019 demonstrations have
demonstrated the Haitian people’s expectations of
good governance and the fight against corruption. This
strong involvement of the Haitian people must be taken
into account through social dialogue.
The Government must address the root causes of
instability and poverty in the country. All parties must
refrain from violence and resolve disputes by peaceful
means. Political negotiations should be based on the
broad consensus that Haiti needs constitutional and
structural reforms to provide economic opportunities
for its people and improve the legitimacy of its public
institutions. Impunity and insecurity are some of the
main sources of frustration. The judiciary needs to be
reformed, corruption must be combated and human
rights protection improved. Only then can the political
elite regain the trust of the population.
16/18

20/02/2020

We note that the Haitian National Police is working
in difficult circumstances. There is a need to further
strengthen monitoring and accountability systems.
Intimidation and attacks against journalists and civil
society representatives must stop, and gang violence
must be urgently addressed. Noting the attack on
the offices of the Fondasyon Je Klere management
yesterday, we remind the Haitian authorities of the
importance of protecting the voices of civil society
from reprisals.
The prevalence of sexual and gender-based
violence remains alarming. It is therefore vital to put
an end to impunity, and we call for urgent judicial
follow-up on the inquiries into the massacres, namely
those committed in La Saline and Bel Air, and into the
allegations of corruption concerning the PetroCaribe
funding scheme. We welcome the fact that the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights are attaching great importance to this
issue. We are encouraged by the progress made in the
validation of the national action plan for human rights.
Concerning the work of the United Nations, we
support the work of BINUH and of the agencies and
funds present in Haiti. The transition towards a new
institutional presence in Haiti must be a gradual one,
and we call on the Haitian parties to make full use of the
mission’s good offices. We encourage BINUH to work
closely not only with other international stakeholders,
including the European Union, but also with Haitian
civil society. We eagerly await the completion of the
integrated strategic framework. The indicators proposed
by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2020/123)
will allow us to monitor the progress that the country is
making in the key areas of the mission’s mandate.
In conclusion, Belgium reiterates its commitment to
strive alongside the people and the Government of Haiti
team to bring about a democratic, peaceful and safe
future for the country. We now await tangible measures
from the authorities to resolve the political crisis.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Gaspard (Haiti) (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset to hail the Belgian presidency and thank it
for having invited the Haitian delegation to take part in
this Security Council meeting in order for it to express
20-04496

20/02/2020

The question concerning Haiti

the views of the Government of the Republic of Haiti
on the first report submitted by the Secretary-General
(S/2020/123) in accordance with resolution 2476 (2019),
which establishes the United Nations Integrated Office
in Haiti (BINUH).
I wish also to congratulate the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Helen La
Lime, for her excellent briefing and to convey to her
words of encouragement from the Haitian authorities,
in particular from the President of the Republic, His
Excellency Mr. Jovenel Moïse, for the dedication with
which she has carried out her tireless work in the
Haitian context. I commend also Marie Yolène Gilles
for her commitment to human rights in Haiti.
My delegation wishes also to take this opportunity
to warmly thank the members of the Security Council
for their constructive comments, which reflect the
unwavering solidarity of this important organ of the
Organization with the Haitian cause.
The presentation of this first report comes at
an important time. Indeed, it closes the book on 15
years of the consecutive presence of a peacekeeping
operation in Haiti and opens a new chapter in the
cooperation between the United Nations and Haiti. The
report also comes at a time when the country is facing
a severe economic and social crisis, with unpredictable
consequences that threaten social cohesion.
The report of the Secretary-General stresses in
particular the alarming and accelerating deterioration
of the economic and social situation in the country.
The gross domestic product, for instance, is estimated
to have contracted by 0.9 per cent for 2018/2019. The
national currency, as the representative of Indonesia
underlined, has depreciated by 22 per cent compared
to the United States dollar in 2019. In addition, fiscal
revenue is weak and dropped by 4.3 per cent compared
to the previous fiscal year, and there has been massive
job loss and a corresponding increase in unemployment,
in particular among young people.
World Bank predictions are very worrisome, as
they foresee economic contraction of 1.4 per cent in
2020 and 0.5 per cent in 2021. And yet the investments
made in 2017/2018 in various sectors — agriculture,
tourism and infrastructure — had made it possible to
forecast growth of 3.4 per cent, according to reports of
the Ministry of Finance and the Bank of the Republic
of Haiti.

S/PV. 8729

However, that goal could not be reached because
of the violence and political upheaval. The year 2018
ended with growth 1.4 per cent lower than forecast.
On this point, the Government of the Republic of Haiti
has taken due note of all the concerns expressed in the
report by the Secretary-General and endorses the main
conclusions contained therein.
With regard to political governance, the Haitian
Government noted with great satisfaction the focus on
the dialogue initiatives launched by the Head of State
in order to achieve an agreement among the main actors
of the country, in particular those of the opposition,
the business sector and civil society. Discussions are
continuing this week.
A comprehensive agreement has not yet been
reached among all actors. However, it is important to
note that significant progress has been achieved in
inducing political actors to sit at the negotiating table
and engage in dialogue on the need to overcome the
current political impasse. On this issue, we welcome
the fact that the report has mentioned the main round of
negotiations that have already been held by the actors
concerned. It is also important to mention that other
progress has been achieved, in terms of, for example,
the establishment of a new national unity Government;
the revision of the Haitian Constitution; and the need to
reach an agreement on the issue of elections, in other
words, to reach a comprehensive agreement on political
governance. In that context, the Haitian delegation also
welcomes the role played by BINUH in this process of
dialogue. Tangible progress is still possible.
The fight against community violence is a major
challenge, because the political crisis has led to a
climate of insecurity in the country that threatens to
undermine social cohesion. The figures contained in the
report clearly demonstrate the scale of the phenomenon
and the insufficiency of the measures taken so far and
of the resources mobilized to reduce insecurity in Haiti.
The Haitian National Police, with 15,000 professional
police officers and limited operational capabilities,
has done its best to address the situation, but it still
requires more training and sufficient resources and
equipment in order to be able to effectively protect and
serve all segments of the Haitian population. Restoring
State authority over the whole territory is more urgent
than ever.
It is undeniable that the political crisis has overall
had a negative impact on the functioning of the

20-0449617/18

S/PV.8729

The question concerning Haiti

judiciary, hindering the smooth operation of the courts
and consequently aggravating the issue of prolonged
pretrial detention. We are aware of the fact that a
great deal remains to be done to irreversibly ensure
the independence of the judiciary. As an example, I
wish to mention the Superior Council of the Judiciary,
which represents a vital step towards achieving the
independence of the judiciary in Haiti.
The same can be said about the human rights situation.
While numerous violations have been reported, it is also
true that the country has made significant progress in
this area and is abiding by its international commitments
by, in particular, cooperating with various regional and
international bodies. The recent on-site visit to Haiti
by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
(IACHR) is part of that approach. The same goes for
the holding of its 175th session, which will take place in
Haiti from 1 to 10 March. On the sidelines of that session,
consultations will be held between the Government,
civil society and IACHR, the objective of which is to
establish an ongoing dialogue among those bodies in
order to strengthen the Haitian State’s prevention and
control capacity with regard to human rights violations.
Regarding the killings, particularly those at La
Saline, it is important to remember that since
4 January 2019 the investigating office has been
requisitioned to report. Investigations are mandatory
in criminal matters. Three reports were therefore
issued by the General Directorate of Judicial Police
in January, February and April 2019 based on the
evidence examined. On the basis of those reports, 16
people have already been arrested in the context of
the investigation. Rulings should be issued shortly.
The matter of youth unemployment mentioned in the
report is a major and recurrent problem in the country.
It is of the utmost concern to the Haitian authorities.
I would like to particularly inform Council members
of a programme implemented by the President of the
Republic with a view to finding lasting solutions to
the issue. It notably involves granting loans to enable
many young entrepreneurs to start small businesses.
The Government of the Republic is encouraged by the
emphasis in section IX of the report, entitled “Conduct
and discipline”, on zero tolerance towards sexual
exploitation and abuse committed in the context of
the United Nations. Those heinous acts, which have
added to the suffering of the country’s most vulnerable
people, can only tarnish the image of our Organization.

18/18

20/02/2020

The perpetrators, wherever they come from, must be
prosecuted and punished so that the ideals of the United
Nations can be fully realized.
In addition, the Republic of Haiti continues to be
concerned about the many cases of abandonment by
United Nations peacekeepers of fatherless children
who live in abject poverty and the thousands of cholera
victims who await compensation. In that regard,
there is a need for greater rigour and transparency
in the Organization’s activities, particularly in
its efforts to provide assistance to all victims.
The Haitian authorities are fully aware of the complexity
and fragility of the country’s political situation and its
negative impact on all aspects of national life. There
must be genuine interaction among and an extreme
effort by the country’s key political actors to find a
positive solution to this crisis. All Haitian actors are
aware of that. That is the best way to bring together all
the country’s leading forces, which, despite the tireless
efforts of the Head of State, has still not been achieved,
since the main responsibility for jointly seeking, in
the context of a genuine dialogue, positive and lasting
solutions to the issues that undermine the security and
the economic, social and environmental stability of our
country lies primarily with us and us alone — in short,
the genuine civic involvement of all those affected by
the crisis.
It is therefore up to us to set and maintain the course.
Hence, the urgent need for the country’s key political
forces to reach an agreement on political, economic,
social and institutional governance. The Head of State,
His Excellency Jovenel Moïse, is focusing on that.
However, to achieve that, the Government is counting
on consistent, appropriate and enhanced international
support, for the mobilization of adequate resources is
critical to realizing the objectives that should restore
mutual trust and the security, stability and longterm development of the country. Indeed, the current
humanitarian crisis facing the country means that the
strong, coordinated, harmonized and unconditional
support of its key partners remains important.
The President (spoke in French): There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now invite
members to consultations to continue our discussions
on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

20-04496
