General Assembly-Nineteenth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED WITHOUT REFERENCE TO A COMMITTEE
Nrcogniziny that tlw United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development has provided a unique
opportunity to make a comprehensive review of the
problems of trade and of trade in relation to economic
development, particularly those affecting the developing
countries,
Convinced that adequate and effectively functioning
organizational arrangements are essential if the full
contribution of international trade to the accelerated
economic growth of the developing countries is to be
successfully realized through the formulation and implementation of the necessary policies,
Taking into account that the operation of existing
international institutions was examined by the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, which
recognized both their contributions and their limitations
in dealing with all the problems of trade and related
problems of development,
Relieving that all States participating in the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development should
make the most effective use of institutions and arrangements to which they arc or may become parties,
Convinced that, at the same time, there should be
a further review of both the present and the proposed
institutional arrangements, in the light of the experience of their work and activities,
Ta king note of the widespread desire among developing countries for a comprehensive trade organization,
Recognizing that further institutional arrangements
are necessary in order to continue the work initiated
by the Conference and to implement its recommendations and conclusions,

1994 (XIX). Confirmation of the allocation of
funds for the Expanded Programme of
Technical A11si11tance in 1965
The General Assembly,
Noting that the Technical Assistance Committee has
reviewed and approved the Expan<le<l Programme of
Technical Assista11cc for the biennium 1965-1966,
1. Confirms the allocation of funds authorized by
the Technical Assistance Committee to each of the
organizations participating in the Expanded Programme
of Technical Assistance from contributions, general
resources and local costs assessments, as follows:
Allocation
( equivalent of
US dollars)

Participating
or,(Jani11ation

United Nations
International La\,our <)rganisation
Food and A~ricu\ture Organization of
the Unitl'd Nations
ll nitcd Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization
I nternationa\ Civil Aviation Organization
World Health Organization
Universal Postal Union
International Telecommunication Union
Worlcl Meteorological Or~anization
Inter-( ;overnmental Maritime Consultative Organization
International Atomic Energy Agency

11,154,714
5,909,792

TOTAL

56,305,SQ-;

13,770,720
9,210,185

2,563,849
9 221,RSl
428,437
1,452,334
1,484,987
25,000
1,083,991

2. Concurs in the Committee's authorization tu the

I

Executive Chainuan of the Tcchniral Assistance Boan!
tu make sm:h chang-('s in these allocations as may he
necessary to provide, as far as possible, for the full
11tilization of rnntrilmtions to the Expanded Programme
of Technical Assistance, and to permit modifications to
1.·ountry prograllllll<'s n·qnestecl hy recipient Govcrn111cnts and approvt'd hy him;
3. Ifrq11rsts the Executive Chairman to report any
surh d1anges to tlll' Committee at the session followin~
thdr adoption.
1314th plenary meeting,

Establishes the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development as an organ of the General Assembly
in accordance with the provisions set forth in section
II below;

II
1. The members of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development (hereinafter referred to as
the Conference) shall be those States which are Members of the- United Nations or members of the specialized
agencies or of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
2. The Conference shall be convened at intervals
of not more than three years. The General Assembly
shall determine the date and location of the sessions
of the Conference, taking into account the recommcnclations of the Conference or of the Trade and
I kvl'lopmcnt lloar<l established under paragraph 4
below.
3. The principal functions of the Conference shall be:
(a) To promote intl'rnational trade, especially with
a view to accelerating economic development, particularly trnclc· hc·twt·<·n 011111tri('s at different stages of
<lcvdopm<'nt, bctwec·n ckvl'loping countries and bet wcen countries with different systems of economic

30 December 1964.

1995 (XIX). Eatabllehment of the United Nations
Conferen~e on Trade uncl Development as
an orMan of the General Aasembly3
The (;l'neral Assembly,
Conilinced that sustained <·fforts arc necessary to
raise tht• standards of living in all countrks aml to
accelerate the economic growth of the developing
C'otmtrit"s,
Considt'1'iny that intt<rnational trncle is an important

imtrument for <·t·onomic clt·vt•lopnwnt,
II

Sec al~o nott· 011 this item 011 page 'J.
l

G,meral A•aembly-Nlneteenth Seeslon

2

and social organization, taking into account the functions
performed by existing international organi,mtions;
( b) To formulate principles and policies on international trade and related problems of economic
development;
( c) To make propos;ils for putting the s.,i<l principles
and policies into effect and to take such other steps
within its competence as may he relevant to this end.
having n·ganl tn difT('rences in economic systems and
stages of <l<·vrlopment;
( d) Cn1crally, to review and facilitate the co-ordination of activities of other institutions within the
United Natir,ns system in the field of international
trade and rel:tte<I problems of economic deveiopment,
and in this regard lo co-operate with the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council with
respect to the performance of their responsibilities for
co-orclinatio11 under thl' ( 'hart<·r of the United Nations;
(e) To initiate action, wlwre appropriate, in cooperation with the rn111prtt'nt organs of the United
Nations for the negotiation am! adoption of multilateral
lt•gal instru111ents in tlw field of trade, with clue regard
to the adequacy of existing organs of negotiation and
witho11t d11plication of their activities;
(/) To be available as a centre for harmoni1.i11g the
tra<ll' and related <kv<'lop111ent policies of Governments
and regional economic groupings in pursuance of Article
I of the Charter;
(y) To deal with any otlier matters within the SCOJ'l'
of its competence.
TRAllF: AND

DEVELOPMENT

BOARI)

Composition
4. A permanent organ of the Conference, the Trade
and Development Hoard ( hereinafter refern:d to as
the Board), shall he established as part of the United
Nations m;1cl 1i11ery in the economic field.
S. The Boarrl shall consist of fifty-five mrmhrr,
elected hy the Conference from among its membership.
111 t·lecting the munhers of the Boar<l, the Co•1fer('ncr
shall have full regard for both equitable geographical
distribution and the desirability of continuin~ rq rese11tation for the principal trading States, and shall accordingly ohs<·rv<· the following distributi1111 of seat;:
( 11) Twenty-two from the States listed in part /\
of the anrl<'x to tht• prcst•11t n:solutio11;
( b) l•:ightt·<·n from tht· States listt'd in part B of
the anm·x;

(c) Nin<' from the Stat<'s listed in part C ,,f tlH·
antwx;
( d) Six fro111 thl' States listed i11 p:1rt [) of the annl'x.
<i. Th<' lists of St:iks co11tainecl in the annrx sh:111
lw rl'vi<'wc·d 1wrioclic:1lly hy the Conference in tl.e light
of rl1a11g<·s in 11a·111l><·rsl1ip of th(' Confen•ncr and oth<'r
factors.
7. Th!' 1m·111lll'rs c,r tlw Hoard shall he rlectrd at
c•ach rt·g11l:1r sl'ssio11 of thr Coufrrl'nce. Th<'Y shall
hol<I otlirc• 1111til tlw t·kction of tlwir successors.
R R<·tiring 11w1111wrs s\1:111 lw eligihle for rr-r!Pcti11n
q_ E:1d1 1111·111lwr of tllt' Board !->kill have nnC' rep,,•.
srn1alivc· with surh :,lternat,·" and advisers a!-> may 111'
n·cp1in·d
10. Tl1<· l\o:,rd ,li:ill 111vit,· :111y nwmlwr of 1111'
( ·011ft-rl'll< ,. 111 l':1rticil':1tc·, witl11111t V;JI<·, in its delibcra-

tions on any matter of particular concern to that
member.
11. The Board m:iy make arrangt·ments for representatives of the inter govnnmental hoclil's referred
to in parag-raphs 18 and 1'1 below to participall', without
vote, in its ddilll'rations and in those of tlw suli~idiary
l>odi('s and working groups est;i!Jlished by it. Such
participation may also he offered to 11011-~overnniental
organizations concerned with matters of trade and of
trade as relatl'd to development.
12. The Board shall aclupt its own rules of procedure.
13. The Board shall meet as required in accordance
with its rules. It shall normally meet twice in any
particular year.

Functions
14. When th" C,,nfrrencc is not in session, the
Board shall carry out the functions that fall within
the competence of the Conference.
15. In particular, the Board shall keep under n:new
a1,J take appro1 ,:·ialc :1cti1111 within its competence f(jr
the implementation of t hl'. recommendations. dc·clar:1 ·
tions, resolutions and other dl'cisions of the: Co11iere11cc
and for ensuring thl'. continuity of its work.
16. The Board may 111ake or m1t1ate studies and
reports in the field of trade and related problems of
development.
17. The Hoare! may rc<1ucst the Secretary-General
of the United Nations to i•reparc such reports, studies
or other documents as it may deem appropriate.
18. The Doard shall, as required, make arrangements
to obtain reports from and establish links with intergovernmental bodies whust: activities arc relevant to
its functions. l n ordl'.r to avoid duplication it shall
avail itself, whenever possible, of the relevant reports
made to the Ernnon1ic and Social Council and other
United Nations bo<lies.
19. The Board shall establish close and continuous
links with th<' regional t·conomic commissions of the
United Natic1ns and may establish such links with
other relevant regional i11ter-governmental bodies.
20. In its relations with organs and agencies within
the United Nations system, the Board shall act in
conformity with the responsibilities of the Economic
a11cl Social Co1111cil under the Charter, particularly
those of co-ordi11ation, and with the relationship agreements with tl·.e agencies concerned.
21. The Hoard shall serve as a preparatory committee for futun· st·ssions of the Conference. To that
end, it shall initiate tl1e preparation uf documents,
including a provisional ;1ge11da, for considn:1tio11 by tlw
Conference, as wl'II as 111ake rt'commendations as to
the appropriate dalt' :tnd place for its convening.
22. The Board shall report to the Conference ancl
it shall also n·port anm1ally 011 its activitirs to the
( ;<·neral Assembly through the Economic and Social
Council. The Crnmcil 111:iy transmit to the Assembly
such comments on the reports as it may deem necessary.
23. The Bo:ird shall establish such subsidiary organs
as may be necessary to thl' effective discharge of its
functions. It shall t·st;,hli,h, in particular, 11w following
com111ittet's:
(a) I\ cnmmittt'c· on co11111l<Hliti1·~ wliicli, inter alia,
will carry ,,111 tlw f1111rtions which ar!' now
perfornwrl 1,y t 111· c~.,111n1issio11 on I 11tn11;1t ion;il
Conm1odi1y Tr:1<lc and the lntnim Co-urdin;1ting

Rewlullon■

s

adopted wlthoat reference to a Committee

---- --- ------------------- ----------------,..,-(ii) In the case of proposals bdr,r;e· .1c Yo:ard · t-y
Committee for I nl!'rnational Commodity Arat least five members of th;: C, ,nicrenc •!. whe. ner
rangements. In this connexion, the Interim
or not they are members of the Board;
Co-ordinating Committee shall be maintained
as an advisory body of the Board ;
(iii) In the case of proposals before Committees of
( b) A committee on manufactures ;
the Board, by three members of the Committee.
(c) A committee on invisibles and financing related
The request for conciliation under the present paragraph
to trade. The Board shall give special considerashall be submitted, as appropriate, to the President
tion to the appropriate institutional means for
of the Conference or to the Chairman of the Board.
dealing with problems of shipping, and shall
In the case of a request relating to a proposal before
take into account the recommendations contained
a Committee of the Board, the Chairman of the Comin annexes A.IV.21 and A.lV.22 of the Final
mittee concerned shall submit the request to the
Act of the Conference. 4
Chairman of the Board.
The terms of reference of the latter two subsidiary
( c) Initiation of conciliation by the President or
bodies and any other subsidiary organs established by
Chairman
the Board shall be adopted after consultation with the
appropriate organs of the United Nations and shall
The process of conciliation within the meaning of
take fully into account the desirability of avoiding
the present paragraph may also be initiated whenever
duplication and overfapping of responsibilities. In
the President of the Conference, the Chairman of the
determining the size of the suhsidiary organs and in
lloard or the Chairman of the Committee concerned is
electing their members, the Roard shall take fully
satisfied that the required number of countries as
into account the desirability of including in the memberspecified in sub-paragraph ( b) above arc in favour
ship of these bodies member States with a special
of such conciliation. In cases where the process of
interest in the subject-matter to he dealt with by them.
conciliation is initiated at the level of a Committee,
It may include any State member of the Confcrcnce,
the Chairman of the Committee concerned shall refer
whether or not that State is represented on the Board.
the matter to the Chairman of the Board for action
The Board will determine the terms of reference and
to be taken in accordance with sub-paragraph (f) below.
rules of procedure of its subsidiary organs.
-

VOTING

24. Each State represented at the Conference shall
have one vote. Decisions of the Conference on matters
of substance shall be taken hy a two-thirds majority

of the representatives presrnt and voting. Decisions
of the Conference on matters of procedure shall be
taken by a majority of the representatives present and
voting. Decisions of the l3oard shall be taken by a
simple majority of the representatives present and

voting.
PROCEDURES

25. The procedures set forth in the present paragraph
are designed to provide a process of conciliation to take
place before voting and to provide an adequate basis
for the adortion of recommendations with regard to
proposals o a specific nature for action substantially
affecting the economic or financial interests of particular

countries.
(a) Levels of conciliation
The process of conciliation within the meaning of
the present paragraph may take place under the conditions stated with regard to proposals which are hefore
the Conference, the Board or Committees of the Board.
In the case of Committees of thr Hoard, the procrss of
conciliation shall apply only to thos<' mnttns, if any,
with respect to which a Committee has hren authorized
to submit, without further approval, recommenc\ations
for action.
( b) Request for conciliation
A rt•qurst for conciliation within th1• meaning of th<'
present paragrnph may he made :
(i) In the l':t!lt' of proposals l1t•forc the Confrrcnct•,
hy at lrast ten memht·r~ of the Conft'rcnce;
'See /'rocer,li,1y,f of tht' l!nitl'tl N111i,>11S C1111f rrt"rr on Tr,ufr
OM D111tlofl1t1tnl, vol. I, Final Act and Ueporl (United Nations
publication, Sale. No.: 64.ll.B.1 l), p. 54.

( d) Time for request or initiation of conciliation
The request for conciliation ( or the initiation of
conciliation by the President or the Chairman, as the
case may be) may be made only after the debate on
the proposal has uecu concluded within the organ
concerned and prior to the vote on that proposal. For
the purposes of this provision, the Chairman of the
organ concerned shall, at the conclusion of the debate
on any proposal, afford an appropriate interval for the
submission of requests for conciliation before proceeding
to the vote on the proposal in question. In the event
that conciliation is requested or initiated, voting on the
proposal in question shall be suspended and the procedures provided for below shall be followed.
( e) Subjects

in regard to which conciliation
appropriate or ercludcd

is

The institution of the process of conciliation shall be
automatic under the conditions stated in sub-paragraphs
( b) and ( c) above. The categories in ( i) and (ii)
below shall serve as guidelines:
(i) Appropriate for conciliation shall be proposals
of a specific nature for action substantially
affecting the economic or financial interests of
particular countries in the following fields:
Economic plans or programmes or economic
or social readjustments;
Trade, monetary or tariff policies, or balance
of payments ;
Policies of economic assistance or transfer of

resources;
Levels of employment, income, revenue or
investment ;
Rights or ohligntions under
agreements or treaties.

international

(ii) l'roposals in the following fields shall not
n.'<1uire conciliation:
Any procedural matter;

4,

General AHembly-Nlnc,IPf'ntlt S..11&lon

Any proposal for stucly or investigation,
including such proposals related to the preparation of kgal instruments in the fit>lrl of trad<";
Establishment of subsidiary bodies of the
Board within the scope of its competence;
Recommendations and declarations of a general character not calling for specific action;
Proposals involving action proposed in pursuance of recommendations which were unanimously adopted by the Conference.
( f)

proposal which was the subject of the report of thl'
conciliation co111111ittt·t·, th:1t rt'solntion shall rdl'r
explicitly tu the rq1or1 11f tlw rnnriliation ro111111itt<-1· am!
lo the r,mrlusion rl'arllt'd by thr conciliation ron1111illn·
in the following forn1, as appropriate:
"Notiny tht' report of the Conciliation Committel'
appointed on (<late) ( document number),
"Noting also that the Conciliation Committee [wa~
able to rc;ich an agreement] [ recommends a further period of conciliation] [ was unable to reach
agreement],"

Nomination of a conciluition committee

When a request for conciliation is made or initiated,
the prt'sicling officer of the organ concerned shall
immediately inform the organ. The President of tht'
Confcn·ncc· or the Chairman of the Board shall, as
soon as possible, after cons11ltation with the members
of the organ concerned, nominate the members of a
cont'iliation committee and submit the nominations for
the approval of the Conference or thr Board, as
appropriate.

(g) Si::r and composition of the conciliation committee
The conriliation committee shall, as a rule, he small
in size. Its 111e111hers shall include countries especially
intcrl'stl'd in the mattC'r with respect to which such
conciliation was initiated and shall be s<:lected on an
equitable g<"ographical basis.

(h) Procedure within the conciliation committee and
submissio11 of its report
The conciliation committee shall begin its work as
soon as possible and it shall endeavour to reach
agreement during the same session of the Conference
or the Board. No vote shall take place in the conciliation
committee. In the event that the conciliation committee
is unable to conclude its work or fails to reach agreement at the same session of the Conference or of the
Board, it shall report to the next session of the Board
or of the Conference, whichever meets earlier. I lowcver, the Conference 111ay instruct the conciliation committee appointed by it lo submit its report to the
following- st'ssion of the Conference in the ev<'.nt that
the con1111illec shall not have concluded its work or
shall have failed to reach agreement during the same
session of the Conference.

L.

(i) lixtension

u/ the mandat,· of thr conciliation

(1) l<eports of the /ioard and of the Conference

The reports of the Uoar<l to the Conference and to
the (~encral Assembly and the reports of the Conference to tht' Asseml,ly shall include, inter alia:
( i) The texts of all recommendations, resolutions
and declarations adopted by the Uoard or the
Conference during the period covered by the
report;
(ii) In respect of recommendations and resolutions
which arc adopt,·d after a process of conciliation,
there shall abo ]J(' included a record of the
voting on each rt'Commendation or resolution,
together with the texts of the reports of the
conciliation co111111ittces concerned. In the report,
the record of VCJtin1-: and the texts of the reports
shall normally follow the resolutions to which
they pertain.

(111) Good of]icrs of the Secretary-General of the

Conference
The good offices of the Secretary-General of the
Conference shall be utilized as fully as practicable in
connexion with the process of conciliation.

fundamentaJ
provisions of the present resolution

( n) Proposals involvinr1 rlianqes in the

A process of conciliation sh;ill also be applied under
the terms and conditions laid down above in regard
to any proposal for a recommendation to the General
Assembly which would involve changes in the fundan_1ental provisions of the present resolution. Any questwn as to whether a particular provision shall be
ronsidered fundamental for the purposes of the present
sub-paragraph shall l,e tl<-t(-rmined hy a simple majority
of the Conference or the Board.

committee
SECHETARIAT

A proposal to co11tin11<' a conciliation committee
heyond tlw session at which it is required to r<'port
shall h<' derided hy a si111ple majority.
(j) N,·port t1f the conciliatit1n rum111itt1·1·

Tlw r<"port of tll(' conciliation committee shall
i11dicat1· wlwtlu-r or not the committee was ;ibk to
r<'ach an agrt·e1111·nt and whrther or not the com111itt1·t·
n·co11111u·11ds a furtllt'r pt·riod of conciliation. The report
of tht• ro111111iltt·1· shall lw made available to tlw nwmhers
of tl1t• ( ·1111fn1·11et·.
( k) .·/<11011 t111

Iii,· n·f•orl of the rnnriliation commitlrr

Tiu· rqu,rt of tht· conciliation rn111111itter shall h;1v1·
priority 011 tl1t· ag-1·n1b of the organ to which it is
sulm1ittt-d. If tht- organ adopts a resolution on the

26. Arrangements shall he made, in accordance with
Article IOI of the Charter, fur the immediate establish111t·nt of an aclt'quate. pt'r111anent and full-time secretariat
with_i~ the Unitecl Nations Secretariat for the proper
St'rv1cmg of the Conference, the Board and its subsidiary
hodies.
. 27. Thi' scrrC'tariat shall be headed by the Secretary( ,t·neral of the Conference, who shall be appointed
hy the S<'cretary-(~ent'ral of the United N;itions ancl
confirmed by the Ceneral Assembly.
28. Aclt•r111ate arrangements shall be made by the
Secrl'lary-Ccneral uf the United Nations for clos<'
ro-opera1ion and co-ordination hetwt·c·n the serrC'tariat
of th<' Confrrcnre and the Department of Economic
anti Social Affairs, i11cl11di11g the secretariats of the
regional economic commissions and other appropriate

s

Re1olatlon1 adopted without reference to • Committee

units of the United Nations Secretariat as well as with
the secretariats of the specialized agencies.
FINANCIAL ARRANGJ,:MENTS

'29. The expenses of the Confrrence, its subsidiary
bodies and secretariat shall he home hy the regular
budget of the United Nations, which shall include a
separate budgetary provis!on for such expenses .. In
accordance with the practice followed by the Umted
Nations in similar cases, arrangements shall be made
for assessments on States not members of the United
Nations which participate in the Conference.
FUTURE INSTITUTION AL ARRA NGEMF:NTS

30. The Conference will review, in the light of
experience, the effectiveness and further evolution. of
institutional arrangements with a view to recommendmg
such changes and improvements as might be necessary.
31. To this end the Conference will study all relevant
subjects, inclucling matters relating to the establishment of a comprehensive organization based on the
entire membership of the Unite-ii Nations system of
organizations to deal with trade and with trade in
relation to development.
32. The General Assembly rxpresses its intention
to se1·k advice from the Conference hefore making
changes in the fundamental provisions of the prest'nt
resolution.
1314th plenary meeting,
30 December 1964.

•

•

•

At its 1328th plrnary meeting, on 10 Febru<Jf"y 1965, thr
(;rnrral A.rsrmbfy confirmrd thr appoi11tmrnt by the SerrrfaryCrnrral. 1mdrr .rrrtion IT. paraqraf>h 27. of thr above rrso/11tion, of Dr. Raul PRF.IIISC.H as Secretary-C:mrrnl of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and De11clopmr11t.

ANNEX
A. List of States indicatrd in paragraph 5 (a)
Afghanistan
Alll'eria
Burma
Burundi
Camhodia
! ·ameroon
Cc11tral African Republic
Ceylon
Chad
China
O,ngo ( l!ruzaville)
Congo ( l lcniocr11tic Repuhlk

of)
Dahmney
Ethiopia
(;ahon
<;hana
Cuinra

India
lndoncaia
Iran

Iraq
l~n,d
lv11ry Co:ut
Jordan
Kt'nya

Kuwait
l,ao.,
t.,·li,11wn
Liberia

Libya

Madagascar
Malaysia
Mali
Mauritania
Mongolia
Mor0<·eo

N,·pal
Niger
'.':igeria
I 'aki~tan
l'hilippuu-,
l«-p11hlic of Korea
H<""public of Viet-Nam
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
S,·rn·i,:al
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Afrit-a
S11<l,u1
Syria
Tlmila11d
T111(C•
T1111i,ia
I l~ancla
Unit1:1I Arah Republir.
Unitc·d l(t'tmhlic of T11nzania

l I p 1wr Voltll

\\',-,tt-rn Samoa
Yi<lllt'II
Yu11'01lavia

B. l.ist of State.r indicattd i11 paragraph 5 (b)

Australia
Austria
lll"lgium
1 ·a11.ula
C ·y11rns
l>t·nmark
Fc,leral Republic of (,ermauy
Finland
France
(;rcece
lloly Sec
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Liechtenstein

l ,uxcmbourg
~lonaco
:'\cthcrlands
:'\cw Zealand
Norway
Portugal
San Marino
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern
Ireland
United States of America

C. Li.rt of States indicated iu paragraph 5 (c)
Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Guatemala

Haiti
I londuras
Jamaica
Mexico
:'ll"icaragua
Panama
Paraguay

Peru
Trinidad arnl Tohago
Uruguay
Venezuela

D. List of States indicattd in paragraph 5 (d)

Albania

Poland

Bulgaria

Romania

Ryelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic
Czechoslovakia
I lungary

Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic
Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics

1996 (XIX). Appointment■ to fill vacanciee in
the membership of the Advl■ory Committee
on Admint■trative and Budgetary Queetion■

The General Assembly
1. Appoints the following persons as members of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions:
Mr. Paulo Lopes Correa,
Mr. Mohamed Riad,
Mr. E. Olu Sanu,
Mr. Dragos Serbanescu;
2. Declares Mr. Correa, Mr. Riad, Mr. Sanu and
Mr. Serbanescu to be appointed for a three-year term
beginning on J January 1965.
1328th plenary meeting,
10 February 1965.

•

•

•

.'1.r o rr.svlt of the abm,e af'pointmt,it.,, lht Adt,isory Com1nitlrt o,i Admi,ii.rtrati1,, and R,,dyetary Que.rtion.r will be
compoud a., follouis: Mr. Jan I'. RANNIF.R (Netherlands),
Mr. Al he rt F. B1rn1,t:H ( United Stal,·., of Amrrica), Mr. l{aouf
l\01111JAKIIJI (Algrria), Mr. Paulo Lopes Co11RF.A (/lra::il),
Mr. Andr~ GANI-M (Fra11rr), Mr. James GrusoN (l!nitrd
l<i11ydom of Grtal Jlritain 11ntl Norther,i lrrla11d), Mr. Ha{il
A. J. Qt11JAN0 (Arw111in11), Mr. Mohamed R1Ao ( llnitrd Arab
Nr/'riblic). Mr. E. Olu SAHU (Niyrria), Mr. Dragos SERBANKscu (Romama), Mr. Agha SHAH! (l'akista,i) a,id Mr. V.
F. ULANCHIV (U1'ton of Soviet Socialist Re,ublic.r).
