S/PV.8499

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8499th meeting

Monday, 1 April 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Maas. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Le Drian
Mr. Djani
Sheikh Al Sabah
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Czaputowicz
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security
International humanitarian law

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-09349 (E)
*1909349*

S/PV.8499

International humanitarian law

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I should like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council,
to His Excellency Mr. François Delattre, Permanent
Representative of France, for his service as President of
the Council for the month of March. I am sure I speak
for all the members of the Council in expressing our
deep appreciation to Ambassador Delattre and his team
for the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in
the maintenance of international peace and security
International humanitarian law
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Ministers and other representatives present in the
Security Council Chamber. Their presence today
underscores the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Peter
Maurer, President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, and Ms. Naz Modirzadeh, Professor of
Practice, Harvard Law School.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
This is the first meeting that Germany is presiding
over under our twin presidencies with France. We have
agreed on an ambitious programme of work and are
grateful for Council members’ support.
(spoke in French)
I would like to thank Jean-Yves Le Drian for his
kind cooperation in the preparation of today’s meeting.
Our twin programmes send a strong message about
the unique cooperation between our two countries. As
always, it is a pleasure.
2/25

01/04/2019

(spoke in English)
Before giving the floor to our briefers, I would like
to make a few short remarks. Today we have chosen
a solution-oriented approach that does not focus on
a situation in a specific country. The multitude of
complex and fragmented conflicts around the world
calls for a discussion about what we as States Members
of the United Nations can do to counter violence
against humanitarian personnel, civilians and medical
missions. When we provide humanitarian assistance, it
should be demand-driven and based on humanitarian
principles, and safeguarding the humanitarian space
must be a guiding concern.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: Though we sometimes forget this,
the last 70 years have in fact been relatively peaceful.
The late Hans Rosling pointed out that one reason
for that is that except for reasons of self-defence, war
between States became illegal, thanks to the Charter
of the United Nations. But where conflict persists, it
is civilians who now bear the brunt. Wars have forced
nearly 70 million people to flee their homes. As
combatants in recent times have increasingly resorted
to siege and starvation as weapons of war, and as
conflict has prevented farmers from reaping their
harvests, destroyed vital infrastructure and disrupted
commercial trade, hunger levels have once again
increased after decades of decline. Some 60 per cent
of people affected by food crises now live in conflictaffected countries.
Today’s conflicts are marked by more direct attacks
on humanitarian workers, and on medical workers and
their facilities, than used to be the case. The Aid Worker
Security Database reported 317 attacks on aid workers
last year, which resulted in 113 deaths. The World
Health Organization reported 388 attacks on health
personnel or facilities in 2018, resulting in the deaths
of more than 300 people and injuries to 400 more. In
some places, medical workers also now face criminal
prosecution simply for doing their job of treating sick
or wounded fighters. Increasingly, we see the deliberate
and organized use of rape as a weapon of war. One
in five displaced women who are asked say that they
have experienced sexual violence. Children are being
recruited into armed groups, forced into early marriage
or used as suicide bombers. They are being barred from
education as their schools are attacked or taken over.
The United Nations verified more than 21,000 grave
19-09349

01/04/2019

International humanitarian law

violations of children’s rights in 2017. In towns and
cities, belligerents use explosive weapons designed for
open battlefields, resulting in mass civilian casualties,
enormous destruction of infrastructure and long-term
disruption of essential services. All of these things have
a big impact on humanitarian operations.
First, protracted conflicts and chronic crises
have caused humanitarian needs to spiral. This year,
139 million people are in acute humanitarian need,
most of them because of armed conflict. That is three
times as many as a decade ago. Combatants deliberately
hinder humanitarian operations, slowing them down,
driving up costs and blocking aid from reaching the
people most in need. Violence against humanitarian
workers, including killing, maiming, kidnapping and
abduction, also obstructs humanitarian operations.
International humanitarian law is designed to
minimize human suffering in war, including by
safeguarding humanitarian activities, and therefore
ensuring greater respect for international humanitarian
law is one of the most effective ways to safeguard the
humanitarian space. This year we mark the seventieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions, which are
complemented in important ways by their Additional
Protocols. Many countries have also signed treaties
prohibiting or restricting weapons and enshrining
international criminal law. And this year marks the
twentieth anniversary of the protection of civilians in
the Security Council.
The Council has taken practical steps to safeguard
humanitarian action in the past. The United Nations
peace operations mandated by the Security Council
support and enable humanitarian access and apply
sanctions to those who obstruct it. Resolution 2286
(2016) covers the protection of medical personnel and
facilities in armed conflict. We therefore have a strong
legal framework for safeguarding humanitarian activity
in conflict. The problem is that the fighting parties
and their backers do not always follow it, and this has
grave consequences. I therefore want to offer proposals
in five areas that could generate greater respect for
international humanitarian law and safeguard the
humanitarian space.
First, we should promote policies and practices to
strengthen adherence to international humanitarian
law. That includes endorsing such political
commitments as the Safe Schools Declaration or the
French declaration on the protection of medical and

S/PV. 8499

humanitarian personnel. The Council could seek much
wider endorsement for such commitments. Related
efforts also include developing policy frameworks that
establish the authorities that are responsible for the
protection of civilians, as well as reviewing policies
and practical measures for implementing international
humanitarian law. Examples of that include establishing
civilian-casualty mitigation measures, developing
policies to avoid the use of explosive weapons with
wide-area effects in populated areas and making
arms exports conditional on respect for international
humanitarian law.
Secondly, we should broaden and deepen the
understanding and acceptance of existing rules,
including the Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols. I am sure that Peter Maurer will touch on this
point, but experience has shown that fighting parties
often have an incomplete understanding of international
humanitarian law. Providing training for armed forces
and members of non-State armed groups on how to
respect humanitarian law can help, and Member States
should assist humanitarian organizations in spreading
such knowledge.
Thirdly, we should enable humanitarian and medical
activities. All parties should adopt clear and simplified
procedures to facilitate humanitarian access. They
should establish civil-military coordination platforms or
humanitarian notification systems to facilitate parties’
respect for humanitarian operations. Council members
and other Member States could do more to advocate for
rapid and unimpeded access to people in need, including
by adopting clear, simple, expedited procedures and
by supporting humanitarian organizations to engage
with armed groups for humanitarian purposes. States
can also take practical measures to minimize the
impact of sanctions and counter-terrorism measures
on humanitarian action. The Council is about to hear
a very important presentation on that by Professor
Modirzadeh. In addition, States can adopt measures
to protect medical care, in line with the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations on resolution 2286 (2016).
Those recommendations include, for example, ensuring
legal protection for medical personnel when they
are acting in line with medical ethics and adopting
preventative measures to minimize the impact of
hostilities on medical care.
Fourthly, with regard to compliance, States and the
Security Council could promote the universalization
of international humanitarian law and human rights

19-093493/25

International humanitarian law

S/PV.8499

treaties. The right kinds of incentives and penalties can
boost compliance. For example, sanctions imposed by
the Security Council can be a powerful tool to promote
compliance and States can exert their diplomatic,
political and economic influence over parties to a
conflict in order to strengthen compliance.
Finally, regarding accountability, States certainly
need to do much better in holding individuals to account
when they commit serious violations of international
humanitarian law. For example, by adopting legislation
that encompasses the full range of international crimes
and jurisdiction over them and by strengthening the
national capacity to carry out impartial, independent
investigations into allegations of war crimes and,
crucially, to prosecute suspects when the evidence
justifies such a step. Where national accountability
systems are insufficient, there should be more support
for international or hybrid accountability mechanisms,
including the International Criminal Court. Supporting,
financially or otherwise, the systematic collection,
analysis and documentation of evidence of violations
of international humanitarian law is very important as
part of that process.
Lastly, let us never forget that accountability for
serious violations of international humanitarian law is
required by law.
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Lowcock

for

I now give the floor to Mr. Maurer.
Mr. Maurer: I am grateful for the opportunity to
address the Security Council today.
The shape of conflict has undergone rapid
transformation in recent years and the result is a heavy
price being paid by tens of millions of women, men and
children around the world. They suffer the immediate
impact, namely, death, injury and displacement,
and often the invisible harms, such as psychological
trauma, sexual violence and the loss of missing family
members. In today’s wars, a vast array of armed
forces, special forces, armed groups, terrorist groups
and criminal gangs now fight directly or by proxy and
openly or secretly. Conflicts and protagonists cross
State borders. Battles are fought in populated areas,
risking thousands of civilian lives and destroying
critical infrastructure. Wars often involve partners
and allies, leading to a dilution of responsibility, the
fragmentation of command chains and an unchecked
4/25

01/04/2019

flow of weapons. That only increases the climate of
impunity and, ultimately, causes yet more suffering.
With the absence of political solutions, wars are
increasingly protracted, with year after year of violence
and turmoil, embedding resentments and deepening
fragility. When I speak with families who are living
through the realities of war and violence today, they
often asked why this has happened and how this has
been allowed to happen. Humanitarian action is often
desperately needed in such miserable situations.
Throughout the operations of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), we see that neutral,
independent and impartial humanitarian action has the
best chance of reaching those most in need. It is also a
tried and tested formula to prevent humanitarian action
being appropriated for larger and more controversial
political agendas.
Yet in many places across the world, the space for
impartial humanitarian action is under threat. Human
dignity is disregarded, the applicability of the law is
questioned, and humanitarian aid is politicized and
deliberately hijacked for political gain or the control of
populations. Terrorist attacks, indiscriminate by nature,
are destroying the very notion of proportionality,
precaution and distinction, which are at the core of
behaviour in combat.
Moreover, neutral and impartial humanitarian
action is hindered by complex sanctions regimes
and counter-terrorism measures. Humanitarian
organizations are increasingly placed under pressure as
both States and non-State armed groups hold civilian
populations and humanitarian actors to ransom in order
to achieve their goals.
But humanitarian organizations do not exist to
endorse, to legitimize or to help the authorities further
their political objectives. The ICRC works to help
States live up to the obligations to which they have
signed up, not to help them circumnavigate them.
When the principles of impartiality are breached and
humanitarian action is curtailed, families such as the
ones I meet go hungry, fall sick and are left vulnerable
to abuse. It is no wonder that they are asking why.
Today we are also witnessing a shift in the
perception of international humanitarian law and
protection work. International humanitarian law does
not rely on reciprocity. It applies even if an opponent
fails to comply. It relies on a consensual understanding
19-09349

01/04/2019

International humanitarian law

among belligerents that there are limits to war and that
there must be a neutral and impartial humanitarian
space in which those not participating in hostilities
are protected. Those who deny the space deny the very
essence of the law.
The Geneva Conventions are not up for negotiation.
They reflect, in normative language, the tested practice
of societies over time. They are customary law and
must guide practical action. They are a tool and a
reliable basis on which to facilitate trust and dialogue,
allowing for consensus-building among belligerents.
For example, agreements have been brokered with
regard to those who have gone missing during war,
bringing news to traumatized families on each side, or
exchanging the remains of the dead. Such agreements,
facilitated throughout a neutral and independent space,
can be the first steps in building trust and in forming
other arrangements to lessen people’s suffering, such as
the exchange of detainees, family contacts across front
lines and others.
With political actors increasingly occupying the
humanitarian space, humanitarians must find practical
ways to fulfil our mission in today’s more complex
environment. Front-line humanitarian negotiators are
rapidly becoming more critical in building support
for humanitarian action. Through the Centre of
Competence on Humanitarian Negotiation, the ICRC
has been building systematic knowledge and networks
of professional negotiators to develop more adaptive
strategies and practices in field operations today.
It is the task of the international community to
fiercely defend and protect principled humanitarian
action. We ask that States take the following very
practical steps, that is, that they fight any attempt to
instrumentalize, manipulate or politicize principled
humanitarian action. Humanitarian access must not
be unlawfully denied or withheld, especially when
people’s basic needs are going unmet. While neutral
and impartial organizations, such as the ICRC, in
accordance with the Geneva Conventions, have the right
to propose humanitarian action to States, States have an
obligation to facilitate such action unless constrained
by valid security concerns.
We ask that States fight the double standards that
delegitimize law and weaken its protective force. Politics
is about the different priorities of States, and we well
understand how difficult it is in today’s international
arena to harmonize their positions. The humanitarian

S/PV. 8499

space is about respecting the law to which they have
already agreed consensually, not about abusing the
law to make a political point. We ask, therefore, that
States lead by example and steadfastly respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law.
Individually or in partnered military operations,
this means using their positive influence to ensure
the proper application of the rules on the conduct of
hostilities, the protection of civilians and medical
facilities, and the humane treatment of detainees. We
ask that States train and instruct their own troops and
the troops of their partners so that they know the law
and how to respect it, that they vet and oversee with
appropriate structures, processes and mechanisms the
combat operations in which they and their partners
are involved, and that they put in place accountability
mechanisms that ensure respect for the law.
With regard to the proliferation of arms, we urge
that States ensure that safeguards and precautions are
in place and that no weapon is transferred if there is a
clear risk that it would be used to violate international
humanitarian law. We ask that hostilities be conducted
in a manner that protects civilians and with respect
for the basic principles of distinction, precaution and
proportionality and that their operational guidance and
those of their partners concretize these principles for
combat operations. Of particular concern is the use
of explosive weapons. The ICRC sees the enormous
civilian cost of bombing and shelling, including death
and physical injury, but also long-term damage to
critical civilian infrastructure.
We ask all parties to an armed conflict to refrain
from using explosive weapons with wide-area effects
in populated areas owing to the significant likelihood
of indiscriminate effects. To support these efforts of
leadership on international humanitarian law, the ICRC
is preparing an international humanitarian law road
map, to be adopted at the International Conference of
the Red Cross and Red Crescent in November. We are
looking forward to working with States and national
societies on pledges for the respect and implementation
of international humanitarian law.
The noose is tightening on humanitarian action.
We have seen some positive steps, including consistent
increases in humanitarian funding levels and the
recognition that counter-terrorism measures must
be compliant with international humanitarian law
obligations. The recent resolution 2462 (2019) is a case
in point. Its implementation at the domestic level will

19-093495/25

International humanitarian law

S/PV.8499

be a crucial step towards preserving a humanitarian
space in domestic counter-terrorism regulations.
But our license to operate should not be up for
debate. It has already been guaranteed. The mission to
protect and aid civilians during times of armed conflict
was universally agreed 70 years ago, in the Geneva
Conventions. We call on States to step forward and
reaffirm this mission, not only in words but through
urgent and concrete actions.
The President:
Ms. Modirzadeh.

I

now

give

the

floor

to

Ms. Modirzadeh: I appreciate the opportunity
to share some of my reflections on the intersections
between international humanitarian law and counterterrorism measures. My primary objective here is to
raise key considerations to help inform this afternoon’s
discussion. I will focus on the importance of ensuring
that counter-terrorism measures, including measures
adopted by the Security Council, do not inhibit the
principled humanitarian action foreseen in, or required
by, international humanitarian law. I will also focus
on steps that the Council can take to further safeguard
humanitarian action and strengthen compliance with
international humanitarian law.
In short, I am concerned that counter-terrorism
measures may be interpreted and applied in ways that
might ultimately diminish commitments to principled
humanitarian action. I urge the Council to build on
a recently adopted resolution by taking more robust
and more concrete steps to ensure implementation of
the extensive and vital international humanitarian law
protections for principled humanitarian action. In this
regard, settings where counter-terrorism measures
may overlap with situations of armed conflict warrant
particular attention.
The common story about the relationships between
counter-terrorism frameworks and international
humanitarian law presents these regimes as sharing
a unitary purpose. This story tells us that these
frameworks are alternative sets of norms created to
solve the same problems. Under this narrative, which
I believe misapprehends the fundamental purposes
of these frameworks, any divergences between these
regimes can be managed merely by technical or legal
solutions. I ask the Council to consider an alternative
approach — namely, that the challenges that I discuss
here may require political solutions crafted by Member
States. Let me explain.
6/25

01/04/2019

International humanitarian law is a body of treaty
and customary rules, drafted and ratified over the
course of more than a century. States have developed
international humanitarian law as the primary legal
framework designed to regulate the exceptional
situation of armed conflict. Under international
humanitarian law, some forms of violence, irrespective
of who undertakes them or for what purposes they are
undertaken, are not unlawful in themselves so long
as the conduct comports with the applicable rules.
International humanitarian law regulates means and
methods of warfare in respect of all parties to armed
conflict. It also permits — and even demands — that
principled humanitarian action be undertaken in armed
conflict. These rules are designed, first and foremost,
to protect civilians and other non-combatants.
In comparison, counter-terrorism measures aim
to prevent, suppress and punish acts characterized
as terrorism. Building on sectoral conventions and
regional treaties, since 2001 the Security Council has
taken the lead in regulating terrorism globally. But that
is only part of the picture. As several recent reports
have detailed, the increasingly complex web of counterterrorism measures encompasses an ever-growing
range of laws, policies and prevention initiatives. This
framework contrasts with the relatively narrow and
specific purview of international humanitarian law.
When these two regimes come into contact with
one another, tensions may emerge between them. For
instance, international humanitarian law foresees that
humanitarian actors may provide impartial medical care
to wounded fighters hors de combat as well as provide
life-saving goods and services to civilian populations
under the de facto control of non-State parties to
armed conflict. Yet under several counter-terrorism
frameworks, these same activities are characterized as
illegitimate and unlawful.
Where principled humanitarian action is
considered to constitute a type of illegitimate support
for terrorism, counter-terrorism measures may inhibit,
or even impede, the work of humanitarian actors in
wide-ranging and consequential ways.
Those actors may thus experience difficulties
in providing relief and protection in line with
humanitarian principles. Humanitarian actors may
become understandably wary of engaging in conduct
that they believe can expose them to legal liability, and
they might accordingly limit or halt their operations.
19-09349

01/04/2019

International humanitarian law

Nevertheless, to maintain operations where needs are
greatest, humanitarian actors have taken diverse steps
and invested extensive resources in seeking to comply
with counter-terrorism requirements while adhering to
humanitarian principles.
For their part, researchers have gathered evidence
of the impact of counter-terrorism measures. For
example, in 2017 the Harvard Law School Program on
International Law and Armed Conflict carried out a
pilot empirical survey study. The study represented an
initial attempt to gather concrete data regarding these
matters. Sixty-nine per cent of survey respondents
indicated that counter-terrorism measures had curtailed
their work. In my view, the question is not whether
counter-terrorism measures might adversely affect
principled humanitarian action, but the scope and scale
of that impact.
Alongside other bodies, the Security Council itself
has increasingly recognized some of these possibilities
and the imperative to safeguard principled humanitarian
action in counter-terrorism contexts. For example,
in 2010 the Council established a limited sectoral
humanitarian exemption in relation to the Somalia
sanctions regime. The General Assembly, in the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review — first in 2016 and
again in 2018 — urged States to guard against counterterrorism risks to humanitarian and medical activities.

S/PV. 8499

address the diverse and consequential ways that counterterrorism measures and international humanitarian law
protections for principled humanitarian action may
conflict in practice.
In conclusion, I wish to urge the Security Council
to expand upon and prioritize its efforts to safeguard
principled humanitarian action. As the many
Government officials and policymakers in the Chamber
today will know from first-hand experience, counterterrorism measures may prove very difficult to amend
once they have been instituted. Any tension with the
agreed norms of international humanitarian law should
be of urgent concern to the Council. Consequently,
it is imperative to ensure that counter-terrorism
measures at all levels are crafted and implemented in
ways that respect principled humanitarian action and
do not degrade it. I therefore urge the Council to take
several steps.
First, the Council may wish to guard against overly
broad and vague notions of what constitutes unlawful
support to terrorism, including in its own practice
concerning designated individuals and entities.
Secondly, the Council and its subsidiary bodies may
wish to ensure that none of the activities that underlie
principled humanitarian action form part or all of the
basis for subjecting individuals or entities to sanctions
or other restrictive regimes.

Furthermore, four days ago, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2462 (2019), on counterterrorism financing. That resolution directs Member
States to ensure that their domestic laws and regulations
establish “serious criminal offenses” related to the
provision of certain kinds of financial support to
terrorist organizations or individual terrorists. The
resolution also demands that Member States ensure that
all measures taken to counter terrorism comply with
their obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law.

Thirdly, the Council may wish to urgently consider
comprehensive exemptions for principled humanitarian
action that are grounded in a steadfast commitment to
international humanitarian law.

On the one hand, the adoption of the resolution
reaffirms the Council’s commitment to the centrality
of international humanitarian law as a matter of
international peace and security. Yet, on the other
hand, the Council is in a position to do much more.
For example, consider the generic references by the
Council to complying with international humanitarian
law and other applicable rules of international law while
combating terrorism. While important in principle,
those references do not sufficiently comprehend and

The President: I thank Ms. Modirzadeh for
her briefing.

Fourthly, and above all, the Council may wish
to uphold and ensure respect for hard-won legal
protections for principled humanitarian action amid the
tumult of war. Far too much is at stake for the millions
of people suffering in armed conflict for it to pursue
anything else.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
I call on the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait.
Sheikh Al Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me to begin, Mr. President, by congratulating
you and the Federal Republic of Germany on assuming

19-093497/25

S/PV.8499

International humanitarian law

the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of April. I would also like to congratulate and thank
His Excellency Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian and the
friendly Republic of France for the able stewardship
of the Council in March. I also thank today’s
briefers — Mr. Peter Maurer, Mr. Mark Lowcock and
Ms. Naz Modirzadeh — for their comprehensive and
enlightening briefings on what could be considered one
of the most important current issues, namely, promoting
the rule of law and providing humanitarian protection
in line with international humanitarian law.
As members know, the year 2019 marks
the seventieth anniversary of the 1949 Geneva
Conventions. In the light of the current international
situation, with ongoing armed conflicts in several
regions of the world, the issue of promoting the rule
of law, in particular international humanitarian law,
has become more important than ever before. The four
Geneva Conventions and their Protocols Additional
thereto provide the legal framework for humanitarian
protection in wars and armed conflicts. However,
it is also important to realize that, although the
Conventions have been universally ratified, regrettably
they are not adhered to or respected as required. The
world has continued to witness neglect and blatant
disregard concerning the texts of those Conventions in
recent times.
Amid fighting and bloodshed, which have regrettably
become the headlines of many of today’s conflicts, we
are witnessing record levels of humanitarian suffering.
As we heard earlier in the briefing made on behalf
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, international humanitarian needs have reached
record levels. For example, as we meet today, more than
130 million people throughout the world are in need of
humanitarian assistance and protection.
The Israeli occupation of the Arab territories,
including Palestinian land, which has lasted for more
than five decades, is considered a blatant violation of
international norms and conventions. Israel’s practices
and policies are a blatant violation of international law.
They include the expansion of existing settlements and
an unprecedented level of construction of new ones. Such
prolonged occupation has had a permanent negative
impact on the daily lives of the Palestinian people for
decades, in violation of the principles of international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. That
was clearly stated in the conclusions of the independent
international commission of inquiry on the protests in
8/25

01/04/2019

the occupied Palestinian territory, which found that
Israeli soldiers committed violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
during the demonstrations in connection with the Great
March of Return. As confirmed by the commission,
some of those violations are tantamount to war crimes
and crimes against humanity.
In Syria, where the crisis is entering its ninth
year, we have witnessed the most reprehensible
violations of international humanitarian law, through
the continued and deliberate targeting of civilians and
their property, as well as public facilities. Moreover, we
have witnessed the ongoing obstruction of the efforts of
humanitarian agencies and organizations delivering aid
to those who need it regularly. How can we end those
violations and alleviate the considerable humanitarian
suffering in conflict areas? The answer to that question
is the essence of today’s discussion, namely, we need
to promote the rule of law and respect humanitarian
principles during armed conflict. However, the more
important question is, how will we achieve that?
First of all, the United Nations, in general, and
the Security Council, in particular, have an important
and pivotal role to play in guaranteeing adherence
to international humanitarian law and in promoting
the rule of law. That is accomplished by ensuring the
full implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, especially in the context of protecting
civilians in armed conflict, and by adherence to
international humanitarian law on the part of parties to
a conflict and the international organizations working
on the ground. Moreover, United Nations peacekeeping
forces have a responsibility to protect civilians by taking
the necessary measures to guarantee such protection
within their mandated tasks for camps of internally
displaced persons and ensure medical evacuation for
the wounded, as well as strengthening the capabilities
of national police forces to enable them to perform
their duties.
The perilous security environment in which some
United Nations forces operate may require that they use
force in self-defence. It is therefore important for United
Nations forces to abide by all the relevant international
rules, including international humanitarian law where
applicable. Furthermore, parties to a conflict and
international organizations working in the field must
respect international humanitarian law. It is also
important to guarantee accountability for war crimes,
genocide and crimes against humanity. We must
19-09349

01/04/2019

International humanitarian law

condemn all human rights violations by any party to
conflict and ensure that those who target civilians in
any way are held accountable. Unfortunately, impunity
is one of the main features of today’s conflicts,
which has served to encourage the commission of
the most blatant violations of every basic principle of
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions.
We nevertheless commend the efforts of the
General Assembly and the Security Council in adopting
the measures necessary to ensure accountability
with regard to many of the items on the Security
Council’s agenda, including the establishment of the
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011. The State of Kuwait was one of the sponsors of
General Assembly resolution 71/248, which established
the Mechanism. We also support the establishment
of an independent mechanism to hold accountable
those who have committed crimes against the Muslim
Rohingya minority in Myanmar. In addition, we
commend the unanimous adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 2379 (2017), which calls for the
establishment of an independent team to investigate the
crimes perpetrated by the group known as Da’esh and
hold it accountable for the heinous acts it committed in
Iraq. Those and similar mechanisms are important to
guarantee an end to impunity. Ensuring accountability
and prosecuting persons having violated human rights
and international humanitarian law are key to achieving
sustainable peace.
This morning’s discussions at the Arria Formula
meeting on the protection of humanitarian and medical
personnel, which you convened, Mr. President,
demonstrate the importance of adhering to international
law. As Member States, we shoulder the responsibility of
implementing them more comprehensively by adopting
specific and pragmatic measures, including the
exchange of expertise and best practices among States
and the coordination of efforts in terms of adhering
to international humanitarian law. In that regard, we
note that the State of Kuwait supports the political
declaration proposed by the Republic of France on the
protection of medical personnel in conflict zones.
At the national level, the State of Kuwait carries out
a number of capacity-building and training activities in

S/PV. 8499

the area of international humanitarian law. We recently
hosted the eighth regional workshop on international
humanitarian law for Arab judges, in collaboration
with the Kuwait Institute for Judicial and Legal Studies
and the International Committee of the Red Cross. The
State of Kuwait will continue its close cooperation
with interested stakeholders to spread the culture of
respect for, and the implementation of, international
humanitarian law.
The Charter of the United Nations aims
“to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought
untold sorrow to mankind”.
Unfortunately today, seven decades after its signing, the
scourge of war continues to cause sadness and sorrow
throughout many of the world’s societies and States. We
must never forget the Preamble of Charter, which states
that the peoples of the United Nations are determined
“[t]o ensure, by the acceptance of principles and the
institution of methods, that armed force shall not be
used, save in the common interest”.
In conclusion, I reaffirm that the State of
Kuwait stands fully ready to work towards ensuring
accountability and justice, as well as our commitment
to the basic principles of international law, especially
international humanitarian law.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Europe and Foreign Affairs of France.
Mr. Le Drian (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I to express to you, Sir, my support for the German
presidency, wish it every success and underscore
the powerful, as well as operational, symbolism
represented by the consecutive French and German
presidencies. For together with our friend Mr. Heiko
Maas, we wanted for the Security Council to act so as
to safeguard what we refer to as humanitarian space, or
the ability of humanitarian workers to carry out their
work safely and effectively in accordance with the
principles of impartiality, flexibility and independence.
The first condition necessary for ensuring the
sustainability of that space is respect for international
humanitarian law. The 1949 Geneva Conventions,
whose seventieth anniversary we will commemorate
on 12 August, bear the mark of the history of our two
countries — France and Germany — and the tragedies
that have punctuated our shared history and that of our

19-093499/25

S/PV.8499

International humanitarian law

continent. As Mr. Maurer, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), mentioned earlier,
the Geneva Conventions and their Protocols Additional,
of which we call for the universal ratification, are today
violated in many conflicts. Certain parties go so far
as to intentionally integrate their violation into their
military strategies. Humanitarian workers and medical
infrastructure are being deliberately attacked to deprive
people of any relief and to secure their surrender. That
was the topic of the Arria Formula meeting that we
convened this morning. We are also witnessing the use
of starvation and sexual violence as weapons of war,
as well as the recruitment of child soldiers, which is
intended to achieve the same goal — to win faster by
maximizing the human cost of the conflict.
Improved compliance with international humanitarian
law requires in particular three types of action to which
the Security Council can contribute: first, ensuring
access for humanitarian aid to populations in need;
secondly, developing preventive measures; and, lastly,
combating impunity.
First, humanitarian personnel must have access to
civilians, which means that they must be protected from
all forms of violence and threats. It is unacceptable that
in South Sudan and the Central African Republic, for
example, humanitarian workers and aid convoys are
targeted. We must also take measures to ensure that
humanitarian personnel are not unduly prosecuted
for activities conducted in strict compliance with
humanitarian principles. That is a key element with
regard to the credibility of our collective commitment
to combating terrorism.
Secondly, the Council shoulders the responsibility
for preventing violations of international humanitarian
law. That is what we do when we place the protection
of civilians, including women and children, at the
core of peacekeeping missions, such as the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. Sanctions are a deterrent tool that must
be used more systematically against violations of
international humanitarian law, in particular against
those responsible for sexual violence. Moreover, France
stands particularly ready to make attacks against
humanitarian personnel a designation criterion in
10/25

01/04/2019

sanctions regimes, such as is now the case concerning
the Central African Republic.
I had an opportunity to remind the Council of
the imperative of protecting children associated
with armed forces and groups. I am pleased that the
Dominican Republic and Djibouti have endorsed the
Paris Principles and the Paris Commitments since the
call for their universalization at the open debate of the
Security Council in October 2017 (see S/PV.8082). The
Security Council must also ensure that the non-United
Nations forces it supports conduct their operations in
strict compliance with international humanitarian law,
which, for example, is made possible by the human
rights compliance framework of the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel, which the Security Council
has supported with the goal of limiting the impact of
the Force’s operations on civilians.
It is also up to States to lead the way. With regard
to France, international humanitarian law is the rule
of conduct for all its operations, and it is integrated
as soon as the planning phase, as currently illustrated
by Operation Barkhane in the Sahel, where we
maintain close dialogue with the ICRC. International
humanitarian law is an integral part of our security and
defence cooperation, in particular through the training
provided to military and civilian staff in national
regional schools in Africa, including in conjunction
with the ICRC.
I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement
and the International Committee of the Red Cross,
which, as guarantors of the Geneva Conventions, play
an essential role in the fight for the dissemination and
implementation of international humanitarian law.
Thirdly, let me address the fight against impunity.
We must do everything we can to strengthen national
capacities and ensure systematic, impartial and
independent investigations and, where national
mechanisms are insufficient or inadequate, support
the use of international mechanisms. In that regard,
France reiterates its call for the universalization of the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and
congratulates Malaysia on its recent accession.
A unit has been set up in France that is specifically
responsible for war crimes and crimes against
humanity. International cooperation, in particular
among European judicial authorities, the Commission
of Inquiry and the International, Impartial and
19-09349

01/04/2019

International humanitarian law

Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, led to
the arrest in February of three former members of the
Syrian intelligence services, as part of a Franco-German
investigation, and the issuance of international arrest
warrants against senior officials of the repressive
Syrian apparatus. It must be possible to systematize
that type of cooperation.
Our discussions today prove the need for
international mobilization to safeguard and strengthen
the humanitarian space. That is why Mr. Heiko Maas and
I have decided today to launch a call for international
mobilization for humanitarian action, to be known as
the Humanitarian Call for Action, which we hope will
lead to the adoption of a declaration of commitment
by States on the margins of General Assembly at its
next session.
Conflicts are becoming increasingly long and
complex, while their impact on civilian populations
is as severe as in the era of major global conflicts. In
the face of that situation, international humanitarian
law constitutes a remedy, and sometimes the last
resort, against arbitrariness. It is up to us to remind
ourselves that its application is not a moral option, but
a legal obligation.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Poland.
Mr. Czaputowicz (Poland): I would like to begin
by thanking the French delegation for its leadership in
March and congratulate it on its successful presidency.
I wish every success to Germany during the month of
April. Let me also thank our briefers for their insightful
introductory remarks.
Today’s meeting is of particular importance for
Poland. Poland has pursued its membership in the
Security Council with three main priorities — first,
strengthening international law; secondly, promoting
the protection of civilians in armed conflict; and,
thirdly, advocating for the peaceful settlement of
disputes. Poland had the privilege of presiding over
the Security Council’s work in May of last year. We
organized two high-level open debates — on upholding
international law within the context of the maintenance
of international peace and security (see S/PV.8262)
and on the protection of civilians in armed conflicts

S/PV. 8499

(S/PV.8264). Both debates focused on international
humanitarian law.
Today’s briefing constitutes the continuation of the
Council’s efforts to talk about the situation of those
affected by conflicts and work out ways to relieve
their suffering. Allow me to share a few comments
regarding my country’s perspective on three challenges
for international humanitarian law — implementation,
development and partnership.
First, Poland strongly supports the implementation
of international humanitarian law, in particular regarding
the strengthening of the protection of civilians. The
goal of minimizing the suffering of the victims of wars
and conflicts cannot be reached without safeguarding
humanitarian aid. International humanitarian law
serves those who are affected by atrocities. It must also
be an effective tool for those who provide humanitarian
assistance. For that reason, we decided to join the
political declaration on the protection of humanitarian
and health workers in conflict. We will continue our
efforts to enhance the protection of humanitarian and
medical personnel.
As we all know, international humanitarian law is
one of the areas of international public law with the
greatest number of multilateral treaties. The great
codifications that emerged in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries in the form of The Hague and
Geneva Conventions were among the most significant
law-making initiatives in modern international law. It is
said that each new Geneva convention appears one war
too late. Newer and newer conflicts proved that there
were a number of gaps and inconsistencies relating to
the Conventions, which forced a natural regulatory
reflex — the need to engage in codification efforts
after the end of each conflict to amend and supplement
existing treaty regulations.
While respecting the heritage of treaties, we need to
think progressively. For example, the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians have set out a framework
for all Member States to improve the capacity of peace
operations to protect civilians and could be considered
a code of conduct to be followed by all involved in
peacekeeping operations.
We believe that a comprehensive awareness of basic
rules flowing from international humanitarian law,
such as the protection of civilians in armed conflicts,
should be spread among all State and non-State actors.
Awareness-raising activities in that regard are therefore

19-0934911/25

S/PV.8499

International humanitarian law

essential at both the national and international levels.
Activities in the areas of education, training and media,
including social media, are particularly important in
today’s world.
Secondly, when it comes to the development of
international humanitarian law, Poland is strongly
committed to the strengthening of international
humanitarian law, as reflected in our activities. Since
the beginning of the intergovernmental process to
strengthen respect for international humanitarian law
eight years ago, Poland has supported the establishment
of a stand-alone forum of States to enable a discussion
on international humanitarian law on a regular basis
and the sharing of best practices among States in
its implementation and dissemination. Despite the
commitment of numerous States, consensus on that new
international humanitarian law compliance mechanism
has not been reached. We call on all States to support
that initiative.
Thirdly, close cooperation with the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) provides
a good example of partnership in the service of
international humanitarian law. Poland signed a
memorandum of understanding with the ICRC in the
area of humanitarian assistance and international
humanitarian law. At the national level, we have
been engaged in a partnership with the Polish Red
Cross, including in the field of education. Every year,
Polish authorities organize a five-day annual course
with the Polish school of international humanitarian
law. The course is intended for different groups of
recipients — students, professional commissioned
officers and members and volunteers of the Polish Red
Cross and other non-governmental organizations. The
Professor Remigiusz Bierzanek competition, another
Polish initiative, grants awards to the best papers on
international humanitarian law and provides students
and graduates in law, international relations and similar
disciplines an opportunity to present their work to a
wider community of specialists. And, next June, we
will organize the Warsaw Humanitarian Expo 2019.
We hope to have all stakeholders on board while
coordinating efforts with a view to achieving the
worldwide observation of humanitarian law. The Expo’s
Humanitarian City will be a platform for representatives
of non-governmental organizations, international
institutions and academia to explore issues related to
the legal obligations of humanitarian actors.
12/25

01/04/2019

In conclusion, I want to reiterate that upholding
and strengthening the principles of international
humanitarian law remain core obligations of the United
Nations and its Member States. Poland will continue
its engagement in that regard for the remainder of its
membership in the Security Council and beyond.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, as
your country assumes the presidency of the Council for
the month of April, and to welcome you to New York
as you preside over this open meeting. I would also like
to congratulate France on its outstanding presidency
last month. We very much appreciated the excellent
work that was accomplished. Lastly, I want to thank
the President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Maurer; Under-Secretary-General Lowcock;
and Professor Modirzadeh for their briefings.
At present the international and regional security
landscape remains grim. Armed conflicts persist in
various regions, with civilians bearing the brunt as the
chief victims. It is therefore very important to ensure
compliance with international humanitarian law,
especially with regard to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. In that connection, the existing
provisions of international humanitarian law, including
the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their two Additional
Protocols of 1977, are sufficient. The international
community has maintained a strong focus on them and
has abided by them. That said, the implementation of
international humanitarian law is still fraught with
multiple challenges, and today I would like to focus on
the following points.
First, we must stay committed to resolving disputes
through peaceful means and addressing the protection
of civilians at the source of the problems. The
fundamental purpose of compliance with international
humanitarian law is to ensure the protection of
civilians, and effectively preventing armed conflict
represents the best possible protection for civilians.
The Security Council should actively encourage
preventive diplomacy and political mediation in order
to promote the use of peaceful means, such as dialogue
and negotiations, to overcome differences among the
parties, with a view to seeking political solutions
while preventing and de-escalating tensions, thereby
protecting civilians from the scourge of war.
Secondly, we must abide by the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, as well as
19-09349

01/04/2019

International humanitarian law

the guiding principles for United Nations humanitarian
assistance. No country should use humanitarian
pretexts to undermine another’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. When carrying
out humanitarian relief operations, it is crucial to
follow the principles of humanity, justice, neutrality
and independence, emphasize the humanitarian
character and professionalism of such efforts and
avoid being drawn into a conflict or interfering in the
domestic affairs of the countries concerned. China
commends the International Committee of the Red
Cross for its conduct. All humanitarian agencies should
work to observe international humanitarian law and
related principles effectively and refrain from using
the delivery of humanitarian assistance for political,
military or other purposes.
Thirdly, the international community should work
in concert to promote and strengthen international
humanitarian law. Governments bear the primary
responsibility for protecting their own civilians,
and the international community should provide
constructive assistance only at the request of the
countries concerned. All parties to a conflict should
understand and abide by international humanitarian
law, implement Council resolutions on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, fulfil their obligations
to protect civilians and ensure humanitarian access.
United Nations peacekeeping operations should make
greater efforts to promote and publicize international
humanitarian law and Security Council resolutions, and
the Council should work on preventing sanctions from
adversely affecting humanitarian relief operations.
Fourthly, the Governments of the States concerned
and the parties to a conflict have a duty to protect the
safety and security of medical personnel and facilities.
Medical personnel and humanitarian workers who risk
their lives to deliver life-saving goods and services are
the people who make humanitarian operations possible,
and the Governments concerned should take effective
measures to strengthen their protection of such
personnel and facilities. All the parties to a conflict
should abide by international humanitarian law and
fulfil their obligations to protect medical personnel
and facilities. In the event of attacks, threats or acts
of violence against medical personnel and facilities in
armed conflict, the countries concerned should conduct
investigations with a view to bringing the perpetrators
to justice in accordance with the law. The international

S/PV. 8499

community should provide support and assistance on a
basis of full consultations with the countries concerned.
As an important participant in and contributor to
the international humanitarian law regime, China has
played an active role in international humanitarian
relief efforts led by the United Nations and has scaled
up its assistance every year to the extent it is able. We
have continually formulated and refined the relevant
regulations in the various mechanisms for implementing
the provisions of international humanitarian law. China’s
naval escort squadrons have cooperated with many
countries in carrying out international humanitarian
relief activities. We attach importance to strengthening
cooperation on humanitarian assistance with United
Nations agencies and civil-society organizations and
stand ready to continue to play a constructive role in
that field.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome you, Sir, and Germany, in your
capacity as President of the Council, and we thank France
for a very productive presidency in March. We are also
grateful to our briefers, Mr. Lowcock, Mr. Maurer and
Ms. Modirzadeh, for their very interesting comments.
The formulation of a body of rules relating to
international humanitarian law is one of the major
accomplishments of the twentieth century. Humanity,
including in armed conflict — indeed, on the
battlefield — is a hallmark of civilized behaviour.
Unfortunately, in the almost 74 years since the end of
the Second World War, the Security Council has had
to address the issue of strengthening the institutions of
international humanitarian law again and again. It is
our job to make sure that the authority of international
humanitarian law is not undermined, and in order to
do that it is essential to refrain from adopting selective
approaches or double standards in which some parties’
violations are flagged and the crimes of others are
passed over in silence. Incidentally, the President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
addressed that issue very eloquently.
It is also our job to work to constantly strengthen
the existing mechanisms in the area of international
humanitarian law. We believe there are enough of
them at present. That was also confirmed by the
outcomes issued two weeks ago, on 15 March, of the
intergovernmental process on strengthening compliance
with international humanitarian law based on the
resolution on the subject adopted at the thirty-second

19-0934913/25

S/PV.8499

International humanitarian law

01/04/2019

Conference of the ICRC. We believe that the problems
with implementation that we are always hearing about
are not because international humanitarian law is weak
but because people are not prepared to put its principles
and standards into practice.

for humanitarian organizations and the provision of
medical care in areas of armed conflict and counterterrorist activity. Through concerted efforts the Council
found a balanced way to word it. Protection, according
to paragraph 24 of the resolution, is to be given to

Against a background of persistent armed conflicts,
humanitarian assistance is of primary importance,
and protecting humanitarian and medical personnel
is one of the most crucial aspects of the issue of the
protection of civilians. Every party to a conflict is
responsible for their safety. Russia will continue to urge
the parties to conflicts to take all necessary measures
to ensure the safety of providers of humanitarian and
medical assistance.

“exclusively humanitarian activities, including
medical activities, that are carried out by impartial
humanitarian actors in a manner consistent with
international humanitarian law”.

However, we should point out that we should
exercise great precision and caution in discussing the
many proposals for involving the Security Council in
the architecture of ensuring that the perpetrators of
international humanitarian law violations are brought
to justice. A number of States have shown recently that
they are less and less interested in the reliability of data
determining the identity of perpetrators of various evil
deeds of one kind or another. What they are interested
in is something else entirely.
One of the main prerequisites for the effective
protection of workers from humanitarian organizations
and medical personnel is their compliance with the
guiding principles of international humanitarian
assistance, including respect for sovereignty and
the humanitarian, impartial and neutral nature of
their provision of humanitarian assistance. Medical
and humanitarian workers in areas of conflict must
abide by the laws of the country they are in. That is
a fundamental truth. It is unacceptable for medical
and humanitarian organizations to openly provide
assistance to terrorists and carry out their inhumane
plans, as the White Helmets are doing in Syria. Such
pseudo-humanitarian activities, which amount to a
manipulation of the topic of medical and humanitarian
assistance in armed conflict, will end up undermining
the systems of international humanitarian law and
will backfire by damaging the authority of genuine
humanitarian and medical workers.
Last week, when the Security Council was working
on the draft of resolution 2462 (2019) on combating
the financing of terrorism — which, incidentally, has
produced a big response — one of the main issues
discussed was that of ensuring unhindered access
14/25

By the way, we are very grateful to the International
Committee of the Red Cross for drawing attention to
this whole issue and for its contribution to the process.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
France on its impeccable leadership of the Security
Council for the month of March. We wish Germany
every success in April, and I would like to thank both
delegations for organizing this important briefing.
We also welcome the presence of the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait
and the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Germany,
France and Poland, and acknowledge and appreciate the
important briefings by Mr. Maurer, Mr. Lowcock, and
Professor Modirzadeh.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea notes with
concern the increasing complexity of armed conflicts
and the growing challenge they pose to civilians and
to humanitarian assistance for the 139 million people
who need it. We thoroughly deplore the persistence of
armed conflicts in which civilians are always the worst
affected. In that regard, we condemn the attacks on the
most vulnerable population groups — children, young
people, women, the disabled, refugees and displaced
persons. We are also outraged by the increasing attacks
on health workers and their facilities.
International humanitarian law recognizes the
principle of State sovereignty, which Equatorial
Guinea supports. States should play the leading role in
providing relief to communities and individuals under
their jurisdiction. However, if for any reason their
ability to do so is constrained, they can ensure that
those affected by the crisis have access to protection
and assistance through international humanitarian aid.
Respect for international humanitarian law should not
necessarily imply a lack of respect for State sovereignty.
On the contrary, the two concepts should be perfectly
compatible. International humanitarian law and
humanitarian principles are clear in that regard. For
19-09349

01/04/2019

International humanitarian law

that reason, Equatorial Guinea urges the parties to
ongoing armed conflicts to comply with international
humanitarian law, including the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and their two Additional Protocols of 1977,
in order to prevent and limit devastating humanitarian
situations, the escalation of armed conflicts and
the radicalization of their victims, especially young
people. In that regard, we call on humanitarian actors
to respect the guiding principles of international
humanitarian assistance so that they are perceived as
neutral, independent and impartial service providers,
particularly in politically controversial environments.
At the global level, there has been significant
progress in the promotion of international humanitarian
law and humanitarian principles. The Security Council
has embedded humanitarian principles in several
resolutions on armed conflict and starvation, children
and armed conflict, Ebоlа in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the prevention and combating of the
financing of terrorism, among others that Equatorial
Guinea is honoured to have supported. The protection
of civilians in armed conflict is also integrated into
the mandates of many peacekeeping missions and the
training of forces participating in them. The SecretaryGeneral’s reports on children and the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and their corresponding
lists are helping to generate greater awareness, traction
and results. That is still not enough, however, because
armed conflicts continue and their natures change.
Among the most serious challenges to the
promotion of international humanitarian law today,
three stand out — the politicization of humanitarian
activities, the resulting lack of trust in humanitarian
organizations and the unidirectional approach to this
important task. Humanitarian activities are politicized
when there is political pressure on humanitarian
organizations and States with regard to the financing
and use of humanitarian assistance and, in certain
cases, some counter-terrorism measures, owing to the
growing nexus between terrorism, armed conflicts
and transnational organized crime. As a result,
national authorities and non-State armed actors
distrust humanitarian assistance and its agents, and
increasingly resist the presence of certain humanitarian
actors, which leads to the imposition and exploitation
of restrictions on humanitarian activity.
The unidirectional approach to promoting respect
for international humanitarian law in all regions
and States limits their ownership. It is important

S/PV. 8499

to remember that concepts similar to international
humanitarian law and many of its principles already
exist in many cultures. In Africa, there are Somali
war conventions and Fulani customs, among others,
that are part of African customary humanitarian law,
as described by legal scholars such as Yolande Diallo
and Emmanuel Bello, among others. In that connection,
efforts to promote, adhere to and ensure compliance
with international humanitarian law could be more
effective if we built on existing analogous principles
in order to encourage their ownership, recognition
and defence by local groups. Greater participation and
representation on the part of all regions and States in
developing and implementing that agenda is important.
In that regard, we also encourage support for the
implementation of African initiatives in that field such
as the 2009 African Union Convention for the Protection
and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in
Africa, the work of the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union and the African Union Peace and
Security Strategy. We recognize and encourage the
increasingly important United Nations-African Union
Joint Task Force on Peace and Security as well as the
collaboration between the International Committee of
the Red Cross and such non-governmental organizations
as African Humanitarian Action.
Equatorial Guinea reaffirms that, in order to
find lasting solutions to today’s urgent humanitarian
situations, the root causes of armed conflicts, such as
underdevelopment, geostrategic ambitions, illegitimate
access to the natural resources of other States, the
unjust international order, inequality, marginalization
and social exclusion, inter alia, must be addressed.
Equatorial Guinea further reaffirms that, at all stages of
the humanitarian-assistance process, the politicization
of humanitarian assistance must be avoided.
As the interpretation of humanitarian principles is
difficult in practice, the need for critical discussion and
ongoing debate is essential. In this regard, we believe
that the strengthening of international humanitarian
law should contribute to respect for the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law in terms of the sovereignty, territorial
integrity of States, the self-determination of peoples
and non-intervention in the internal affairs of States.
Any humanitarian intervention must have the consent
of the recipient country.

19-0934915/25

S/PV.8499

International humanitarian law

Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We
congratulate Germany on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of April and thank
France for its productive presidency during a very
busy month of March. We also thank the briefers and
welcome the Ministers who are joining us today.
We thank the President and Minister Le Drian
for convening this morning’s Arria session and this
afternoon’s briefing on safeguarding humanitarian
space. The topic is vital to improving our ability to
save lives and ease the suffering of millions of people
affected by conflict around the world today. The United
States strongly believes that full implementation
of international humanitarian law by all parties to
a conflict is the best way to provide protection for
civilians, including humanitarian personnel. We also
believe that additional guidelines and policies should
avoid inadvertently diluting principles of humanitarian
assistance. Unfortunately, we know that the laws of
war are not always universally observed, with grave
consequences for civilians in need of protection and
humanitarian assistance. Mr. Maurer and Mr. Lowcock
know these consequences all too well.
The United States pairs its role as the world’s
largest single largest humanitarian donor with strong
diplomatic efforts to promote respect for humanitarian
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence. We do this by speaking out against
States that impede humanitarian organizations from
meeting basic human needs. We have consistently
called on the Syrian regime to implement the many
Security Council resolutions calling for unimpeded
humanitarian access across that country. Nonetheless,
the Al-Assad regime continues to obstruct aid to those
in need, including in areas under the regime’s control.
We do this by condemning physical attacks directed
against humanitarian personnel. South Sudan has for
many years consistently ranked as the most dangerous
place in the world for aid workers with blatant disregard
for protections that should be afforded to them as
civilians by all parties to the armed conflict. Attacks
on health facilities and responders, including recent
incidents in the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of Congo are unacceptable. They
must end. We do this by opposing resolution language
that would require the “full consent” of affected States
for the delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in
need. States that use humanitarian access as a cudgel
to deny starving women and children of food and water
16/25

01/04/2019

or prevent desperate people from having access to
life-saving medical care cannot be allowed to rely on a
resolution by the United Nations to justify their actions.
And we do this by correcting outrageous, dangerous
and baseless allegations against humanitarian workers
like those Russia consistently levels against the heroic
White Helmets in Syria.
Many of us are deeply engaged in protecting
humanitarian space, but we can all do more. The United
States supports efforts to widely disseminate accurate
information about international humanitarian law
among all parties to conflicts. A thorough understanding
of international humanitarian law in principle and
practice is fundamental to the training of United States
military personnel at all levels. We further integrate
international humanitarian law topics and principles
into training that we provide to international military
partners. For example, international humanitarian
law principles are actively addressed in peacekeeping
predeployment training that we provide to partner troop
and police contributors deploying to United Nations
and regional peace operations. The work that the
United States has undertaken to ensure that civilians,
civilian infrastructure and humanitarian locations and
personnel are protected in some of the world’s most
fraught conflicts is important, but it cannot replace the
full adherence to international humanitarian law by all
parties to conflict.
We encourage Member States to engage more
closely with non-governmental and faith-based
humanitarian actors that can provide valuable
insights about how to ensure the most vulnerable are
protected and receive assistance. We welcome the joint
initiative between Switzerland and the International
Committee of the Red Cross aimed at strengthening
the implementation of international humanitarian law,
which included multiple rounds of dialogue designed to
allow States to share best practices in a non-politicized,
non-country-specific setting. We hope this type of
exchange can continue.
Finally, the United States calls on Member States
to implement domestic frameworks, including counterterrorism laws and sanctions, in a manner consistent
with their obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and international refugee law.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, at the beginning of my statement,
19-09349

01/04/2019

International humanitarian law

I would like to extend to you my best wishes for a
successful German presidency of the Security Council
and to thank you for organizing this briefing on the
challenges of international humanitarian law and the
strengthening of international peace and security. I
also extend my warm congratulations to France for
its outstanding leadership of the Council’s work over
the past month, and welcome the continuing presence
among us of Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister for
Europe and Foreign Affairs, who has been with us, I
believe, for five days, demonstrating the importance
of our work here in the Security Council. Finally,
allow me to thank the distinguished briefers, whose
relevant briefings and recommendations further inform
the Council on the correlation between respect for
international humanitarian law and the strengthening
of international peace and security.
The presence of new entities, in addition to State
actors, in crises around the world has fundamentally
changed the typology, motivations and thus the very
meaning of the notion of “conflict” that prevailed at
the time of the creation of the United Nations. These
new actors, whose methods of combat pay very little
attention to the norms of international law and the
values of humanism that underpin our common action,
operate outside the agreed codes of the law of war. In
this way, the various forms of violence against civilians,
schools, hospital infrastructure and humanitarian
personnel are nowadays part of the sad range of warfare
methods used by parties to some current conflicts.
Furthermore, rather than waiting for these horrors to
occur before repressing them, the collective conscience
of humankind is called upon to promote the preventive
dimension of international humanitarian law through
the establishment of mechanisms aimed in particular
at the prevention of genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity.
Côte d’Ivoire considers that the recurrent violations
of the rules of international humanitarian law now
constitute obstacles to the restoration and preservation
of international peace and security. Indeed, respect for
this legal corpus governing hostilities and reconciling
the aims of war with the principle of humanity is today
the instrument par excellence for protecting victims
against abuses and atrocities committed during armed
conflicts. That is why my country is of the opinion that
scrupulous respect for the principle of distinction, the
cornerstone of international humanitarian law, must
be imposed on all belligerents. All parties to an armed

S/PV. 8499

conflict must, at all times and in all places, distinguish
between civilian populations and combatants on the
one hand, and between military objectives and civilian
objects on the other. In the light of the foregoing, Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes the decision of the Security Council
to make the prevention of armed conflict an integral
part of its primary responsibility in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Violations of international humanitarian law in
armed conflicts around the world have caused many
tragedies to humankind, whose collective conscience
still bears the wounds. That is the case particularly in
Africa, the Balkans and the Middle East.
In the context of the principle of the responsibility to
protect, it is therefore incumbent on States, individually
and collectively, to act in order to promote the rule of
law and respect for international humanitarian law with
a view to maintaining international peace and security.
In accordance with that obligation, Côte d’Ivoire has
signed all the relevant international legal instruments,
in particular the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
their Additional Protocols.
In implementation of its international commitments,
in 1996 Côte d’Ivoire established the national
interministerial commission for the implementation
of international humanitarian law, which, among other
work, is entrusted with the following tasks: to ensure
compliance with international humanitarian law and
its effective implementation; to consider and develop
laws and regulations in areas where national legislation
needs to be supplemented or amended and submit them
to the Government; to ensure the implementation of
international law; and to encourage the promotion,
dissemination and teaching of international law.
As part of its peacebuilding strategy, my country
has also worked to strengthen the national legal and
institutional system for promoting the rule of law
through the establishment of the national human rights
council, which monitors and supports State action in
the area of human rights.
In addition, Côte d’Ivoire pays the greatest
attention to the awareness-raising and training of its
police and military contingents with a view to their
deployment through training modules on human rights
and international humanitarian law.
During its term on the Security Council, in
partnership with the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Côte

19-0934917/25

S/PV.8499

International humanitarian law

d’Ivoire worked for the adoption of resolution 2417
(2018), which condemns the use of hunger as a weapon
of war and calls on all parties to conflict to protect
civilian infrastructure, including that which is critical
to the delivery of humanitarian aid.
With regard to the action of the international
community, my country believes that the inclusion and
primacy of international humanitarian law, in particular
respect for civilian infrastructure and the protection
of humanitarian personnel, in ceasefire and peace
agreements should ensure the greater responsibility of
their signatories to respect human rights.
Finally, it is incumbent on the Council to ensure
the implementation of the principle of accountability
in combating human rights violations and mass crimes.
At this point in my remarks allow me to pay
a warm tribute to the United Nations specialized
agencies, in particular the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the World Food
Programme, the International Committee of the Red
Cross and all the other humanitarian agencies around
the world.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire would like to recall
that the Charter of the United Nations has provided
for valuable instruments to strengthen the rule of
law, particularly through the powers entrusted to
the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
International Court of Justice. We therefore encourage
all Member States to promote an international order
based on multilateralism with a view to ensuring
respect for international humanitarian law, which
represents the last layer of protection for humankind
against barbarism, thereby helping to make this world a
haven of peace and security.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, allow me to
welcome, Sir, Germany’s presidency of the Security
Council for this month, to which I look forward. I
would like to express our sincere appreciation for the
excellent presidency of France last month. Indonesia
greatly appreciates your initiative, Mr. President, to
convene this very important meeting, which conveys
the importance of the humanitarian space in armed
conflict. I would also like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock
and Mr. Peter Maurer, as well as Ms. Naz Modirzadeh,
for their briefings, which provided us with a great deal
of information.
18/25

01/04/2019

According to the report of the Secretary-General
of May 2018 (S/2018/462), active hostilities and
logistical challenges continue to impede the delivery of
humanitarian aid. Armed conflicts have now become
even more protracted and challenging, including
interlinkage with counter-terrorism measures. I
therefore note that preserving the humanitarian space
to facilitate assistance to those in need demands our
increased efforts. It requires our sensitivity and
engagement with all parties involved in armed conflict.
Against that backdrop, allow me to focus on three points.
First, building trust is of crucial importance
to ensure prompt and unhindered humanitarian
assistance. Without trust all is for nothing. That
recalls that the primary responsibility to protect the
population throughout its whole territory lies with
the national Government. We must therefore respect
the sovereignty of the legitimate Government and, of
course, gain the trust of the respective Governments
and the people, including the affected communities
where we are present.
International humanitarian law also offers pragmatic
direction that takes into account the sovereignty and
security requirements of States. Ensuring the delivery
of humanitarian assistance requires engaging with
all parties to the conflict, both State and non-State
actors. It is critical to manage dialogue and to seek
a durable political solution. The message must be
clear, namely, that our presence is not to judge but to
assist. Humanitarian personnel are there to support
the national authorities in showing greater respect for
international humanitarian law.
That brings me to my second point, on the
importance of our collective efforts to safeguard the
humanitarian space, for no single Government can
resolve this alone. Together, we can act expeditiously,
swiftly and effectively from the very outset to help
the affected communities, providing basic needs,
life-saving supplies and essential health care.
Together, we should also be flexible in our approach
to engagement without sidelining humanitarian
principles. It is not easy to deal with certain conflicting
parties. Flexibility sometimes becomes part of the
success in gaining confidence, thereby preserving the
humanitarian space. Indonesia vigilantly upholds the
principles of inclusivity and non-discrimination in its
consultation with all segments of society, including the
military, and in the provision of humanitarian assistance.
19-09349

01/04/2019

International humanitarian law

My third point concerns the safety and security of
humanitarian and medical personnel, since, working
directly with communities every day, they often face
life-threatening risks in carrying out their mission. Such
a situation may also delay, or even disrupt, an effective
delivery of humanitarian assistance. Safety and access
for peacekeepers are a must and should be honoured by
the conflicting parties. We must also ensure that United
Nations peacekeepers are well equipped before their
deployment to conflict areas. That includes training
on international humanitarian law and respect for the
core principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality
and independence.
Indonesia will host another regional conference
on humanitarian assistance in 2020. That will also be
a platform for sharing best practices to better protect
humanitarian and medical personnel.
On that note, the Security Council should explore
ways to find more sustainable and context-appropriate
actions in safeguarding the humanitarian space, in line
with resolutions 2175 (2014) and 2286 (2016). There is
no one-size-fits-all approach to delivering humanitarian
assistance. But it must be delivered.
Let me conclude by emphasizing that we have
an obligation to save lives. We need to ensure that
humanitarian assistance is provided to fulfil that
noble intention.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on Germany’s
assumption of the Security Council presidency for
April. South Africa will support Germany as you lead
the Council through the month. We would also like to
warmly thank the French presidency for its work in the
month of March, including the Council’s visit to Mali
and Burkina Faso. In addition, I would like to welcome
the presence of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Kuwait, Poland, France and Germany here among
us today.
I would also like to thank the briefers, Mr. Maurer,
Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Modirzadeh, for their insightful
briefings on such an important topic as the promotion
and strengthening of the rule of law, particularly
international humanitarian law. We particularly
took to heart the issues raised by the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
The seventieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions and the Protocols Additional thereto

S/PV. 8499

provides us an opportunity to reassess our commitment
to international humanitarian law and humanitarian
principles, notably the principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence.
In this regard, the applicability of international
humanitarian law in conflict situations remains relevant
in order to preserve humanitarian space in order to
facilitate impartial humanitarian action, including
the provision of the necessary medical treatment to
all parties to conflict and the delivery of life-saving
supplies and assistance to the civilian population.
It is for this reason that South Africa considers
the attacks on humanitarian workers and medical
practitioners in conflict situations to be serious
violations of international humanitarian law and
encourages States to push back to prevent these
incidents from becoming the norm in conflict areas.
To that end, South Africa resolved to embark on
a project to champion the cause of “Health care in
danger” by creating public awareness in collaboration
with the ICRC office in Pretoria. Having witnessed
the dangerous conditions under which humanitarian
workers and medical practitioners are working in war
zones without protection, South Africa wishes to align
itself with the efforts and endeavours of the States
members of the international community in seeking to
address this dire situation.
The changing nature of armed conflict, from
inter-State to intra-State, requires adherence
to international humanitarian law by parties to
non-international conflict so as to ensure the greater
protection of the civilian population. All actors to armed
conflict, including foreign troops, in particular during
partnered operations or more general partnerships with
other States or armed groups to support the conduct of
military operations, ought to abide by the provisions of
international humanitarian law.
The United Nations could play at least three
important roles with respect to the implementation of
international humanitarian law.
First, during peacetime, it is important for the
United Nations to assist Member States, at their request,
in cooperation with the International Committee of
the Red Cross, with the dissemination of international
humanitarian law instruments and their codification
into domestic legislation, and, in cooperation with
other United Nations organs and organizations, with the

19-0934919/25

S/PV.8499

International humanitarian law

01/04/2019

entrenchment and enhancing of respect for international
human rights law.

Protocols Additional thereto as they continue to guide
the actions of parties during armed conflict.

Secondly, the United Nations should continue to
play a vital role in monitoring compliance with, and
the prevention, stopping and punishment of violations
of, international humanitarian law and applicable
international human rights law during times of armed
conflict. It is important to note that a proactive
approach of dissemination and education should be the
primary focus, not a reactive approach where action is
taken only following grave breaches of international
humanitarian law.

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): Allow me at the outset to congratulate France
on its presidency of the Council over the past month and
to assure Germany of our full support for its presidency
this month.

Thirdly, States must adopt, ratify and codify in their
national laws the Geneva Conventions and the Protocols
Additional thereto. Auditing, improving, reinvigorating
and accelerating implementation is equally as crucial.

But the reality is quite different. We all know
that the norms of international humanitarian lower
are being increasingly flouted, as was noted by other
speakers this afternoon. The issue of safeguarding the
humanitarian space, the topic of our meeting today,
shows very clearly the main challenge that we are
facing. Humanitarian actors all too frequently have
to deal with major obstacles in the framework of their
activities in conflict areas.

Given South Africa’s active role in peacekeeping
and conflict-resolution processes, the Government has
made efforts to train, and integrate practical measures
for, the armed and security forces, in partnership with
humanitarian organizations, to enhance knowledge of
and compliance with international humanitarian law.
We encourage other States to consider similar measures.
In addition, South Africa, together with the ICRC,
co-hosts annually a regional conference at which
participants from the Southern African Development
Community, the East African Community and
the Economic Community of West African States
are represented and where the implementation of
international humanitarian law by various countries
is discussed.
Just as national Governments have the primary
responsibility to ensure the safety and protection of their
civilians, national courts also have a clear obligation
to bring perpetrators of violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law to
justice under national laws that support implementation.
In conclusion, South Africa firmly believes that
the full implementation of and respect for international
humanitarian law leads to reduced casualties and
promotes the protection of the critical civilian
infrastructure essential for emergency assistance
during conflict as well as part of the long-term recovery
of societies affected by conflict. We stand ready to
partner with the relevant actors, in particular the
ICRC, to commemorate this year’s anniversary so as
to give prominence to the Geneva Conventions and the
20/25

As has been recalled, on 12 August we will mark
the seventieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions,
four universally ratified treaties with no fewer than 196
States parties, that is, more than the number of States
Members of the United Nations.

So how can we strengthen the implementation of
international humanitarian law? Belgium would like to
share with the Council five good practices.
First of all, we must promote the dissemination
of information about the norms of international
humanitarian law. National humanitarian law
commissions play a key role in that regard by providing
advice and assistance to the public authorities. The
Belgian national commission was created in 1987, so it
is one of the oldest ones around. It is prepared to share
its experience with States wishing to establish similar
bodies. I would like to also underscore the central role
played by the national Red Cross and Red Crescent
societies in the dissemination of information about
international humanitarian law in their capacities as
auxiliaries to the public authorities.
Secondly, it must be ensured that there is adequate
training of the armed forces on this issue. We in Belgium
make certain that international humanitarian law is part
of the curriculum in the training of military personnel.
We also invest in training troop-contributing countries
on the protection of civilians, including in French.
Thirdly, States that provide support to parties to an
armed conflict, be it in the framework of a coalition
of States or through support for a non-State armed
group, must ensure that they bring pressure to bear on
19-09349

01/04/2019

International humanitarian law

the combatants so that the latter abide by the norms of
international humanitarian law.
Fourthly, we must prohibit measures within the
framework of combating terrorism that impede the
work of humanitarian organizations, whose activities
are neutral, independent and impartial. It is therefore
essential to take into account the potentially adverse
effects on the humanitarian situation of the policies
we adopt against terrorist groups operating in war
zones, as well as sanctions measures that could have a
negative impact on carrying out humanitarian work in
specific contexts.
Fifthly, in line with their obligations under
international humanitarian law, it is incumbent upon
States to have the necessary means to ensure that the
perpetrators of violations are accountable for their
actions, thereby serving as a deterrent for committing
atrocities. It is for that reason that combating impunity
is important. In that regard, I would point out the
contribution of the International Criminal Court in
combating impunity for the most serious crimes,
including war crimes.
The Security Council also has a key role to play. It is
in a position to encourage the training of peacekeepers
in the field in the area of international humanitarian law,
provide adequate space for international humanitarian
law in the efforts to rebuild the rule of law in post-conflict
situations, inscribe on sanctions lists perpetrators of
the most serious crimes and make better use of existing
monitoring and investigative mechanisms.
In the face of the hundreds of daily casualties in
armed conflict, it is the duty of us all to renew our
commitment to respect international humanitarian law.
That is why we welcome the initiative announced in
that regard by Ministers Le Drian and Maas.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): As our briefers made
clear, and as we all know, international humanitarian law
consists of a comprehensive and universal framework
to which all Member States are not only committed
but bound. It is important, of course, that we enhance
that framework whenever we see an opportunity to do
so — and our briefers today mentioned resolution 2462
(2019), adopted just last week at the initiative of the
French delegation, on the issue of terrorist financing,
which includes important provisions on humanitarian
action; as well as resolution 2417 (2018), on starving
civilians as a weapon of war. But we do not lack law, we
lack enforcement and accountability. Sadly, we are too

S/PV. 8499

regularly used to hearing terrible humanitarian stories
around this table. Time and time again, from Syria to
South Sudan to Yemen and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo — in fact, in every conflict situation on
the Council’s agenda — we witness the human cost
of the lack of respect for humanitarian principles and
international humanitarian law.
The most appalling incidents become notorious and
are brought not only to our attention by those agencies
and operators on the ground, but also often brought to
our peoples on their television screens — for example,
attacks on aid workers or the bombing of hospitals.
But we hear much less about the routine and insidious
actions that nevertheless have a human cost in the end.
I am talking about such things as the denial of visas
for humanitarian staff, the removal of medical items
from aid convoys, lengthy procurement and transport
processes, the looting and diversion of pre-positioned
goods by armed actors or the authorities, taxes and
fines on goods and people, the closure of crossings,
and the denial of registration to non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). There is a long list.
The human coast is clear. People starve, they
suffer and they die when the humanitarian space is not
respected. And we lose development gains that have
taken years to achieve. To give one example from South
Sudan, which we have talked a lot about in the Council,
an international NGO with an in-country staff of fewer
than 200 people estimates that it spends approximately
$350,000 per year in South Sudan on administrative
taxes and fees. Those financial costs are primarily paid
to official or quasi-official entities. That is all money
that should be going to protecting the people that those
officials are in place to serve.
As well as documenting attacks on humanitarian
personnel or other egregious crimes, we need to gather
data on the bureaucratic impediments and the actions
that hamper humanitarian access. In that respect, let me
commend the work that the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs is doing to map out how
access constraints relate to the severity of needs and
the humanitarian assistance received. Let me also say
that the United Kingdom is supporting research to
ensure that the nature, frequency, scale and impact of
attacks on health care in conflict is better understood
to improve data collection analysis, as called for in
resolution 2286 (2016). All of that data should be
brought to the attention of the Security Council and its
subsidiary bodies.

19-0934921/25

S/PV.8499

International humanitarian law

For its part, the United Kingdom is always looking
for any innovative ways to promote compliance
with international humanitarian law. On 11 March,
we published our first voluntary report on the
implementation of international humanitarian law at
the domestic level. Publishing specific examples of
our practice to implement international humanitarian
law is intended to help improve understanding of it
and encourage informed dialogue on these issues, both
at home and abroad. We hope it will encourage other
States to publish details of their activities to implement
international humanitarian law at the domestic level so
as to identify best practices and improve implementation
and compliance.
Of course, more can be done by State actors. Mark
Lowcock talked about the importance of increasing
the understanding and training of some countries’
armed forces. But he also spoke about the need to do
so with non-State actors — a point made also by Peter
Maurer. I think this is an area to which the Security
Council could give greater focus. We could look both at
education and training and ensuring that commanders
are aware of their liabilities under international law,
whether those are State or non-State actors, and look at
tackling actions of non-State actors through sanctions
in particular.
I had not intended to talk today about Syria,
which the Council regularly discusses. But the
Russian representative today chose to continue his
Government’s misinformation campaign against the
White Helmets. The Russian Government does so to try
to deflect attention away from the appalling war crimes
committed by the Syrian regime — its attacks on its
own people, including by its use of chemical weapons.
Therefore, let us not have our attention deflected from
the fact that Physicians for Human Rights corroborated
553 attacks on medical facilities in Syria in 2018, of
which 498 were committed by the Syrian regime and
its allies.
It is very welcome, Mr. President, that you
organized this briefing today. All here have reaffirmed
their commitments. Good ideas have been shared by
our briefers and by colleagues. However, I am struck
by the contrast between our willingness to stake out a
clear position in the abstract while at the same time not
tackling humanitarian violations in country-specific
conversations. In addition to today’s meeting, I think
that we need to do the following.
22/25

01/04/2019

First, we must ask for, gather and then discuss
data about not just the most egregious violations of
international humanitarian law but also the bureaucratic
impediments and interference with humanitarian
assistance, which kill so many of those in most
desperate need.
Secondly, we must ensure that the United
Nations system is able to support States in spreading
understanding of international humanitarian law
and training armed forces, and Government officials
more broadly.
Thirdly, we should consider how such understanding
and training could be expanded to non-State actors and
ensure they also are held to account.
Fourthly, we could call out consistently violations
of international humanitarian law by all actors
in our regular business and our country-specific
conversations — whether on South Sudan, Syria,
Myanmar or elsewhere.
Fifthly, we could put greater attention on
humanitarian violations when designing and
implementing sanctions regimes.
And, sixthly, we should push consistently for an
accountability mechanism where States cannot, or will
not, act.
As Mr. Maurer said, upholding international
humanitarian law depends on our common acceptance
that there are limits to war. We all, therefore, have
a stake in upholding and strengthening it for our
common humanity.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): Allow me, at the outset, to commend
you, Mr. President, for having convened this meeting
and to congratulate you on assuming your presidency
for the month of April. You have the support of the
Dominican Republic, just as we extended to France
during the month of March, for the same values unite
our three countries.
It is more necessary today than ever to address the
problems and challenges involved in the protection and
defence of our humanity. I am referring to the sentiment
that we are, in the end, one single humankind. In the
Dominican Republic, our interpretation of that concept
is very simple. The suffering of any woman who has
fled violence more than once; the desolation felt by
any family that is gradually dying of hunger and the
19-09349

01/04/2019

International humanitarian law

lack of access to medicine; the girl who is forced into
marriage as the only way of surviving; the child who
has no access to education or the woman who has been
raped again and again — we cannot remain indifferent
in the face of all this. No human suffering is alien to us.
That was the case when, in the Second World War,
the Dominican Republic was one of the few countries
to welcome a group of Jewish families who found an
oasis of protection and tolerance in our small country.
We were no strangers to that principle when we were
the first to offer assistance to our brother country Haiti
after the devastating earthquake there in 2010. That is
why we are here today in the Council to help restore
optimism, hope and the desire to build a better future
to the millions of people affected by armed conflict or
other humanitarian emergencies.
I sincerely thank today’s briefers and take this
opportunity to express to them and to thousands of
humanitarian workers and volunteers our gratitude
and admiration for the work they carry out day after
day, keeping alive those principles that mobilized
and promoted the adoption and subsequent universal
ratification of the Geneva Conventions.
Every day, we witness the tragic consequences of
multiple and diverse forms of violations of international
humanitarian law. In many cases, humanitarians are
called on to respond to new and more complex types
of violence and forms of warfare. However, far from
calling into question the relevancy of the principles
contained in the Conventions, we believe that these
violations have further deepened the need to defend
them and demand compliance with them by the parties
to armed conflicts. It is precisely the failure to comply
with these rules and principles that has led to a world
that is steeped in suffering but has fallen short in its
ability to enforce them.
The region of Latin America and the Caribbean has
not been unaffected by the consequences of conflicts
and other, non-traditional forms of violence. Many of
those did not exist at the time of the adoption of the
Geneva Conventions and perhaps do not fall within the
scope of application of international humanitarian law,
but they do have humanitarian consequences and raise
important challenges to the protection and alleviation
of the suffering of the most vulnerable among us.
The Dominican Republic, despite living in peace,
is concerned with the strengthening of humanitarian
action at the international, regional and national levels.

S/PV. 8499

It therefore strives to increase the capacities of all
humanitarian actors, including their military assets. In
that regard, between 2001 and 2019, 34,315 Dominican
military personnel have completed 637 courses and
training classes in international humanitarian law
and human rights in our highest military academy of
strategic studies. Of those courses, 50 per cent focus on
human rights, the use of force and women and armed
conflict, among others. Another 12,836 personnel
have been trained in issues related to international
humanitarian law and human rights.
We also maintain significant cooperation with
our brother countries of Central America in the
framework of the Central American Armed Forces
Conference (CFAC), comprised of the armies of El
Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and the Dominican
Republic. Through that cooperation, 2,640 military
personnel from those nations have been trained in our
country in international humanitarian law. CFAC is a
regional organization founded, inter alia, to promote
the strengthening of peace processes, democracy and
development in the countries of Central America,
coordinate efforts to involve the population in
emergency situations, and participate in humanitarian
and peacekeeping operations in the framework of the
United Nations.
We believe that this is an excellent example
of a response to one of the questions posed in the
concept note prepared for this meeting, as it meets the
need to disseminate understanding of international
humanitarian law and humanitarian principles and
to create spaces for exchanges and the training of
humanitarian actors among the active military personnel
of our countries. We hope to expand this programme
even further and to create a platform for military and
civilian training that will improve the understanding
and implementation of international humanitarian
law, including the humanitarian principles involved
in achieving better and more effective coordination
in Latin America and the Caribbean, particularly
that aimed at meeting the needs of people affected by
natural disasters in the region.
In conclusion, it is our responsibility as States to
place people at the centre of all of our actions, as we
are all part of a single humankind. This includes those
who serve in humanitarian situations. We must seek to
establish mechanisms that will allow us to address the
new challenges around humanitarian action in urban
areas affected by new forms of violence. It is everyone’s

19-0934923/25

S/PV.8499

International humanitarian law

responsibility to continue advocating vigorously and
tirelessly to ensure that the perpetrators of violations of
international humanitarian law pay the consequences of
their actions. Impunity is the reflection of indifference,
and indifference leads only to more violations, more
suffering and greater and worse consequences for the
peace and development of our peoples.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, we commend last month’s French presidency
for its efficient work in leading the Council. We wish
the German presidency every success and welcome the
presence of the German Federal Minister for Foreign
Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Heiko Maas, as well as the
other high authorities present today.
We also thank the
informative presentations.

briefers

for

their

In this year commemorating the seventieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions, which enshrine
the regulation of hostilities and ways to alleviate
the devastating consequences of armed conflicts,
Peru reaffirms its commitment to international
humanitarian law and its proper implementation, as
well as to international human rights law. We affirm
this in a context in which these legal regimes are
violated on a regular basis, which is why we stress the
urgent need for the Council to fulfil its legal obligation
and primary responsibility to act in unity and put an
end to the suffering of millions of people in regions
throughout the world. This should be complemented by
effective action to promote sustainable peace — that is,
activities to prevent, combat the root causes of conflict,
strengthen institutions and promote the rule of law.
Peru is a signatory to the foundational international
instruments of law of armed conflict, the provisions
of which are duly developed and implemented in our
domestic legal system, including the ongoing training
of national authorities — in particular, our armed forces
participating in peace operations — and the generation
of measures to improve the protection of civilians. In
that regard, we highlight the primary responsibility of
every State to protect its population; when this does
not occur, the international community has the duty
to assume that responsibility, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.
Moreover, in accordance with resolution 2286
(2016), we reject all types of attacks against medical
facilities and humanitarian workers, which constitute
war crimes under customary international law. We
24/25

01/04/2019

express the same concerns about schools and condemn
attacks against them.
Similarly, as we recently said in the Council (see
S/PV.8496), any State action in the area of counterterrorism must consider the effects it could have on
humanitarian assistance efforts. As other delegations
have said, we believe it is essential to ensure
accountability for the commission of atrocity crimes. The
universalization of international criminal jurisdiction
and the predictability of access to justice will also help
to more effectively prevent the suffering of civilians in
conflict. In that regard, Peru reiterates the importance
of cooperating with the International Criminal Court.
We also advocate for the Council to make greater and
better use of the institution by referring new situations
to it. We reiterate our support for the work of the
recently established evidence-gathering mechanisms.
We would like to conclude by highlighting the
sacrifice and risky protection efforts of humanitarian
agencies and workers assisting civilians in conflict
situations. Their sacrifice and efforts must be duly
recognized by the international community.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Germany.
Our discussion has made one thing clear: we are
anything but indifferent to human suffering. Action
must be taken wherever help is needed. Unfortunately,
our discussion has also shown that doing that is
becoming increasingly difficult. The humanitarian
space is shrinking in many parts of the world. Armed
conflicts are more complex today than ever before. They
last longer and increasingly take place in urban spaces.
A growing number of non-State actors and rebel groups
are involved, and not only in Syria, where fragmentation
is especially evident. Sadly, attacks on hospitals and
medical personnel have become commonplace. Our
meeting this morning made that clear too. Instead of
being protected, the work of aid workers is becoming
more dangerous. Yemen, north-east Nigeria and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are just a few of the
areas where that occurs. It is also vital that the Security
Council address those tragedies. Talking is not enough.
We have to take action. As today’s discussion has
shown, three points are especially important.
First of all, upholding international humanitarian
law and humanitarian principles is vital. Such norms
are not an end in themselves. They protect the lives of
19-09349

01/04/2019

International humanitarian law

aid workers and the people they help. As the secondlargest bilateral donor, Germany rejects any kind
of political instrumentalization of humanitarian
assistance. Humanitarian space can be established only
if the neutrality, independence and impartiality of aid
workers are not in doubt. Humanitarian aid workers
live by those principles every day, often at great risk to
themselves. They deserve our thanks and full support
for the valuable work they do. Humanitarian space can
be established only where rules are in place. Only those
familiar with international humanitarian norms can
consciously apply them.
Secondly, therefore, we must help humanitarian
actors impart the necessary know-how about international
humanitarian law. That is all the more important at a
time when an increasing number of non-State parties are
involved in conflicts. Humanitarian organizations must
therefore be able to continue working with such groups.
If that is prohibited, the international community will
lose influence over a group of players of increasing
importance, which is not in our best interest. We also
have a responsibility as States. What President Maurer
said earlier today is important: we are all bound by
international humanitarian law. Therefore, those of us
who support parties to conflicts must especially ensure
that those parties live up to their obligation to comply
unconditionally with international humanitarian law.
Thirdly, the law itself must not become the target
of attacks — for instance, through national laws that
supposedly take precedence over humanitarian law.
We see that ever-more frequently, especially in the
case of counter-terrorism laws. It is good that we at
the United Nations are now discussing the impact of
such laws as well as the consequences of sanctions
on humanitarian work. Germany will play its part in

S/PV. 8499

that regard, including within the context of the various
sanctions regimes.
Germany and France are determined to advance
an exchange on this issue with all Council members.
Our aim is to compile concrete recommendations in the
coming months in a call to action intended to provide
answers to pressing questions. Where and how should
we ensure the protection of aid workers and those
receiving assistance? Where do we need training and
instruction in international humanitarian law? How
can we better support compliance with international
humanitarian law in conflict regions?
Today’s discussion was a start. To mark the
seventieth anniversary of the adoption of the Geneva
Conventions in August, Poland, our partner in the
Weimar Triangle, will follow up on today’s exchange.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank Minister
Jacek Czaputowicz for that. It is important that we all
pull in the same direction. We have act where help is
needed. That is the task of the Security Council. We
should, and will, rise to the challenge.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would like to thank all participants for their
constructive contributions. Today’s briefing underlined
the importance of a sharp focus on respect for
international humanitarian law and on the responsibility
of the Security Council in that regard. I am glad we
had such eminent briefers with us today. I thank them
for being here. Together with France, we will build
on today’s debate and seek support from all Council
members in this endeavour.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

19-0934925/25
