S/2018/420

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 May 2018
Original: English

Letter dated 1 May 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), which was established by the Security Council in its
resolution 1876 (2009) and whose mandate was most recently extended in resolution
2404 (2018).
Following the usual consultations, I wish to inform you of my intention to
appoint José Viegas Filho (Brazil) as my Special Representative for Guinea-Bissau
and Head of UNIOGBIS, at the level of Under-Secretary-General, effective 7 May
2018. He succeeds Modibo Touré (Mali), who will complete his assignment on 6 May.
While there has been some recent progress in overcoming the political and
institutional crisis that has affected Guinea-Bissau since 2015, the full
implementation of the Conakry Agreement, which was brokered by the Economic
Community of West African States and endorsed by the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union, remains a challenge. In addition to
the recent appointment of a consensus Prime Minister and the formation of an
inclusive Government, the Agreement calls for the adoption of a stability pact
incorporating key constitutional, electoral, justice and security sector reforms.
These reforms are expected to be implemented ahead of legislative elections
scheduled for later in 2018 and presidential elections in 2019. In this context, in view
of the anticipated challenges in completing the electoral cycle, the need for good
offices and high-level political facilitation will remain critical in the coming months,
requiring the full-time engagement of the United Nations at a senior level.
My Special Representative and Head of UNIOGBIS will have responsibility for
the implementation of the mission’s mandate and the overall management of the
mission. He will carry out the good offices, political facilitation and mediation roles
and promote the integration of the political, security and development aspects of the
United Nations system’s engagement in Guinea-Bissau.
I should be grateful for your kind cooperation in bringing the present letter to
the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

18-07134 (E)

070518

*1807134*
