s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/25361
3 March 1993
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Following consultations among members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the
Council, at its 3180th meeting, on 3 March 1993, in connection with the
Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina'·':
"The Security Council, recalling all its relevant resolutions and
statements, expresses its grave concern at and condemns the continuing
unacceptable military attacks in eastern Bosnia and the resulting
deterioration in the humanitarian situation in that region.
It is
appalled that even as peace talks are continuing attacks by Serb
paramilitary units, including, reportedly, the killings of innocent
civilians, continue in eastern Bosnia.
In this connection, the Security
Council is particularly concerned about the fall of the town of Cerska and
the imminent fall of neighbouring villages. The Security Council demands
that the killings,and atrocities must stop and reaffirms that those guilty
of crimes against international humanitarian law will be held individually
responsible by the world community.
"The Security Council demands that the leaders of all the parties to
the conflict in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina remain fully
engaged in New York in a sustained effort with the Co-Chairmen of the
Steering Committee of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia to reach quickly a fair and workable settlement.
In this
connection, the Security Council also demands that all sides immediately
cease all forms of military action throughout the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, cease acts of violence against civilians, comply with their
previous commitments including the cease-fire, and redouble their efforts
to settle the conflict.
"The Security Council further demands that the Bosnian Serb side as
well as all other parties refrain from taking any action which might
endanger the lives and well-being of the inhabitants of eastern Bosnia,
particularly in the areas near the town of Cerska, and that all concerned
allow the unimpeded access of humanitarian relief supplies throughout the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, especially humanitarian access to the

93-12320 (E)

030393

I • ••

S/25361
English
Page 2

besieged cities of eastern Bosnia, and permit the evacuation of the
wounded.
"Having determined in the relevant resolutions that this situation
constitutes a threat to international peace and security, the security
Council insists that these steps must be taken immediately.
"The Security Council also requests the Secretary-General to take
immediate steps to increase UNPROFOR's presence in eastern Bosnia.
"The Security Council remains seized of the matter and is ready to
meet at any moment to consider further action."
