VIII.

32/72.

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of tbe Fiftb Committee

Committee on Conferences

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3351 (XXIX) of 18 December 1974,
Having noted the report of the Committec on Conferences,23
1. Decides to retain the Committee on Conferences,
composed of twenty-two Member Stat~s, subject to
review of its terms of reference as reqmred;
2. Requests th~ President of the General Asse~bly,
after consultations with the chairmen of the regional
groups, to appoint Member States, on the basis of an
equitable geographical balance, to serve on the Committee on Conferences for a three-year term;
3. Decides that the Committee on Conferences shall
have the terms of reference set forth below:
(a) To advise tbe General Assembly on the calendar of conferences;
(b) To act ,on behalf of the General Assembly in
dealing with departures from the approved cale~da~ of
conferences that have administrative and financ1a'1 1mplications;
( c) To recommend to the General Assembly means
to provide the optimum apportionment of conference
resources, faciliües and services, includi~g documentation, in order to ensure their most effic1ent and effective use;
( d) To advise the General Assembly on the current
an<l future requirements of the Organizat_ion for conference services, facilities and documentatlon;
(e) To advise the General Assembly on means to
ensure improved co~ordination of conferences within
th~ United Nations system, including conference services and facilities, and to conduct the appropriate consultations in that regard;
4. Requests its subsidiary bodies to seek the advice
of the Committee on Confer:ences with regard to the
scheduling of their regular meetings and with regard
to any proposed changes in their established pattern of
sessions.
99th plenary meetin,g
9 December 1977
*

*

*

The President of the General Assembly subsequently informed
the Secretary-Genera/24 that, in accordance with paragraph11 1
and 2 of the above resolution, he had appointed the member.r
of the Committee on Conferences.
As a result, the Committee on Conferences is composed of
the fo/lowing Member States: ALGERIA, AusTRIA, CANADA,
CHILE, CZECHOSLOVAKIA, EGYPT, FRANCE, HONDURAS, INDONESIA, lVORY CoAST, JAPAN, KENYA, MEXICO, NEW ZEALAND,
NIGERIA, PERU, PHILIPPINES, SRI LANKA, UNJON OF SOVIET
SocIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF ÜREAT BRITAIN
ANO NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED STATES OF AMERIC'A and
YUGOSLAVIA.

32/73.

lnvestments of the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Fund in transnational corporations ami in developing countries
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in its resolution 31 / 197 of 22 December 1976 it requested the Secretary-General to cnsure
Supplement No. 32 (A/32/32).
24 A/32/ 497 and Add. l.

23 Jbid.,

187

that the resources which the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund holds invested in shares of transnational
corporations are invested on safe and profitable terms
and, to the greatest extent practicable, in sound investmoots in developing countries,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-~neral on United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund investments in transnational corporations and in developing
countries, 2 ''
Noting that since the adoption of resolution 31/197
United Nations Joint Staff P.:!nsion Fund investmcnts
in transnational corporations have risen to $772 million
in bonds and equities as at 31 March 1977, while direct
bond investmcnts in the developing countries have only
increascd to $22 million,
Recalling that the third preambular paragraph of
resolution 31 / 197 took into account that investments by
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund in shares
of transnational corporaüons might contradict the objectives and purposes of the organizations of the United
Nations system,
Recalling also the resolutions adopted by the United
N ations and other imernational organizations concerning the new international economic arder and the transnational corporations,
Noting with satisfaction the decision of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Board that, where investments in the developed and the developing world equally
satisfy the criteria of safety, profitability, Iiquidity and
convertibility, priority should be given to investment in
developing countries,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to redouble his
efforts in consultation with the Investments Committee,
in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 31 / 197,
to ensure that, subject to careful observance of the requirements of safety, profitabHity, liquidity and convertibility, and in strict conformity with the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund,
a larger proportion of the investment of the resources
of the Fund is made in developing countries;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session on
the implementation of the present resolution.
99th p/enary meeting
9 December 1977
B

The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board26 and of the Secretary-Generai27 with regard to the investments of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund in transnational corporations and in developing countries,
Recalling that in its resolution 3527 (XXX) of
16 D¡;cember 1975 it rcquestcd the Secretary-General
to intensify his efforts to increase the investments of the
United Nátions Joi:nt Staff Pension Fund directly in
developing countries on safe and profitable terms,
Noting that the efforts of the Secretary-General to
increase the investmcnts of the United Nations Joint
2r. AIC.5/32125.

2 6 O/ficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-secor1d
Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/3219) and A/32/9/ Add.1.

27 A/C.5/32/25.

General Assembly-Tbirty-eecond Session

188

--~

Staff Pension Fund in developing countries as indicated
in his report 28 do not cover the continent of Africa,
Requests the Secretary-General to initiate negotiations with financi:al institutions in Africa with a view to
investing sorne of the portfolio of füe United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund directly in Africa on safc
and profitable terms and to report on the matter to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session.
99th plenary meeting
9 December 1977

32/74.

Report of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board to the General Assembly and
to the member organizations of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund for 1977 29 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrativc
and Budgetary Que,stions,30

I
ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES

l. Approves expenses, chargeable directly to the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, totalling
$3,363,400 (net) for 1978 and supplementary expenses
totalling $49,800 (net) for 1977 for the administration
of the Fund, as estimated in annex III to the report of
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board; 29
2. Concurs with the comments and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions contained in paragraphs 2 to 9 of
its report; 80
11
EMERGENCY FUND

Authorizes the United Nations Joint Staff ~nsion
Board to supplement the vo1untary contributions to thc
Emergency Fund, for a further period of one year, by
an amount not exceeding $100,000;

V
TEMPORARY MEASURES APPLICABLE TO
EXISTING PENSIONERS

Authorizes the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Board to continue to implement in 1978 the payments
to existing pcnsioners authorized in S'ection VII of General Assembly resolution 31/196 of 22 December 1976,
in accordance with paragraph 68 of the report of the
Board.~:,
99th plenary meeting
9 December 1977

32/102.

Draft Agreement hetween the United
Nations and the lnternational Fuml for
Agricultural Development:n

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questionsª 2 on the
draft Agreement between the United Nations and the
International Fund far Agricultura! Development,:1:1
Bearing in mind the provisions in thc draft Agrecment regarding co-operation between the Fund and thc
International Civil Service Commission on matters concerning the regulation and co-ordination of the conditions of service of staff,
lj1earing f urther in mind the principle contained in
art1cle 9 of the statute of the International Civil Scrvicc
Co_mmi~sion w~ich ai~~ at th~ development of a _single,
urnfied mternatronal crvrl servrce through the application
of common personnel standards, methods and arrangcments,
invites the International Fund for Agricultura! Dcvel~pment, once constituted, to participate in the Unitcd
Nat1ons common system far the regulation and co?rdinat~on of the conditions of employment of s-taff and,
m partI,cular, to accept the statute of the International
Civil Servicc Commission.
101st plenary meeting
13 December 1977

III
ADMISSI0N TO MEMBERSHIP 0F THE lNTERNATI0NAL
FUND F0R AGRICUL TURAL OEVELOPMENT

Decides to admit the Intemational Fund for Agrkultural Development to membership in the United Nations
Joint Staff. Pension Fund, in accordance with article 3
of the Regulations of the Fund, with effect from the
date on which it becomes a specialized agency;
IV
TRANSFER 0F PENSION RIGHTS

Concurs in the agreement approved by the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Board with the Commission
of the European Communities under article 13 of the
Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund with respect to continuity of pension rights bctween the Commission and the Fund;
annex JI.
29 Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/32/9) and A/32/9/ Add. l.
3 0 A/32/319.
2 S /bid.,

32/103.

Enlargement of the Advisory Committee
on Aclministrative and Budgetary Questions: amenclments to rule."1 155 to 157
of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly

The General Assembly,
Recalling ~ts resolution 14 (9 of 13 February 1946
on the establishment of the Adv1sory Committee on Administrative and Budgctary Questions and its resolutions
1659 (XVI) of 28 Novemher 1961 and 2798 (XXVI)
of_ 13 Decemhcr 1971 on the enlargement of the Commrttee,
Noting that the membership of the United Nations
has in~reas ed su~stantially since the adoption of t he
resolut1ons enlargmg the Advisory Committee,
1

31 See also scct. V, resolution 32/ I 07, and sect. X.B.7, dccision 32/ 428 A.
32 A/32/325.
33 _Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-second
Sesswn, Supplemmt No. 3 (A/32/3), annex V.
