asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6870

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6870th meeting
Monday, 26 November 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Laher
Mr. Kandangha-Bariki
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)
Working methods
Letter dated 19 November 2012 from the Permanent Representatives of India and
Portugal to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2012/853)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-60476 (E)

*1260476*

S/PV.6870

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/507)
Working methods
Letter dated 19 November 2012 from the
Permanent Representatives of India and
Portugal to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General (S/2012/853)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Argentina, Brazil, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Egypt, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Ireland, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea,
Singapore, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and
Uruguay to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/853, which contains a letter dated
19 November 2012 from the Permanent Representatives
of Portugal and India to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper
on the item under consideration.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this open debate on the Council’s working
methods. It has been a year since the Council, under
Portugueuse presidency, held the most recent debate on
this issue (see S/PV.6672). That debate demonstrated
yet again the great interest that this issue raises among
the wider membership. Council working methods
are indeed a matter of interest to all United Nations
Members.
Open debates are held so that we can listen to the
wider membership. Indeed, the debate last year was very
useful, with many relevant inputs by Council members
and non-members alike, focused on ways to enhance
transparency, efficiency and the interaction of the
Security Council with the general membership. They
were instrumental in feeding the Council’s work on this

2

area during the months that followed. As a follow-up,
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Matters, which I have chaired since
January, met to discuss the set of measures proposed
during the debate in order to identify areas of future
work. In that same vein, members of the Informal
Working Group exchanged views with members of the
group of five small nations on the proposals put forward
by that group, which reflect many of the ideas floated
during the debate.
To improve the working methods, we have to start
by improving the way the internal work of the Council
is done.A significant part of the Council’s work is done
in consultations. While the Council has made an effort
to meet more often in public — a trend that should be
encouraged, in particular by presidencies — consultations
are indeed useful in helping the Council prepare its
decisions. However, questions of transparency and
inclusiveness remain important within the Council, to
Council members, as was noted in several interventions
at the debate last year. There is indeed work to do in the
internal aspects of the Council’s work.
Following consultations organized by the Council
in March, during the United Kingdom presidency, a
discussion was held on further measures to improve
interactivity, better planning of work and better use
of conference resources. Those same aspects were
further developed in the Informal Working Group and
later on condensed in a note issued by the President
in (S/2012/402). The underlying idea is to stress the
informal aspects of consultations — such as abolishing
pre-organized lists of speakers and avoiding reading
out lengthy statements by briefers and Council
members — better organization of resources to allow
more space for subsidiary bodies to meet, more use of
video teleconferences to avoid the costly presence of
briefers, and better planning of work by readjusting
mandates and reporting cycles with a view to evening
up the workload throughout the year, thereby leaving
more time for the Council to prepare decisions and
discussion of conflict prevention.
Another aspect that was mentioned in several
interventions at the last debate was the practice related
to the work of pen-holders and the process to appoint
the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies. The Informal
Working Group is now concluding the consideration
of this question in a draft note that deals with issues
of enhanced participation, inclusiveness and exchange
of information among Council members. These are

12-60476

S/PV.6870

crucial elements to enhance the Council’s efficiency
and ultimately help promote the necessary consensusbuilding within the Council. I hope, with the support
and flexibility of all members of the Working Group,
to conclude the work on this within the coming weeks.
On the external aspects of the Security Council’s
work, the Working Group is considering further
measures to improve transparency and interaction
with the wider membership. A draft note is now being
discussed on ways to improve open debates by enhancing
the interactivity of council members with non-council
members in debates; by ensuring a better follow-up of
open debates, including by reflecting relevant inputs of
non-members in the outcome of an open debate, when
there is one; and by improving their efficacy through
the use of concept papers, shorter interventions and
summaries of the debate, whenever possible. We are
also considering measures to improve the annual report
by reinforcing aspects related to the interaction with
non-Council members prior to the preparation of the
report and by providing more substantive information
in the report and in its presentation to the General
Assembly on the work of the Council.
Monthly assessments by Council presidencies are
very important documents. When circulated early after
the end of the respective month, they can be particularly
useful instruments to elucidate on the work done. Also
very useful in this regard are informal briefings to the
general membership by Council Presidents once they
finish their presidencies, which could be done as a
matter of practice, adding to the briefing that is already
done at the start of each presidency.
These are all aspects that have been discussed in
the Informal Working Group and are being considered
through a draft note we expect to adopt in the coming
weeks. They include several ideas and proposals that
were highlighted last year at the open debate. This is
why we think that regular open debates on working
methods, such as this, are important. They provide
the necessary stimulus to the Council by signaling the
areas of concern and avenues to improve its working
methods that are very helpful to the Council in taking
this work forward.
The note by the President of 26 July 2010
(S/2010/507) remains a landmark. It represents an
acquis of Council practice that can always be improved,
guided by the goals of transparency, inclusiveness and
enhanced interaction with the wider membership, the
General Assembly and other relevant bodies. As in the
12-60476

past, presidential note 507 shall be updated regularly in
the future with subsequent agreed measures aimed at
developing and improving the Council’s practice.
This debate is yet another opportunity to look to
our future work to improve the working methods. In the
concept paper prepared jointly by India and Portugal
(S/2012/853), some other ideas are included in the bullet
points that could assist us in focusing this debate. In
addition to the measures that I have alluded to, many
others can be addressed, such as ways to enhance
interaction with regional and subregional organizations,
to better interact with troop-contributing countries in
order to ensure a more substantive exchange of views
and more fruitful and focus discussions at meetings with
troop-contributing countries, to improve the Council’s
interaction with the chairpersons of the Peacebuilding
Commission and its country-specific configurations,
or ways to further improve the work of the subsidiary
bodies in terms of transparency and interaction with
States, regional and subregional organizations, and
relevant United Nations bodies in order to increase
their efficacy.
It is also important to underline the existing
trend in the Council of a more flexible use of meeting
formats, such as the Arria Formula meetings and the
informal interactive dialogues, which are clearly an
evolving trend revealed by the significant number of
such meetings last year. They are proving to be very
useful as practical ways for the Council to interact
informally with individuals and other relevant actors,
with clear benefits to Council members in the course of
preparation of Council’s decisions.
Prevention is a key aspect of the Council in
performing its role under the United Nations Charter.
Horizon-scanning meetings, also referred to at the
last debate, can be very useful in helping the Council
to enhance awareness of situations with potential to
develop into conflicts. Last year, several presidencies
continued to organize such meetings. They can indeed
be important opportunities for Council members
to exchange views with the Secretariat on new
developments in different situations and regions of
the world with deterrence potential and to help settle
conflicts at an early stage. In our view, this type of
informal meeting to promptly gather information and
allow space for the Council to act preventively should
be promoted. We therefore encourage further reflection
on this issue to allow the horizon-scanning concept
to be perfected and thereby help dissipate existing

3

S/PV.6870

reservations towards a tool that can be truly relevant
insofar as prevention is concerned.
We look forward to this debate. I am sure it will
be productive and enjoy contributions by all, Council
and non-Council members alike. I am also sure that
the Council will listen and follow it up in the months
to come, in particular in the Informal Working Group.
I must say that it has been particularly gratifying for
me to Chair the Working Group. I have counted on
the support of all members and the diligence of the
Secretariat, and I am sure that we will take the work
under way to a successful conclusion.
Next year, the work of the Informal Working
Group will continue, building on the work in course,
the discussions held in the Working Group and the
ideas and proposals coming out of this debate. And we
will, I hope, assess the improvements achieved next
year when the Council holds the next open debate on
working methods and the implementation of note 507.
It is indeed crucial, bearing in mind the importance
attached to this issue by the wider membership, that
the Council keep organizing these debates on an annual
basis.
We must recognize that some improvements have
been made in recent years, but there is always room
for improvement. Working methods are always a work
in progress and never completed, and the generalized
interest in this issue, manifested by the high level of
participation here today, is proof also of the relevance of
the Council as a principal organ of the United Nations.
In conclusion, have one last word to say in
connection with the transparency aspects, the
outstanding work of the Secretariat in making available
more information on the web, including on mandates
and reporting cycles, and the analytical and statistical
overview of the Council over the past year, which
are indeed very important contributions to promote
understanding of the Council’s work and the new trends
and developments in the area of international peace and
security. As Chair of the Informal Working Group, I
commend the efforts of the Secretariat in preparing this
new set of informative tools, and I welcome the new
capacities offered by the Council’s web page, which I
invite all interested delegations to access and navigate.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to fi rst express my thanks to you, Mr. President, for
having organized this debate on a subject that has been the
object of such great interest on the part of Member States.

4

I am also grateful for the concept note (S/2012/853, annex)
prepared by India and Portugal to guide our discussion,
which provides an important list of efforts aimed at
improving and modernizing the working methods of
the Council and additional measures that we should
consider in order to continue work in that respect.
I would like to thank and particularly congratulate
Ambassador José Filipe Moraes Cabral, the Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, not only for his statement just
now, but also for the very hard work he has done this
year at the head of that subsidiary body of the Council,
which has made a considerable contribution to progress
in that area.
With respect to the working methods of the Council,
our main goal must be to identify those areas and
matters requiring the attention of the Council in order to
achieve a greater degree of transparency, participation,
efficiency and accountability as the Council carries out
its responsibilities in the maintenance of international
peace and security. Over recent months, we have
achieved some progress. On the one hand, on 5 June,
we received a note by the President (S/2012/402) that
complements the guidelines contained in the annex
to document S/2010/507 with respect to rationalizing
conference service resources and strengthening
interaction. Other important procedural aspects have to
do with penholders, the chairs of the subsidiary bodies,
open debates, the drawing up of the annual report to the
General Assembly and the monthly assessments carried
out under each presidency. We are sure that discussions
on those matters will continue in the Working Group,
and that we will be able, before the end of the year, to
adopt new guidelines for the future work of the Council.
We have also made progress in ensuring a more
equitable distribution of the Council’s work throughout
the course of the year by adjusting mandates and their
renewal periods and by aligning their requirements
for the presentation of reports. The recommendations
submitted in that respect by the Chair of the Working
Group in July and duly reflected in the annual report
presented to the General Assembly (A/67/2) just a few
days ago indicate a good course of action for Council
members in their efforts to improve the future planning
of Council work.
I would now like to refer to some of the outstanding
matters and the ways in which we can address them to
achieve greater efficiency.

12-60476

S/PV.6870

First, on open debates, my delegation believes that
an important development contributing to improved
transparency is the increase in the number of open
debates organized each month. The participation of
non-members of the Council in such debates contributes
to the very purpose of illustrating and enriching the
background on the basis of which Council members
take decisions. Therefore, non-members of the Council
have expressed a natural expectation that their concerns
and contributions should be taken into account when
the outcome document of a debate — in most cases, a
presidential statement — is adopted.
Secondly, the established practice of having the
President meet every month with the Member States to
consider and comment on the provisional programme of
work is a very useful practice and makes a significant
contribution to transparency in the work of the Council.
The Charter and the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure anticipate having States non-members of
the Council be invited to participate in the Council’s
deliberations on situations that could have an impact on
their immediate interests. There are therefore specific
provisions that enable them to participate in such
meetings.
Moreover, in the concept note already mentioned,
reference is made to the importance of an increase
in the interaction of the Council and its members
with other interested parties. We believe that the
Council would indeed reap considerable benefits, if a
mechanism were established to improve its links with,
for example, regional organizations with subsidiary or
complementary responsibilities for the maintenance of
peace and security, troop-contributing countries and
the chairs and country-specific configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
I would like to pay tribute to the extremely valuable
assistance that the Council receives from the Secretariat
on an ongoing basis and with the utmost discretion. In
the past year, we have seen that considerable efforts
have been made to improve the Council’s web page,
those of its subsidiary bodies and the tools available to
all Member States and the public in general, including,
most notably, the very useful repertoire of Security
Council practice. We are grateful for the work and
resources invested in that regard, which have led to a
noticeable increase in the transparency of the work of
the Council and an improvement in the general public’s
perception of the Council.

12-60476

Finally, we believe that the discussions on
procedural issues and the working methods of the
Council and its subsidiary bodies, in particular the
Sanctions Committees, are of great importance, and
non-permanent members can make considerable
contributions to those discussions in order to improve
the work of those bodies. We believe that it is important
to move in that direction.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We attach particular importance to today’s
debate on the working methods of the Security Council.
The fact that it is being held in an open format for
the fifth year in a row now shows the unswerving
attention that the Council pays to Member States’
proposals on improving the procedural aspects of
the work of the Council, with the understanding that
the working methods themselves and any potential
possible modifications to them are the responsibility
of the Council itself. That is a very sensitive issue in
the context of the reform of the Council, and discussion
on that topic should not be subjected to populism. The
Council’s procedures are constantly evolving, as can be
seen from the information contained in the statement
just given by the Chairman of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, Ambassador José Filipe Moraes Cabral.
In order to improve and change the work of
the Security Council, we must seek to improve the
effectiveness and efficiency of its functioning with
regard to its task of maintaining peace and security.
That is the Council’s primary responsibility. In the
discussion on the Council’s working methods, broader
topics have often been raised, namely, how successfully
and appropriately the Security Council manages to
cope with the tasks conferred upon it by the Charter.
We sometimes hear the Council criticized for
infringing on the prerogatives of other United Nations
organs. We share that concern. Our colleagues know
of our reservations regarding the initiatives under
discussion in the Council in terms of various topical
subjects, in particular generic issues. We believe that
the Council should focus on country-related topics
and on issues where it must and should take specific
decisions.
We also understand the concern as to whether
the Council uses Chapter VII of the Charter too
often in imposing sanctions, which have, of course,
clear humanitarian implications, to put it mildly. We
would like to underscore that the Russian Federation
5

S/PV.6870

is in favour of the Council using the tool of preventive
diplomacy and of its investing in measures aimed at
the peaceful settlement of conflicts. Fuller and broader
use should be made of the provisions of Chapters VI
and VII. Sanctions measures, in particular scenarios
in which force is used to settle conflicts, should only
be employed when all possibilities for the peaceful
settlement of disputes have been exhausted, the threat to
international peace and security is clear and a decision
to make use of Chapter VIII is supported as broadly as
possible by members of the Council. I repeat that all
of these are important topics, but in our view they do
not fall within the rubric of the working methods of the
Council. Of course, the fundamental provisions of the
Charter pertaining to the right of veto do not pertain to
the working methods of the Council.
In order to make the Security Council more effective
and reflective of the realities of our time, we must work
painstakingly to improve its working methods. To that
end, we have established the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions. We
commend the efforts of the Portuguese chairmanship,
under whose leadership the work of the Working Group
has taken on a new dynamism. With its specific nature,
we note that the Working Group is systematic in its work
and undertakes appropriate, constructive interaction
with all interested delegations of the Members of the
Organization.
We believe that improving the quality of the
Council’s interaction with other United Nations bodies
on issues beyond its remit is a key area for improving
its working methods. A current challenge is to further
improve the effective forms and methods of dialogue
between the Security Council and the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, other
United Nations structures, regional organizations and
international partners. We must develop the practice
of holding effective consultations between members
of the Security Council and countries that contribute
troops to peacekeeping operations. We advocate a
reasonable increase in the number of open debates of
the Council, while recognizing the great importance
of closed consultations. The Arria Formula can play a
useful role in that regard.
We are convinced that the aim of improving
both the transparency and the democratic nature of
the Council would be furthered by a better division
of responsibilities of the informal leadership of
the so-called penholders. We deem unfounded the

6

prevailing opinion that the so-called penholders have
some kind of right to always take the floor first when
discussing relevant issues. In our opinion, that is
justified only when they are introducing draft decisions
to the Council and therefore representing them. In all
other cases, discussions should be more informal and
there should be no so-called mentoring.
In conclusion, I wish again to underscore that no
innovation to improve the transparency of the work
of the Security Council should harm its effectiveness
or decrease its efficiency. Dialogue on this important
topic requires a balanced, professional approach
without politicization of the substance of the topic
being discussed.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening this important open debate on the
working methods of the Security Council. We commend
the Permanent Representative of Portugal, Ambassador
José Filipe Moraes Cabral, for his dedicated efforts as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. We acknowledge the
role that the Working Group is playing to advance ways
to further enhance the transparency, accountability and
overall efficiency of the Council’s work.
The interest of the entire international community
in the matter under consideration is obvious and arises
from the functions of the Security Council. In fulfilling
its Charter-mandated obligations, the Council acts on
behalf of all States Members of the United Nations and
therefore should be duly accountable to them. Almost
one year has passed since the Council’s last open debate
on its working methods (S/PV.6672), at which a number
of important issues were raised. During this period, the
Council continued to further implement presidential
note 507 (S/2010/507) and agreed on several measures
to increase interactivity, inclusiveness and efficiency
in the internal work of the Council, as eventually
reproduced in presidential note 402 of June 2012
(S/2012/402).
More attention has also been paid to achieving
a wider participation of Council members in the
decision-making process and to improving the existing
practice of penholdership and the designation of
chairpersons to subsidiary bodies. The Council has also
discussed ways and means to enhance its interactivity
with non-members and to promote its responsiveness to
their inputs and contributions. Unfortunately, obstacles
remain, and more should be done to address existing
differences. We hope that the Council will take the
12-60476

S/PV.6870

initiative and initiate a process of genuine reforms of
the Security Council to meet the expectations of the
international community.
It should be noted that the reluctance and
sometimes even unwillingness to change stereotypes
by preserving existing practices complicate the process
of reaching agreement on matters of importance to the
United Nations membership. The reasons for keeping
the Council’s current rules of procedure provisional
for decades are also self-explanatory. Today’s debate
on the working methods, procedures and practices that
the Security Council applies in fulfilling its Chartermandated functions represents an excellent opportunity
to identify possible short-comings in areas requiring
improvement and adjustments.
We welcome the increase in the number of
public meetings of the Council, which amounted to
more than 145 this year. The quality of this increase
certainly depends on the Council’s genuine readiness
to take into consideration the views and contributions
of non-members and regional and subregional
organizations, including through the reflection of
their proposals and inputs in the outcomes of public
meetings. While we stress the importance of close
interaction with regional and subregional organizations
to facilitating early response to disputes and emerging
crises, appropriate steps also need to be taken to improve
the quality of briefings as sources of information
in an effective early warning and crisis prevention
mechanism.
More should be done to further improve in
practice the content and narrative quality of the
Council’s annual reports as a main communication
tool between the Council and the general membership.
We welcome the efforts of our Colombian colleagues
to make the latest annual report more complete
and detailed. Among other things, there is a need to
include analysis in the monthly reports prepared by the
rotating presidencies, which should also contain more
information relating to consultations of the whole. The
Council should also resort frequently to Arria Formula
meetings to ensure more interaction and informal
dialogue with the international community, similar to
that organized in May on the peaceful settlement of
disputes, conflict prevention and resolution, which was
open to all Member and observer States, international
organizations, academia and civil society.
Another important issue that requires additional
efforts is the Council’s control over the implementation
12-60476

of its own decisions. It is unacceptable that a resolution
of the Security Council containing imperative demands
for concrete action should be ignored or interpreted in
a way to avoid their implementation. Special attention
should be given to situations involving regional
arrangements referred by the Security Council with a
view to encouraging the development of the peaceful
settlement of disputes or conflicts. Needless to say, the
silence of the Security Council concerning the apparent
disregard of its resolutions on issues pertaining
to international and regional peace and security
and attempts to undermine them with ambiguous
considerations is dangerous and cannot constitute an
accepted practice of the Council’s working methods.
In conclusion, let me note that the Council must
enhance the efficiency and viability of its working
methods. Minor changes to the working methods will
stimulate and promote general reforms that could
be commensurate with contemporary realities. Real
improvements should require a change in approach
towards the primacy of general and collective interests
over national and individual ones.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): I thank you, Mr. President,
for scheduling today’s open debate and for the useful
concept note (S/2012/853, annex). We are also very
grateful for the work undertaken by the Chairman of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, the Ambassaor of Portugal, as
well as for his presentation today.
Germany welcomes the increased efforts of the
Council to interact with and seek input from a broad
range of relevant actors, including the wider United
Nations membership. Open debates, Arria Formula
meetings and the holding of interactive dialogues are
regularly and successfully used formats to ensure
communication and the exchange of information that
are vital for the Council’s functioning.
Also, the briefings provided by the Department
of Political Affairs represent a particularly important
improvement, and we call on all Council members to
consider conducting one such horizon-scanning during
their respective presidencies. We also welcome the
increased use of modern technologies, such as video
teleconferencing, in enhancing the timeliness and
efficiency of the Council’s actions.
An interactive and dynamic relationship with a
multitude of interlocutors, such as thematic Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, is crucial

7

S/PV.6870

to the fulfilment of the Council’s mandate, and the
interactive dialogue held earlier this year of the
Council with the Chairpersons of the Peacebuilding
Commission’s
country
configurations
clearly
highlighted the potential for further cooperation
between the two bodies. For example, the participation
of the Chairpersons in Council consultations should
also be considered, not least to ensure a broader
peacebuilding perspective in the Council.
We also support the enhanced involvement of
regional organizations in the work of the Council.
Those organizations can play a crucial role in furthering
conflict prevention, mediation and peacebuilding
in their respective regions, and thus effectively
complement the role of the Council. In that regard, I
would like to recall the successful high-level meeting
held on 26 September on peace and security in the
Middle East (S/PV.6841), which focused on cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States.
While much has been achieved to improve the
Council’s working methods, we are looking forward to
the completion of work that is currently in progress.
I would therefore like to provide a brief overview of
where Germany stands on some of the main points.
Regarding penholderships and chairmanships of
subsidiary bodies, we are of the view that all Council
members are eligible to fulfil those functions and that
elected members should therefore increasingly be
assigned penholderships. Germany is currently holding
the pen for Afghanistan, as well as the chairmanship of
several subsidiary organs. It has been a very positive
experience.
Consultations on the appointment of penholders
and chairs of subsidiary bodies for the following
year should take place soon after the elections of
non-permanent members and before the end of the
year, and they should be fully inclusive. The mandates
of working groups should be flexible and open to
necessary adaptations. In that regard, I would like to
state that Germany is ready to consider the expansion
of the mandate of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, so as to also include issues
relating to States’ non-cooperation in the context of the
Council’s referrals to the International Criminal Court.
On the issue of enhanced interaction in the context
of open debates, Germany views such debates as an
important opportunity for Council members to benefit

8

from the input of non-member States. We therefore
support the early circulation of concept notes to all
United Nations Members and the delivery of concluding
remarks by the presidency.
Both the Council’s annual report and the monthly
assessments can be further improved. The presidency
responsible for the annual report should continue to
consult informally with non-members well ahead of
the report’s issuance, and report to Council members
on the suggestions and expectations raised in those
consultations. Since the monthly assessment is
prepared under the responsibility of the presidency, it
should allow for a more substantive reflection of the
presidency’s views and analysis of the Council’s work
during the respective month.
The reform of working methods is part of a larger
comprehensive reform. Let me therefore be clear. We
must not stop at addressing working methods only.
What is required is a structural reform of the Security
Council — a reform that makes it more representative
of the world we live in today; a reform that lends the
decisions taken by the Council more credibility and
therefore greater effectiveness. The desire for real,
meaningful reform is more evident than ever. An
overwhelming majority of Member States small and
large, from the developing and the developed world,
see true structural reform as the best way forward.
Anything else would address only the symptoms and
not the root causes.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate. I
also thank Ambassador Moraes Cabral for setting the
scene for our discussion and for his energetic chairing
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions.
We meet today to discuss how we conduct our
business and to listen to the ideas and views of the wider
membership. It is an important topic. However, when
we consider the question of working methods, Council
members must be careful not to give the impression
that they are more interested in the process than in
the product. The key test of the Security Council will
always be its effectiveness at preventing and resolving
conflict around the globe. What we do here in New
York is important as a forum for discussion and for
shaping response to events, but we must not forget that
our main responsibility is to make a difference on the
ground and to save innocent men, women and children
from suffering in conflict.
12-60476

S/PV.6870

As the Council endeavours to carry out that solemn
duty, I think that two principles need to be balanced in
order to guide the methods by which the Council carries
out that work. First, the Council should be ruthless in its
pursuit of effectiveness. Speed can be crucial in dealing
with volatile situations of escalating conflict. We need
to be able to come together as a diverse group of nations
representing the world and arrive at swift and decisive
solutions that can make a difference on the ground.
The United Kingdom has championed several
working methods to improve the effectiveness of
the Council. We have advocated more use of video
teleconferences, which happily have become the new
standard in Council consultations. We have secured
time and space for the important work of the Council’s
subsidiary organs, and we have argued that the Council
must exercise its responsibility for conflict prevention
as well as conflict management. That is why we
introduced monthly horizon-scanning sessions, which
in the case of Yemen, for example, encouraged the
Council to pay closer attention to the early warning
signs and provided us with the impetus to take decisive
action. I recognize that we have failed to convince all
other Council members of the value of that exercise,
but I am disappointed not to have heard alternative
ideas from the opponents for exercising our conflict
prevention responsibilities.
Secondly, the Council needs to be transparent and
therefore accountable to the United Nations membership
and the wider world. All United Nations Members have
a legitimate interest in what the Council is doing — or,
indeed, not doing. So it is right that the Council listens
to and engages with all other United Nations Members,
whether through open debates like this one today
or other formats, such as informal dialogues or the
Arria Formula meetings that we and other Council
members have championed. We also share the view of
those who think that the Council’s official reporting
should be more expansive, more analytical and, where
appropriate, more self-critical.
We also need to keep the Council’s agenda fresh and
up to date. As far as I am aware, not a single new item
has been introduced on the formal agenda in the past
18 months. Has the world really been so static during
that period? We are in the bizarre situation where the
list of items of which the Council is seized includes one
regional issue that has not been discussed since 1949
but does not include Syria or Yemen, both of which have
been major Council preoccupations during 2012. That

12-60476

is not a good advertisement for the responsiveness and
transparency of our procedures. How can we properly
be accountable to our members if we cannot even be
frank about what is on our agenda?
According to George Bernard Shaw, the golden rule
is that there are no golden rules. In today’s Council, our
rules, practice and precedent provide valuable guides to
our work, yet even as we respect the rules set out in the
Charter, we must avoid becoming hidebound by past
practice and we must be ready to innovate and adapt
our procedures to the modern world. That might mean
adapting to modern technology by using social media
and discarding the requirement to use fax machines.
But it also means that the Council must do more to
engage with the Members of the United Nations and the
people they represent in the Organization.
Finally and fundamentally, it is crucial that
the Security Council be as effective as possible in
addressing the problems faced by the world today. That
requires considering any methods of work that promote
well-considered and decisive action in the Security
Council.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome India’s initiative in convening today’s meeting
on the working methods of the Security Council.
Today’s meeting — the fifth open debate convened by
the Council on this issue — fully reflects the importance
the Council has attached to the issue of improving its
working methods and shows the attention the Council
gives to the opinions of Member States.
I listened attentively to the statement by the
Permanent Representative of Portugal, and I wish to
acknowledge Portugal’s efforts as Chair of the Security
Council’s Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions.
China also supports, and attaches importance to,
the continuous improvement of the Council’s working
methods so as to enhance the authority, efficiency
and transparency of the Council and allow it to better
implement the mandate conferred upon it by the Charter
of the United Nations. Thanks to the considered efforts
of Council members, the Council has made much
progress in terms of improving its working methods.
The number of open meetings of the Council
has increased significantly. The monthly briefing
to non-Council members by the Council’s rotating
presidency on the monthly programme of work has
become a well-established practice. The Security
9

S/PV.6870

Council has effectively utilized various formats, such
as informal interactive dialogues and Arria Formula
meetings, to strengthen its exchange and interaction
with relevant Member States, country configurations
of the Peacebuilding Commission, civil society and
academic institutions. The annual joint meetings
between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union have served to
strengthen cooperation with regional organizations in
Africa. With the assistance of the Secretariat, various
information and communication technologies have been
extensively applied to the Council’s work, allowing
it to respond more quickly and promptly to emerging
developments and allowing non-Council members to
find out about Council activities on a more timely basis.
The revamped official website of the Security Council
now provides more information to its users.
The Charter of the United Nations provides that the
Security Council shall adopt its own rules of procedure.
There is still room for improvement with regard to the
working methods of the Council. China supports the full
implementation of presidential note 507 (S/2010/507)
on that issue and supports the continued discussion on
concrete proposals and measures. I would like to focus
on and highlight the following points.
First, over recent years, the workload of the Council
has increased continuously. The Council should focus
on using its existing resources effectively and on dealing
with major, urgent issues that threaten international
peace and security. The number of thematic subjects it
addresses has also been increasing continuously. Some
of them are beyond the scope of the mandate of the
Security Council, and the Council should pay attention
to the concern expressed by Member States in that
regard.
Secondly, the Security Council should pay more
attention to preventive diplomacy and use peaceful
means such as mediation and good offices to defuse
disputes and should avoid the frequent use or threat
of sanctions and other measures of force. An effective
mechanism to monitor the implementation of the
Council’s mandates should be established so as to avoid
acts that abuse or overstep them.
Thirdly, before adopting resolutions or agreeing on
presidential statements, the Council should carry out, in
a full and patient manner, negotiations and consultations
so as to reach extensive and broad consensus. In that
process, it is important that all Council members be

10

given adequate time to consider and study texts. The
Council should avoid forcing through texts over which
there remain serious differences, so as to safeguard the
solidarity of the Council.
Fourthly, the Security Council should continue to
strengthen its interaction and dialogue with non-Council
members and pay more attention to the opinions of
relevant Member States that are connected to the
Council’s agenda. We support the full utilization by the
Council of various mechanisms such as the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations and meetings with
troop-contributing countries (TCCs). With regard
to deploying peacekeeping operations and adjusting
their mandates, more attention should be given to
communication between TCCs and the Secretariat.
Fifthly, the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Peacebuilding Commission should fully respect
the division of labour, on the one hand, and strengthen
the communication and coordination among them,
on the other. China supports the Council’s efforts
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter to
strengthen its cooperation with regional organizations
such as the African Union and the League of Arab
States so as to achieve synergy.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We join others in felicitating
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s debate.
We also appreciate the concept note prepared by the
delegations of Portugal and India (S/2012/853, annex).
Pakistan associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement later in the debate.
We thank Ambassador Moraes Cabral for his
leadership and the members of the Portuguese
delegation for their efficient conduct of the Council’s
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. Ambassador Moraes Cabral has
highlighted some of the important achievements of the
Working Group. The delegation of Pakistan actively
contributed to that collective effort.
Improving the Council’s working methods is an
integral part of comprehensive reform of the Security
Council, which is a shared objective of the entire United
Nations membership. It is encouraging to note the
enhanced attention to working methods in the Council
itself. The organization of open debates such as this
is a manifestation of the importance that the Council
attaches to this issue, as well as of the keen interest

12-60476

S/PV.6870

that it generates among the general membership. We
should reinforce that trend. Such discussions will
translate into tangible benefits only through effective
follow-up. The Council should further deliberate on
practicable suggestions flowing from this debate
with a view to their operationalization. The Working
Group’s role is of continuous relevance in that regard.
The implementation of presidential note S/2010/507 is
a work in progress. In our view, such implementation
should incorporate and formalize additional substantive
aspects of working methods, while also reviewing the
status of the measures already integrated.
We would like to focus on three principal aspects
of the debate.
First, transparency, democracy and inclusion
are fundamental to improving the Council’s working
methods. Pakistan believes that the advancement
of those principles will enhance the Council’s
accountability to the general membership.
Secondly, the importance of working methods is not
merely a procedural matter. In fact, the issues involved,
particularly with regard to the decision-making process,
cut across the entire substantive agenda of the Council,
including the work of its subsidiary bodies. It is not
surprising, therefore, that the general membership
perceives that it has a direct stake in the question.
Thirdly, improving the working methods will
also enhance the Council’s efficiency. However, the
effectiveness of the Council and, in turn, its credibility
is more a function of its members’ political will and
of the implementation of its decisions and resolutions.
We welcome the additional measures on conference
resources and interactivity agreed in the presidential
note of 5 June 2012 (S/2012/402). Spreading out the
Council’s periodic workload more evenly throughout
the year, where possible, and on a case-by-case basis
can also improve planning. The Secretariat’s efforts
to enhance the availability of information and data,
including through the Council’s website, are especially
laudable.
Allow me to point out some of the areas in which
little or slow progress necessitates further concerted
efforts.
First, in terms of transparency, there is a need to
give real meaning to rule 48 of the provisional rules
of procedure, which provides that “[u]nless it decides
otherwise, the Security Council shall meet in public”.

12-60476

Closed consultations should be kept to a minimum as
the exception they were meant to be.
Inside the Council, the decision-making process
should be more transparent and inclusive. That entails
involvement and consultations with all members,
adequate time for the consideration of issues and
proper negotiations on Council decisions. The tendency
to push decisions with a take-it-or-leave-it approach
should be eschewed. Pakistan supports the Working
Group’s ongoing discussions aimed at enhancing the
transparency and inclusivity of the penholder practice,
as well as of the appointment of Chairs of subsidiary
bodies, since they is closely related to that objective.
To improve access and participation for non-Council
members, we should fully implement Articles 31 and
32 of the Charter, within the context both of the work
of the Council and that of its subsidiary bodies. Arria
Formula meetings and informal interactive dialogues
offer additional mechanisms for interaction with
non-members and other actors. It is pertinent that the
presidential note 402 also specifically commits to
enhancing interaction with non-Council members and
seeking their views. An important aspect of interaction
with non-Council members is ensuring that their
views are factored into the Council’s deliberations,
decision-making and outcomes. Pakistan also supports
measures aimed at enhancing the interactivity of open
debates, including alternating statements by Council
and non-Council members.
Given the central role of peacekeeping in the
Council’s work, we believe it is essential to have more
enhanced, substantive and regular interaction and
consultation with troop-contributing countries. The
Council should also further strengthen its consultation
and cooperation with regional organizations and be
more coherent and consistent in its approach, in order
to make such cooperation more effective.
The Council should rely more on the pacific
settlement of disputes, as outlined in Chapter VI of the
Charter.
In order to enhance information exchange and
outreach related to the Council’s work, its presidencies
could be more proactive, including by interacting, as
required, with non-Council members, the media, the
Secretariat, and with the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoys and Representatives. Interaction between the
Presidents of the General Assembly and the Council is
also important.

11

S/PV.6870

With regard to sanctions committees, we are of
the view that recent best practices, particularly the
institution of an Ombudsperson for the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011), merit consideration for other committees.
It is also essential that the process of selecting and
appointing the various expert groups be made more
transparent, balanced and representative.
In the interest of its overall efficiency and
effectiveness, the Council should devote more time
and effort to the core issues of international peace and
security, in accordance with its primary responsibility,
and refrain from encroaching on the mandates of other
bodies.
Over the years, non-permanent members have
made important contributions to improving the working
methods of the Council. That is understandable, since
non-permanent members, because they are elected,
have a sense of accountability to the wider membership
and share the general sentiment on the need to
improve the Council’s working methods. Conversely,
the empirical evidence shows no correlation between
the permanent seats and improved working methods.
Adding new permanent members therefore is not
likely to change that pattern. The understanding and
cooperation of permanent members is nonetheless also
important in that process. And it is true that, more
recently, permanent members have also tried to reach
out to wider audiences.
In conclusion, it is in our common interests to
improve the working methods of the Security Council.
We should therefore continue to pursue that objective
collectively and vigorously.
Mr. Kandangha-Bariki (Togo) (spoke in French):
I would first like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate on the question of the
Security Council’s working methods, the fifth such
meeting on this subject and one that the Members of
the United Nations as a whole consider more and more
important. I am also grateful to Ambassador José Filipe
Moraes Cabral of Portugal for the outstanding work he
has done as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, as
well as for the detailed briefing he has just given us.
The presidential note of 7 February 2006
(S/2006/507), modified by the Security Council on
26 July 2010 (S/2010/507), covers the main topics that
the Informal Working Group has had to discuss and

12

that are of major interest to the Council. The Group is
working with resolve and determination to achieve good
results, since the question of the reform of the Council’s
working methods has been a focus of the concerns of
Heads of State and Government since the 2005 World
Summit, at which they actually made a recommendation
on the subject (General Assembly resolution 60/1). Many
efforts have been made since then within the Council
itself, but we must recognize that there is still a long
way to go before we reach the goals that signify greater
transparency and efficiency in the Council’s work.
That is why, since the open debate of 30 November
2011 (see S/PV.6672), the Informal Working Group has
focused its action on new issues, while still attempting
to ensure the effective implementation of those it
compiled in presidential note 507.
The consideration of those new issues has resulted
recommendations on various equally important issues.
What emerges is that the good use of conference
resources and a judicious reordering of mandate
renewal periods throughout the year not only save the
Organization money but also reduce the workload for
Council members during certain months of the year.
On other questions such as that of the people we
term penholders, and of the Chairs of subsidiary bodies,
my delegation has always believed that transparency,
inclusivity and flexibility should govern actions in
that regard so as to enable all members to participate
effectively and efficiently in drafting resolutions and
in the process of designating the Chairs of subsidiary
bodies. We hope that the Council will take decisions on
such questions as soon as possible, in order to improve
its work.
The interaction between the Council and other
organs of the United Nations, particularly the General
Assembly, is a question that has always come up
when we discuss the issue of reform. In that regard,
the increasing number of open debates, which allow
non-Council-member States to share common concerns
in a spirit of complementarity and responsibility, is
commendable. Some delegations have proposed, in
that connection, that the documents the Council adopts
at the end of such open debates reflect the positions
expressed in those debates, which would mean delaying
their adoption. While sharing such concerns, we
believe that we should not throw out the baby with the
bathwater, since the adoption of such documents would
be subject to intense negotiations with non-members,

12-60476

S/PV.6870

which is not always guaranteed to succeed and could
lead to blockages that would affect the desired result.

which would enable this principle organ of the United
Nations to be more transparent and credible.

My delegation would also like to welcome the
dialogue that has begun between the Council and other
organizations or entities in the area of the maintenance
of international peace and security. Such informal
interactive dialogues, such as those that took place this
year with the delegations of the Economic Community
of West African States on Togo’s initiative, and with the
African Union on the crises in Mali and Guinea-Bissau,
have the advantage of enabling direct exchanges aimed
at deciding on the best action to undertake. Such
praiseworthy initiatives must be continued, as should
the holding of Arria Formula meetings and meetings
for the exchange of information and views with
troop — and police-contributing countries.

Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this thematic debate on the working
methods of the Council. This annual gathering is of
particular importance, as it offers the opportunity to
the United Nations membership as a whole not only
to evaluate the Council’s efforts to provide greater
transparency, effectiveness and inclusiveness in its work,
but also to make proposals and comments to contribute to
the progress of the Council’s work in this area. We would
like to thank the Indian and Portuguese delegations
for the joint concept note (S/2012/853, annex) they
submitted for the present debate, which will facilitate
our consideration of the topic.

The meeting held this year between the members
of the Security Council and the heads of peacekeeping
missions around the world was very significant and
should become established practice (see S/PV.6789).

The Charter has conferred upon the Council
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The importance of
that mandate and its impact on a large majority of
Member States explain and justify their following of,
and involvement in, the Council’s activities and work,
which are no longer limited to traditional situations of
war and peace but now touch on complex issues such
as terrorism and nuclear non-proliferation. While the
Council has certainly taken important steps over the
years both to improve the effectiveness of its work and to
open itself to non-member States, in particular through
the adoption of presidential note 507 (S/2012/507),
optimizing the effectiveness and transparency of the
Council calls for continued effort. In that regard, my
delegation would like to make the following comments
and observations.

Another topic we continue to follow is cooperation
between the Council and regional and subregional
organizations. In the context of subsidiarity, under
Chapter VIII of the Charter, such meetings are of
increasing interest at a time when regional organizations
such as the African Union are making greater efforts
to seek solutions to conflicts both within and between
States. We firmly encourage the continuation of that
practice and of exchanges with the Peacebuilding
Commission, which should be held more regularly.
There are many areas where the Security Council
must improve its working methods. They are all equally
important, so I will not list them now. What reassures
us most is that the Council, which is master of its own
agenda, has taken note of the importance of this subject
and is tackling it. A great deal of time will be required
to adopt all the measures needed in that regard, and even
more time to put them into practice. The enthusiasm
characterizing the discussion and adoption of measures
to improve working methods is lacking when it comes
to their implementation. It is in there that more work
needs to be done, because it is useless to decide upon
something without implementing it.
What is certain is that the road ahead is long and
that we need to continue to work together, with external
and internal stakeholders, to reach the laudable goal of
reforming the working methods of the Security Council,

12-60476

First, I wish to pay tribute to Mr. José Filipe Moraes
Cabral, Ambassador of Portugal, who has undeniably
breathed new life into the work of the Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
He will leave an indelible mark on the work of that
Group. Traditionally, the workload of the Council was
spread unevenly throughout the year, with a heavier
programme of work in June and December. The Council
has managed to make some slight changes to the dates
for the renewal of mandates and the publication of
reports of the Secretary-General and of the various
committees so as to distribute them evenly throughout
the whole year. That has helped to reduce the pressure
on the Secretariat.
The Council has taken a number of steps to make
better use of the resources at its disposal, including
13

S/PV.6870

consulting on two topics during the same meeting. That
has allowed for budgetary savings, which have been
redistributed to the subsidiary bodies of the Council.
We support the Council’s use of new information
technologies, in particular videoconferencing for ad
hoc briefings. The Council can make use of many
formats for its meetings. We note that the number of
public meetings is on the rise. We remain of the view
that the format chosen for each meeting should take
into account the sensitivity and the nature of the topic
at hand and the context in which its consideration is
planned.
Open debates strengthen the interactions and
relationships between the Security Council and the
Member States and regional organizations. We believe
that such debates should have a specific scope and
focus on specific topics. The Council should take
full advantage in its deliberations of the views and
proposals expressed by the Member States, which must
be afforded adequate time to prepare for such debates.
The Council should also make optimal use of its
interactions with countries contributing police and
troops to peacekeeping operations when discussing
or renewing their mandates. The same goes for the
Peacebuilding Commission and its various countryspecific configurations, which should be systematically
invited to participate in the work of the Council in
order to take into full account their contributions and
proposals.
Informational meetings for Member States and the
press on the programme of work, which are organized
on a monthly basis by the Council presidency, are an
excellent opportunity to discuss the Council’s daily
work and the aims and priorities of each presidency.
Greater participation by Member States in those
meetings would strengthen their relevance.
Stronger cooperation has been established between
the Council and a number of regional organizations.
We cannot but welcome that. We note, for example,
that the Council is interacting to a greater degree
with the League of Arab States and that a presidential
statement was adopted in September, under the
German presidency, calling for the strengthening of
that partnership (S/PRST/2012/20). The Council could
also reaffirm its cooperation with other regional and
subregional organizations. Subregional organizations
have shown that they can play an important role
alongside the Council in solving recent crises affecting
their respective regions.
14

The annual report of the Security Council to the
General Assembly (A/67/2) has undergone several
improvements in terms of both format and content.
Seeking the opinions of Member States prior to the
drafting of the report is a practice that should be
continued and strengthened.
Subsidiary bodies and working groups now
occupy an important place in the work of the Council,
and their chairs take on a heavy workload. Elected
members of the Council should, before being allocated
chairmanships, have the opportunity to express their
choice and preference regarding their desired role.
Finally, we note with satisfaction the work of
the Security Council Affairs Division, in particular
the setting up the Council website in the six official
languages of the United Nations. The website contains
comprehensive and up-to-date information on the
Council’s activities and those of its subsidiary bodies.
We strongly support that effort.
The increased participation in today’s debate,
which has been underscored by most of my colleagues,
clearly shows the interest that all Member States have
in the Council’s work. Improving the working methods
of the Council should remain a work in progress. We
believe that effort at improvement should be followed
up through a periodic review of presidential note 507
and more effective participation by Council members
in that undertaking.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Indian presidency for convening this now annual
debate on the working methods of the Security
Council. I would also like to thank Ambassador Moraes
Cabral for chairing the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
The Council determines its agenda and its
procedures. They are provisional and enable practice
to vary according to needs. That is to the Council’s
advantage, which can adapt itself to new requirements.
The review in 2010 contained in the annex to
presidential note S/2010/507 on the Council’s good
practices clarifies our working methods. On that basis,
I will make two observations.
First of all, there have been efforts to improve the
Council’s working methods. In particular, the public
nature and transparency of debates have been enhanced.
I would like to cite four examples.

12-60476

S/PV.6870

First, the majority of Council meetings are now
public or include a public part. On matters of general
interest, we believe that the open debate formula should
prevail. We would like in particular to hear more often
from the High Commissioner for Human Rights in the
Chamber, rather than in consultations.
Secondly, at the initiative of France and the United
Kingdom, there is now a regular dialogue with countries
that contribute troops to peacekeeping operations. With
the help of all interested delegations, we must now
ensure the greater substance of such dialogue.
Thirdly, the President of the Council regularly
meets the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Chairs of its country-specific configurations who
are invited to participate in Council debates.
Lastly, thanks to the revamped Council website
and regularly updated documents on all mandates and
operations, the President and the Secretariat provide
all members and officials of the Organization with the
information that they need on the work of the Council
in all official languages.
There have been further developments this year.
In 2012, the Informal Working Group discussed the
recommendations put forward by States in the course of
the open debate held in November 2011 (see S/PV.6672).
That shows our concern in listening to the ideas of all
States. Points of agreement were found on the better
use of Council resources and greater interactivity in its
consultations.
My second observation is that we can continue to
make progress and to be innovative. First, we need to
better use the tools available to us. By way of example, I
should like to refer to field missions that enable Council
members to engage with local actors. It is appropriate to
draw greater advantage from such missions by defining
our objectives more specifically and by ensuring that
there is follow-up to the conclusions drawn from such
deployments.
Secondly, the Council now regularly holds
exchanges with the Department of Political Affairs on
threatening situations that justify particular attention.
Allow us to recall that through that practice the Council
was first able to consider the situation in Mali. In that
way, the Council has the means to better anticipate and
prevent crises.
Thirdly, we must ensure consistency in our
consideration of, and action on, thematic resolutions

12-60476

and geographic agenda items. In that regard, we agree
with the recommendations of the group of five small
nations on increasing the link between the work of the
Security Council on thematic issues, namely, the rule
of law, combating impunity, the protection of civilians
and emerging situations, and its action on specific
situations. The Council has adopted an ambitious
framework regarding the protection of civilians,
children in armed conflict and combating gender-based
violence in conflict situations. We must implement such
principles in the context of geographical resolutions.
Our annual report does not reflect the total synergy of
those two approaches.
In the same spirit, France believes that the sanctions
regimes should be applied more systematically to
persons subject to arrest warrants of international
criminal jurisdiction or the leading perpetrators of acts
of piracy.
Fourthly, as I already pointed out in the open debate
convened by Guatemala on 17 October (see S/PV.6849),
France supports the permanent members of the Council
voluntarily and jointly foregoing the use of the veto
in situations under the Council’s consideration in
which mass atrocities are being committed and, more
generally, which pertain to the responsibility to protect.
Finally, as the Council has drawn up new meeting
formats that facilitate better exchanges with the United
Nations membership and other actors under Arria
Formula meetings or interactive dialogues, it seems to
us appropriate to amend the mandates of the Working
Groups of the Council when new issues emerge. That
could be done in a dynamic and flexible way. As we
discussed on 17 October, I would particularly like to
see the 15 Council members consider developing a
broader mandate for the informal working group on ad
hoc tribunals.
In conclusion, we encourage the future Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions to draw working proposals from
this open debate, as Ambassador Moraes Cabral has
done in the course of this year.
Mr. Laher (South Africa): We thank you,
Mr. President, for your excellent initiative in continuing
this important debate and for jointly preparing the
concept paper on working methods (see S/2012/853,
annex) together with Portugal in its capacity as Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions.

15

S/PV.6870

We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered later this morning by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran in its capacity as Chair of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

the Sanctions Committees on Somalia and Eritrea and
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example,
to engage the relevant stakeholders and Member States
in its deliberations.

The past few years have seen greater demands by
the global community for democracy, transparency and
accountability. That has translated into positive changes
in many Member States. The Security Council cannot
remain immune to such complexities of a changing
international environment. To remain relevant, the
reform of the Council in both its composition and its
working methods remain one of the key priorities of the
United Nations.

An encouraging development has been the use of
the informal interactive dialogue, which has allowed
the Council to interact informally with individual
Member States, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
and subregional and regional organizations. In our
view, given the linkages between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, the Council has benefited tremendously
from its increased interaction with the PBC. Given
the advisory role of the Commission, however, that
interaction should translate into the views of the PBC
being reflected when the mandates of peacekeeping
missions are considered.

We have seen some progress by the Security
Council in responding to those new demands through
an increasing focus on improving its working methods.
In that regard, presidential note S/2010/507 continues to
be a key commitment in order to enhance the efficiency
and transparency of the Council’s work. The consistent
implementation of its provisions must therefore remain
central to the Council’s work for ensuring greater
accountability. The challenge is to ensure that those
measures are made permanent. Those reforms, as well
as the provisional rules of procedures, should become
permanent so that the Council can have predictable
rules that can be followed.
As its decisions affect Member States outside the
Council, its work and decisions can benefit from the
views of all Member States. South Africa welcomes the
continuing progress in increasing the number of public
meetings and the greater frequency of public briefings
by special envoys and special representatives. It is also
worth noting that briefings to the general membership
by the incoming and outgoing Presidents of the Council
are becoming standard practice. We commend the
work of the Secretariat in publishing documents on
the mandate cycles and on revamping the Council’s
website. Those developments increase transparency in
the work of the Council.
The Council’s outreach has also expanded through
the work of its subsidiary bodies. As Chair of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa, South Africa has endeavoured to
involve the broader membership and non-State entities
in the discussions on the Group’s agenda by opening up
its meetings. We are of the view that other subsidiary
bodies of the Council could also benefit from such
engagement. In that regard, we welcome the initiative of

16

Equally, interaction with troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) has been on the increase and has
been scheduled well in advance of Council meetings.
However, we could benefit from more meaningful
and substantive engagement during such meetings,
in particular as TCCs are often directly affected by
decisions of the Council. The Council’s request in
resolution 2076 (2012) that the Secretary-General
consult with troop — and police-contributing countries
to the the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
welcome development.
While those are modest measures, they continue
to be important steps towards improving the work of
the Council and ensuring greater transparency and
accountability. More needs to be done to ensure that
those developments translate into substantive and
meaningful engagement between the Council and the
general membership.
Field visits by members of the Security Council
continue to be an important vehicle for the Council’s
understanding of the situation on the ground and for
its ability to make informed decisions. During the
past year, visits to Haiti, West Africa and Timor-Leste
were beneficial and helped the Council in carrying out
its mandate effectively. Equally, visits by Chairs of
subsidiary bodies enhance the outreach of such vital
bodies. Given the usefulness of such visits, including
mini-missions, the Council may wish to consider
increased field visits, as well as by Chairs of subsidiary
bodies. However, South Africa was disappointed that
the Council was not able to visit key regions on its

12-60476

S/PV.6870

agenda, such as the Middle East, in spite of formal
invitations and the overwhelming support of Council
members for such visits.
In our experience, elected members of the Council
are confronted by numerous constraints that result from
the current configuration, which affords dominance
and permanence to the non-elected members. That
dominance is experienced at the very start of one’s
tenure on the Council when the five permanent
members allocate the chairmanships of the subsidiary
bodies without themselves chairing any — and with
little or no consultation with the members concerned. It
further permeates the daily work of the Council as three
permanent members are penholders on almost every
country-specific issue on the Council’s agenda. We are
encouraged by the efforts of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
under the able stewardship of Ambassador Moraes
Cabral, to promote greater transparency, efficiency
and inclusiveness in the appointment of the Chairs of
subsidiary bodies, penholdership, the preparation of the
annual report and monthly assessments. Those efforts
must be continued and further enhanced.
In addition, we remain concerned that resolutions
and decisions of the Council are often drafted in small
groups and presented as faits accomplis to elected
members. While we support broad consultation by the
Council, its decisions should be open to debate among
all members of the Council.
In responding to an increasingly complex and
changing world, the Council has become increasingly
reliant on regional and subregional organizations
that are playing a direct role in conflict prevention,
resolution and management. South Africa is
particularly pleased with the enhanced strategic
cooperation between the African Union Peace and
Security Council and the United Nations Security
Council, specifically in connection with the adoption
of resolution 2033 (2012). The positive impact of that
strategic coordination is evidenced in the subsequent
adoption of resolution 2046 (2012), concerning the
Sudan and South Sudan, as well as the adoption of
resolution 2036 (2012), which authorized an increase in
the troop levels of the African Union Mission in Somalia.
The ongoing consultation between the Council and
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel,
which is playing a leadership role in resolving postComprehensive Peace Agreement issues, continues to
benefit the Council in addressing the matter.

12-60476

South Africa is also pleased that the annual
consultation between the Council and the Peace and
Security Council has become more structured and
effective. In that regard, we are of the view that greater
strategic coordination between the United Nations
and the African Union will enhance the effectiveness
of the Council in addressing challenges to peace and
security on the African continent. We are confident that
the continued cooperation and unity between the two
Councils could be of immense benefit with respect to
addressing the challenges we face in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Guinea-Bissau and Mali and the
widerSahel region.
In spite of those positive developments, my
delegation remains concerned about the tendency in
some cases whereby the Council is selective in picking
elements of decisions of regional organizations, such as
the African Union and the League of Arab States, that
advance the national interests of some members. It is
important that the principle of subsidiarity be respected
if we are to establish better synergies in enhancing
cooperation, especially on the African continent. We
therefore call for greater consistency from the Council
in engaging with regional bodies.
As a means of concretely fostering cooperation,
South Africa encourages the President of the Council
to interact regularly with the Chairperson of the Peace
and Security Council on issues on the agendas of both
Councils. The two Councils could further benefit from
more interaction and substantive discussion on a regular
basis. In that regard, the use of video technology could
successfully be deployed to regularize such interaction
between the two Councils.
In conclusion, whereas the debate on working
methods could be mistakingly considered as a mere
technical matter, it continues to be a political debate
dependent upon the political will of its members. As
such, the Council should continue to work towards
increasing and improving its transparency and
accountability, thereby ensuring greater effectiveness
and legitimacy in its work. In responding to an everchanging world, the Council and its working methods
cannot remain static. They must adapt to ensure greater
legitimacy and effectiveness. Cosmetic changes to the
working methods do not advance the fundamental need
for a reform of the Council and the expansion of its
membership in both the permanent and non-permanent
categories. We must therefore speed up the reform of

17

S/PV.6870

the Council if we are to avoid further erosion of the
legitimacy and credibility of this organ.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate on the issue of the Council’s
working methods. I would also like to thank you for the
concept note you have circulated to inform our debate
(S/2012/853, annex). We trust that our deliberations will
make it possible to renew the commitment to continue
to move forward with improving the efficiency,
transparency and interactivity of the Security Council.
I would also like especially to thank the Permanent
Representative of Portugal for his statement and for
his work as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
We acknowledge the progress that has been made
with regard to some of the Council’s practices, as well
as in connection with improving new measures set out
in presidential note 507 (S/2010/507) and subsequent
such notes. In that regard, the progress made in the
Informal Working Group this year and the measures
that have been adopted to improve internal aspects
of the Council’s work, including the establishment
of a new web page in the six official languages, are
all commendable. Nevertheless, we believe that there
is still room for improvement. In that connection, I
should like to highlight some practices that we believe
should be improved or more systematically carried out.
I should mention that I will be guided by the concept
note, insofar as I shall not revisit the great number of
items that we have discussed in the past — and will
continue to discuss — under the rubric of working
methods of the Council.

taken of the work done by other bodies, such as the Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly, in considering
budget adoptions for peacekeeping operations.
Regarding requests for reports, we heard what the
Secretariat said about wanting more specific requests,
particularly with respect to the spacing, content and
scope of reports.
Presidential note 507 provides us with a number
of measures, including the possibility of reviewing
certain paragraphs in the light of the criteria that we
are continuing to elaborate in terms of spacing out
mandate renewals, grouping meetings by theme and
streamlining requests for reports.
Secondly, we would as a priority continue to improve
the interaction between the chairs of subsidiary bodies,
that is, Committees and informal working groups, with
all Member States. In particular, we deem necessary the
development of a mechanism for interaction with those
Member States that are to hold such chairmanships,
particularly those that are joining the Council for the
first time, so that they not only have the opportunity
to voice their preferences but are also enabled better to
prepare for their roles and work.
We support an informal process in which all Council
members participate that is efficient, transparent and
inclusive and that would facilitate the exchange of
information on the work done by subsidiary organs.
We believe that recently elected members must be
consulted immediately following their election. The
Informal Working Group is considering proposals to
that end, and we trust that it will be possible to approve
as soon as possible a President’s note on that issue.

First, I should like to mention the importance that
we attach to the regular consideration of the items on the
Council’s agenda. In that connection, I should like thank
the Secretariat for the broad perspective encompassed
by document published on 1 November on the mandates
and publication cycles of Security Council reports.
The practices of spacing the renewal of mandates,
grouping meetings by theme and streamlining requests
for reports are not only common sense; they have also
demonstrated their utility. That is a specific measure
that we support, as it benefits Council Presidents,
experts negotiating draft resolutions and the Secretariat
itself.

Thirdly, we wish to highlight the importance of
public meetings and the usefulness of open debates,
which promote greater participation of non-members of
the Council, with measures that include ensuring that
Member States are given enough time to prepare useful
contributions; increasing interactivity, by inviting
non-Council members to alternate their statements with
those of Council members; and promoting more focused
contributions, for instance through the preparation of
concept notes and, where possible, following up on
relevant contributions made by participants after the
holding of an open debate. In that respect, I would recall
that four open debates were held under the presidency
of Guatemala, in October.

We trust that this exercise will continue to be
implemented in an orderly and well-planned fashion.
We believe that to that end greater account must be

My fourth and final point concerns the need for
closer cooperation between the Council on the one

18

12-60476

S/PV.6870

hand and regional and subregional organizations on
the other with respect to the management of crises and
armed conflicts. It is important to increase the number
of Security Council consultations held with regional
and subregional organizations playing an active role in
crisis resolution and the settlement of armed conflicts,
such as the African Union and the League of Arab
States, especially when the Council is acting under
Chapter VII of the Charter. That would ensure greater
efficiency in the short, medium and long terms with
respect to finding lasting solutions to crises.
We deem it important to continue to be innovative
and to adopt other measures, with the necessary political
will on the part of Member States, particularly the
permanent members, in order to improve the working
methods of the Security Council. Transparency,
accountability and consistency are key elements
that must obtain for the Security Council in all of its
activities, approaches and procedures.
There is no doubt that improving the working
methods of the Council would contribute to
strengthening its capacity to maintain international
peace and security and to administer efficiently and
effectively its growing workload and the multiplicity
and complexity of the items on its agenda.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
The United States welcomes today’s discussion, and
we thank Ambassador Moraes Cabral for his diligent
work as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
Under the United Nations Charter, the Security
Council has the primary responsibility in the United
Nations to maintain international peace and security. To
fulfil this most critical of mandates, the Council must
continually strive to improve its working methods, with
a focus on enhancing its effectiveness and optimizing
transparency. The Council must be able to act quickly
and with a high level of flexibility, and we have already
taken some notable steps in that direction, such as our
quick turnaround meetings this month to discuss the
situations in Gaza and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We should build on this, while remaining
mindful that Article 30 of the Charter mandates the
Council to adopt its own rules of procedure.
The Council has also increased the accessibility of
its work to Member States and the public. Last year,
less than 10 per cent of the Council’s meetings were
private, compared with almost 30 per cent in 2002 — a

12-60476

very good trend. The monthly assessments produced by
Council Presidents provide the broader United Nations
membership with a regular snapshot of the Council’s
work. In addition, we intend to propose that the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions hold open meetings, similar to
those we already hold for the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning CounterTerrorism, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and the sanctions Committees.
Such meetings would allow the Chairman to explain
the Group’s mandate to Member States and to provide
another forum to hear views on working methods.
In July, the Council President traditionally meets
with Member States to solicit views on the annual report
of the Security Council to the General Assembly. The
United States, as Council President for July 2013, looks
forward to continuing that practice and to receiving
suggestions on ways to enhance the report.
The United States values the participation of all
Member States in the Council’s open debates, such as the
one today, and in the our various informal discussions,
as well as in country — or region-specific meetings and
informal processes such as groups of friends. In the past,
we have also welcomed the chairs of country-specific
configurations of the Peacebuilding Commission,
subsidiary bodies and sanctions committees to brief the
Council or participate in discussions. Such important
interaction helps the Council mitigate, or, hopefully,
prevent, the recurrence of the conflicts on our agenda,
and also consider new threats. Arria Formula meetings,
such as the Council’s session with the independent
international commission of inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic, are an important tool for us to hear the
views of interested Member States and of civil society.
We should look for ways to discuss more issues in this
manner.
While the Council’s formal meetings make
headlines, much of our work occurs outside the
Chamber, especially in negotiations on the Council’s
resolutions and statements. On these, Council members
should consider carefully the views of other Member
States, including those expressed in letters to the
Council, and consult with concerned States about the
content of Council products.
Beyond greater transparency and interactivity, we
must keep working to make the Council more effective.
Increased use of video teleconferencing has provided
the Council with better, more timely information
19

S/PV.6870

on existing and emerging conflicts, enabling the
Council to maintain its vital role in early warning
and conflict prevention. In 2009, the Council held one
video teleconference; in 2011, we held 26. In addition,
comprehensive mandates designed by the Council, such
as those supporting the safety and security of women
and children, have proven valuable in resolving conflict
and assisting stability and recovery in post-conflict
situations.
Indeed, a more effective Security Council must
remain our collective goal. Increased transparency on
the participation of the Council and its engagement with
the broader United Nations membership can support
that goal, but proposals must be carefully assessed to
ensure that transparency and effectiveness are mutually
reinforcing, and not at cross-purposes.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of India.
At the outset, I would like to thank Ambassador
Moraes Cabral, Permanent Representative of
Portugal, and his delegation for co-authoring with
my delegation the concept note for today’s open
debate (S/2012/853, annex). I would also like to put on
record our deep appreciation of Ambassador Moraes
Cabral’s stewardship of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions
this year. His active involvement and guidance have
enabled the Working Group to consider several issues
related to the Council’s working methods in order to
promote transparency and the greater involvement of
elected members in the Council’s work.
The Security Council is mandated by the United
Nations Charter with the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
What the Council does and how it acts to discharge
its responsibility is thus of interest to the entire
international community, not only to Council members,
let alone the permanent members.
Over the years, there has been a growing realization
that the Council’s composition, rooted in the situation
obtaining in 1945, and its working methods are divorced
from contemporary reality of international relations.
This is exemplified by the fact that the Council has
shown little interest in consulting with those affected
most by its decisions and in adopting transparent and
inclusive rules of procedures that remain provisional
even after the Council’s existence for six and a half
decades. The Council has also not acted to harness the

20

capabilities of the wider United Nations membership.
Its all-too-evident eagerness to apply methods of
coercion under Chapter VII, to the neglect of provisions
under Chapters VI and VIII, has proved to be counterproductive in resolving several crises, even while the
Council has sought to expand the definition of peace
and security with a view to encroaching upon the
Charter-mandated roles of other United Nations organs.
Let me briefly share India’s perspective on how the
Security Council could better its performance. First,
the permanent members of the Security Council must
recognize, not only individually but also collectively,
that the Council must be reformed to make it reflect
the contemporary realities of the international system.
Secondly, the international community as a whole
must be cognizant that enlarging the Security Council
to reflect contemporary geopolitical realities would
improve its representative character and grant greater
legitimacy and credibility to its decisions. Thirdly, there
is a need for real improvement in its working methods
to enhance the Council’s effectiveness and efficiency.
Cosmetic changes to working methods alone will not
help. Real improvement needs changes in both process
and approach, which require reform of the composition
of the Council.
Insofar as the working methods of the Council
are concerned, the first and foremost necessity is
to make them transparent and inclusive. Access to
documentation and information is an issue of particular
concern, and the tendency to hold closed meetings that
have no records should be curbed. During the past
two years, we have strongly supported efforts in the
Informal Working Group aimed at improving Council’s
working methods. Some specific points include the
following.
First, the Council should amend its procedures so
that items do not remain on its agenda permanently.
Second, the reporting cycle should be practical
and results-oriented so that issues do not come for
consideration so routinely as to bog down the limited
time that the Council has at its disposal.
Third, the mandate cycle should be streamlined to
spread the Council’s work throughout the year.
Fourth, Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter must be
fully implemented by consulting with non-Security
Council members on a regular basis, especially
members with a special interest in a substantive matter
under the Council’s consideration.
12-60476

S/PV.6870

Fifth, penholders should allow the greater and
systematic participation of elected members as
co-penholders.
Sixth, non-members should be given systematic
access to subordinate organs of the Security Council,
including the right to participate.
Seventh, the participation of troop- and policecontributing countries in decision-making concerning
peacekeeping operations must cover the establishment,
conduct, review and termination of peacekeeping
operations, including the extension and change of
mandates, as well as for specific operational issues.
Eighth, countries having a specific interest in a
particular agenda-item must be consulted before an
outcome document on that item is adopted.
Ninth, the Council should concentrate its time and
efforts on dealing with issues concerning its primary
responsibility with regard to international peace and
security as mandated by the United Nations Charter,
rather than encroach upon the mandate of the General
Assembly.
Tenth, before mandating measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter, the Council should first make serious
efforts to achieve pacific settlements of disputes through
measures under Chapter VI. In this connection, the
Council must also improve its cooperation with regional
organizations, particularly the African Union (AU),
since a large volume of the Council’s work concerns the
African continent. Such cooperation must be serious
and include providing assistance for the AU’s capacitybuilding, as per its requirements, not only when some
permanent members deem it in their interest.
It is our expectation that these ideas will be
pursued by Council members in the coming months so
that the views expressed by the wider United Nations
membership find resonance in the Council’s work and
working methods.
In conclusion, let me reiterate India’s considered
view that genuine reform of the working methods of
the Security Council requires a comprehensive reform
of the membership of the Council, with expansion in
both permanent and non-permanent categories, not
only improvement in its working procedures. This is
essential both to the credibility and to the continued
confidence of the international community in this
institution.

12-60476

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Before I invite speakers under rule 37, I wish to
remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than four minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this important open debate on the working
methods of the Security Council. We also thank you for
circulating the concept note that guides our discussion
today (S/2012/853, annex). And we take this opportunity
to thank Ambassador José Filipe Moraes Cabral for his
briefing and to congratulate him on his commitment to
increased transparency and openness on the part of the
Council.
Brazil has been a long-standing supporter of
measures to promote the transparency, inclusiveness and
accessibility of the Council to the wider membership.
We actively worked to further this goal during our most
recent term in this body, including when we held its
presidency in February 2011.
There is a strong desire on the part of Member States
to be better informed about the Council’s deliberations.
The call for a less opaque Council was once again
reiterated in the General Assembly during the recent
discussion of the Security Council’s annual report
to that body (A/67/2). There is, in particular, a wide
recognition of the need to promote closer ties between
the Security Council and the General Assembly. We
would welcome more frequent interactive briefings
and the presentation of special reports, in line with the
relevant Articles of the United Nations Charter. The
Council should also consider mechanisms to follow
up on suggestions made by non-members during the
debate of its report to the General Assembly.
We welcome recent initiatives to enhance the
relationship between the Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission. The informal interactive dialogue held
in July, under the Colombian presidency, brought
up interesting suggestions on how the Council could
benefit from the advisory role of the Peacebuilding
Commission. However, there is much room for
improvement. We encourage a dialogue between the
Council and the country-specific configurations on
21

S/PV.6870

a regular basis and in the context of the renewal of
mandates.
We commend the recent steps taken by the
Council to strengthen its relationship with regional and
international organizations, including through their
active participation in open debates.
It is important that the presidency of the Council
hold informational briefings, not only at the beginning
of its monthly work, but also at the end of each
presidency in the format of wrap-up sessions. Brazil
and Portugal recently held such meetings, which we
hope will soon become a regular practice. The growing
availability of information on the Council’s website,
including on mandate cycles, is also positive.
The same should apply to the Council’s subsidiary
organs. Informative and interactive briefings with
Member States have the potential to add transparency
to their activities, while offering an opportunity to all
interested delegations to provide input to the work of
those bodies.
Another issue that stands out as an important part
of the discussion on working methods is the question of
the interpretation and implementation of the Council’s
decisions. In many circumstances, especially when
the use of force is authorized, objective parameters
should be established. This would be indispensable
to increasing the accountability and effectiveness
of the Council’s decisions and avoiding the loose
interpretation of mandates.
Finally, allow me to stress that improving the
working methods is only a part of the broader need to
adapt the Security Council to the new international
reality. We reiterate our view that only a real reform
of the Council’s structure will make this body more
representative, transparent, efficient and legitimate. It
is our hope that Member States will, sooner rather than
later, take steps to promote a comprehensive reform
of the Security Council, with an enlargement in both
categories of membership.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liecthenstein): We commend
Portugal and Ambassador Moraes Cabral for their
work as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions. They
have shown outstanding leadership, and we are grateful
to them for the work that they have done.

22

The past years have seen some modest but important
improvements in the practice of the Council. The
annex to the presidential note contained in document
S/2010/507 is a set of measures that the Council itself
has agreed to take in order to better serve the interests
of the wider membership, as well as its own. More
than two years since it was issued, however, the full
and consistent implementation of these measures
remains elusive. The Working Group has continued
its commendable efforts. At the same time, progress
remains limited and slow.
A key issue for discussion at this time of year
is the more equal distribution of work between the
permanent and non-permanent members of the Council
as it prepares for a new year in a new composition. We
hope that genuine consultations will lead to a good
distribution of work in the subsidiary bodies, and we
certainly believe that the work of the Council would
benefit if non-permanent members were given a more
active role in the drafting of draft resolutions and
decisions.
We also look forward to improvements in the
format of the open debates of the Council. This could
perhaps be a topic for the Working Group to take up
early next year.
We value the work of the Working Group, but are
also realistic about its scope and potential, which are
focused mostly on the implementation of note 507. But
we must also advance discussions beyond that.
The point of reference for this discussion is, to
our mind, draft resolution A/66/L.42/Rev.2, which
was submitted to the General Assembly this spring
by Costa Rica, Jordan, Singapore, Switzerland and
ourselves — a group known as the group of five small
nations. That draft resolution dealt with enhancing the
accountability, transparency and effectiveness of the
Security Council, the goals on which the Council needs
to make tangible progress, as we all agreed in 2005.
The draft resolution received, as is well known,
considerable support among the membership of the
United Nations, to the point that we are asked to this
day why it was withdrawn instead of being put to a
vote. While this is certainly not the place to discuss
the reasons, we would like to recall the annex to the
draft resolution, which should serve as a yardstick in
our discussions on the Council’s working methods. It
continues to reflect the agenda that the Security Council
should deal with, according to the membership that

12-60476

S/PV.6870

it represents. This is true even for most of those who
were not willing to support the draft resolution, as they
advanced reasons of procedure rather than substance
to explain their reluctance. If the Security Council is
serious in its resolve to advance its working methods, it
has now been given a detailed menu for doing so.
Of particular relevance in the work of the Council
is the area of accountability. Two decades after the
establishment of the first ad hoc tribunal, it often seems
that the Council finds itself in uncharted territory in
this respect. At the same time, the accountability needs
and the relevant pressure on the Council are increasing,
as is illustrated in connection with the widespread
and systematic crimes committed against the civilian
population in Syria. There is a clear need for the Council
to engage with the rest of the membership in an in-depth
and comprehensive discussion of the role that it can
play in this respect. The open debate that Guatemala
organized on this topic in October (S/PV.6849) was a
significant step, while just a first one. We organized
a workshop with the International Peace Institute on
the same topic earlier this month, and hope that other
States, members of the Council or otherwise, will show
an active interest in this important subject.
A substantial part of this discussion, while by far not
all of it, will naturally revolve around the International
Criminal Court, given the competencies assigned to
the Council under the Rome Statute. As a first small
step in this direction, we believe that a subsidiary
body — preferably an existing one — should be
designated as the place where relevant topics, including
notifications from the Court on non-cooperation, can
be discussed. To this end, my delegation, together with
the delegations of Costa Rica and Jordan, has submitted
a letter (S/2012/860) to you, Sir, asking that the Council
take such a step as a concrete follow-up to the open
debate held in October.
The use of the veto is a central aspect of the way
in which the Council carries out its work or, more
frequently, fails to do so. The past year has given ample
evidence to this effect. The veto as such is part and
parcel of the Charter of the United Nations, which
we all have ratified. But it is essential that it not be
used contrary to the very purposes and principles of
the Organization and that a minimum of accountability
be provided in this respect. We believe that a code of
conduct regarding the use of the veto would be useful,
with a clear emphasis on its use in situations involving
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.

12-60476

We encourage the Council, in particular its permanent
members, to commence this discussion.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand thanks
India and you, Sir, personally for convening this debate
and for the concept note (S/2012/853, annex), and
we compliment the Ambassador for Portugal on his
presentation.
This is an important debate. It is vital that the
Council be both efficient and effective in discharging
its responsibilities on our behalf, and to do that the
Council must be alert to opportunities to improve
its processes. We accept that most improvements to
Council working methods will be incremental and that
individual cases will often steer the nature and pace of
reform. But it is also true that this Council has often
been slow to adapt to the changing nature of the issues
it must address.
For example, much of the Council’s work is focused
on Africa, and yet the quality of the Council’s interaction
with the African Union’s Peace and Security Council
is still much less than it could be and is certainly still
much less than it should be. There is a general need for
effective interaction with regional organizations, but,
given the number of African issues on the Council’s
agenda, that need is particularly acute with respect to
the Peace and Security Council. We echo the comments
in that regard by South Africa and others because,
despite the excellent work of South Africa and other
African Council members, there is still much work to
be done. Resolution 2033 (2012) was only achieved
after several years of effort. It was an important step,
but its implementation is now critical and will require
innovative Council working methods.
Many United Nations Members are concerned that
the Security Council fails to achieve optimum outcomes
because it does not give due weight to the mechanisms
available under Chapter VI of the Charter — a point
also made by you, Mr. President. Mediation, conflict
prevention and the peaceful settlement of disputes are
not only efficient in that they are much less expensive
than costly peacekeeping and peace enforcement
operations, but many of us also believe that they deliver
more sustainable outcomes over the longer term. But
again, the Council’s working methods are not well
adapted to Chapter VI.

23

S/PV.6870

We admire South Africa’s efforts and determination
to transform the output of the Ad Hoc Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa from
the theoretical to the practical, but despite those efforts,
the Working Group’s potential is still not being realized.
Indeed, we would like to see a full-scale review of
the structure and functioning of all the Council’s
standing and ad hoc committees, working groups and
commissions. We believe that much of their work could
be greatly improved.
Likewise, we welcome the United Kingdom’s
initiative to use horizon-scanning to improve Council
capacity for Chapter VI action. But that has largely
fallen by the wayside — so much so that in 2012 this
Council is much less systematically briefed by the
Secretariat on developing situations than it was in
the past. We consider that horizon-scanning briefings
should be a regular feature of the Council’s programme
of work.
Past Council members have raised the important
issue of the interdependence between security and
development and the overlap between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. We commend Brazil, South Africa,
Nigeria, Turkey and others for keeping those discussions
before the Council. But despite their best efforts, the
Council’s outcome documents rarely get past the point
of problem definition.
Everyone seems to agree that there is a problem,
but the working methods reforms required for the
Security Council to work in partnership with others and
to implement solutions are still not being addressed.
Likewise, despite concerns expressed over many
years, there is still the problem of participation in the
Council’s work by those with a real interest in the issues
under discussion. The Arria Formula and interactive
dialogues are useful formats to extend participation, so
their use should be commonplace and not an exception.
As another way of extending participation, we would
urge the Council to consider, adapting as appropriate,
the Peacebuilding Commission’s (PBC) example of
country-specific configurations. The PBC precedent as
a whole probably is not applicable to Security Council
processes, but there is still much that could be learned
from that model.
The legal responsibility for adapting the Council’s
working methods rests, of course, with the Council
itself, but the wider United Nations membership has a
strong political, moral and often financial interest in

24

how well the Council functions. As the concept note
says, these matters concern the United Nations Member
States as a whole. And so, with such engagement
in mind, we propose that in 2013 there should be an
open Security Council debate focused on options
for improving the Council’s working methodologies
under Chapter VI. That debate could be preceded by
an informal interactive dialogue with non-Council
members, which would better inform the open debate
and could also result in an outcome document that
the Council itself could adopt. After that debate, the
Council and interested non-members might consider
establishing a dialogue group to address this and other
procedural issues on an ongoing basis.
We offer this as a constructive, practical proposal
for engaging the wider United Nations membership in
this important issue, while at the same time leaving
the ultimate decisions to the Council itself. We make
that proposal — indeed, all the suggestions we have
offered — in recognition and acknowledgement of the
open and constructive spirit in which you, Mr. President,
have convened this debate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank India for convening this important
open debate. I also wish to convey my country’s
appreciation to Portugal for its work to improve the
transparency, inclusiveness and efficiency of the
Security Council’s work during its chairmanship of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.
Historically, Argentina has promoted a more
transparent and democratic Security Council whenever
it has had the opportunity, including in the course of
the intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council
reform in the General Assembly. It is worth recalling
that it was Argentina who, in February 2000, during its
presidency of the Security Council, urged the adoption
of a presidential note in which newly elected members
were invited to participate as observers in informal
consultations during the month preceding their term
of membership as elected members of that organ
(S/2000/155). Also, during its most recent term in the
Council, in 2005 and 2006, my country promoted and
supported a number of initiatives aimed at achieving
greater transparency and access to the Council for the
wider United Nations membership.

12-60476

S/PV.6870

It would be unfair not to acknowledge the positive
developments that have taken place in the last few
years, including the holding of these debates, which
offer an opportunity for non-Council members to put
forward proposals aimed at further improving the
Council’s working methods and democratizing its
decision-making process. The interaction of the Security
Council with troop – and police-contributing countries,
with regional organizations and with the relevant
United Nations bodies, as well as the increase in Arria
Formula meetings, inter alia, are developments also
worth mentioning. However, we believe that, although
necessary, these achievements are not sufficient, as
became clear last May when the proposals of the group
of five small nations were discussed. Those proposals
are in line with Argentina’s position on the matter. At
that time, Argentina did not deem it advisable to force
a decision through a resolution adopted by a vote in
the General Assembly. However, there is no reason
why the Security Council should not benefit from the
contributions that an in-depth debate in the General
Assembly can generate. We believe that such a debate
on methodological improvements is both appropriate
and timely, and in no way impedes progress towards a
deeper, comprehensive reform of the Security Council.
The new measures being considered by the
Council with regard to the process of appointing the
chairs of subsidiary bodies and the exercise and role
of penholders seem to be going in a good direction,
despite the fact that, once again, the discussion of the
topic has been limited to Council members, without a
participatory process involving the wider membership.
The goal of achieving a more democratic, effective
and transparent Security Council requires that the means
for its transformation involve an open and inclusive
debate with the participation of the full membership.
Paragraph 1, Article 2, Chapter I of the Charter, which
governs and inspires us, reads: “The Organization is
based on the principle of the sovereign equality of all its
Members”. It is therefore clear that the most legitimate,
representative and efficient way to make sure that the
process moves forward is to work in consultation with
the entirety of the wider membership, while respecting
and taking into consideration its expectations.
Lastly, Argentina believes that updating the
working methods of the Security Council in response to
the demands of the international community for a more
democratic and transparent Security Council continues
to be an important goal, which Argentina endorses.

12-60476

In that regard, Argentina reaffirms its promise to
contribute its best efforts to the process in 2013-2014 as
a non-permanent member of the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
We thank the Indian presidency of the Council for
organizing today’s open debate on the working methods
of the Security Council. We welcome that this debate
has become an annual tradition. I would like to take
this opportunity to commend the remarkable work done
by Portugal as Chair of the Council’s Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions throughout 2012.
During the past few months, progress has been
made on the internal organization of the Council’s
work, notably with the adoption of the presidential note
of 5 June (S/2012/402), which recommends better use of
conference resources and greater interactivity during
consultations. With the aid of the Secretariat, efforts
have also been made to spread the mandate renewals
more evenly throughout the year.
Nevertheless, there is certainly still room for
improving the effectiveness of the Council’s work, for
increasing its transparency and for strengthening the
interaction between the Council and non-members.
The concept note prepared by India and Portugal
(S/2012/853, annex) contains helpful suggestions in that
regard. Without intending an exhaustive list, I would
like to mention a few concrete proposals that would
merit further consideration in Luxembourg’s view.
First, we should continue to improve the
transparency and interactivity of the Council’s debates
by tailoring the format of meetings to our needs. Arria
Formula meetings facilitate exchanges with civil society
and non-governmental organizations, the insights and
field experience of which can have particular relevance
for the Concil’s deliberations. Informal interactive
dialogues allow for increased interaction, inter alia with
non-members involved in a situation on the Council’s
agenda.
The dialogue on peacebuilding that took place on
12 July (see S/PV.6805), in which Luxembourg was
invited to take part in its capacity as Chair of the Guinea
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
was a good example of such interaction. Such dialogues
are useful insofar as adequate follow-up is ensured. In
our opinion, it is to be hoped that non-members that are
25

S/PV.6870

in a position to bring added value, such as the Chairs
of the PBC country-specific configurations, will be
invited to join the Council’s consultations.
Furthermore, developments in Africa and in the
Middle East strengthen our conviction that we should
continue to ensure the best possible interaction between
the Security Council and regional and subregional
organizations concerned, such as the African Union
and the League of Arab States. While respecting
competencies and mandates, we believe that the
Security Council should strive to make good use of the
particular expertise that those organizations, as well as
other stakeholders such as the European Union, have
to offer.
Finally, we encourage the initiatives taken in
recent years to better prepare the Security Council to
anticipate threats to international peace and security.
A case in point is the practice initiated under the
presidency of the United Kingdom in November 2010
to invite the Department of Political Affairs to present
to the Council issues that, because of their destabilizing
potential, deserve its attention. In our view, that is a
good example of applying Article 99 of the Charter,
under which the Secretary-General may bring to the
attention of the Security Council any matter that may
in his opinion threaten the maintenance of international
peace and security. If that early-warning function
is used wisely, the Security Council will be better
equipped to fulfil the responsibilities conferred upon
it by the Charter.
In the context of improving the working methods of
the Security Council, the case has often been made that
adequate follow-up should be given to the Council’s
thematic debates. To give but one example, the very rich
open debate that took place on 17 October under the
presidency of Guatemala on the topic of the interaction
between the Security Council and the International
Criminal Court (see S/PV.6849) clearly deserves such
follow-up.
The steps taken after the open debate of 30 November
2011 on working methods (see S/PV.6672) are, in our
view, a good example to follow in that regard. We hope
that today’s debate will encourage further progress and
that the useful suggestions made by the many Member
States participating in this debate will not go unheeded.
As an elected member of the Security Council for the
term 2013-2014, I can guarantee that Luxembourg will
spare no effort to contribute to the process.

26

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
express my appreciation for the work of Mr. José Filipe
Moraes Cabral, Permanent Representative of Portugal,
for his contribution in his capacity as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.
Under Article 25 of the Charter, we, the Member
States, accept decisions of the Security Council as
binding on all Member States. That does not mean,
however, that the legitimacy of decisions of the
Security Council can be taken for granted. Let us
recall that our leaders at the World Summit in 2005
agreed and adopted by consensus General Assembly
resolution 60/1, in which the Assembly recommended
that the Security Council enhance its accountability
to the membership and increase the transparency of
its work. In a nutshell, we should remind ourselves of
the fundamental structure provided for in the Charter,
in which improving the Council’s working methods
is indispensable for enhancing the legitimacy of the
decisions of the Security Council.
From that perspective, Japan attaches great
importance to the efforts to improve the Council’s
working methods. In its capacity as then Chair of the
Working Group, Japan took the initiative of compiling
the presidential note on the subject in 2006 (S/2006/507),
updating it in 2010 (S/2010/507). As duly reflected in
the revised note of 2010, significant progress has been
made so far. For example, the Council engages more
frequently than before in interactions with non-Council
members through various formats. Informal interactive
dialogues have been utilized this year in relation to
some regional and thematic issues. Furthermore,
the presidency briefs non-Council members on the
Council’s programme of work at the beginning of each
month, and that information is made readily available
on the Council website. We would like to commend
Portugal’s chairmanship of the Informal Working
Group this year, under which the Group realized a
notable achievement by issuing a presidential note in
June (S/2012/402) concerning conference resources
and interactivity. Since then, we understand that the
Working Group has been actively addressing other
issues, such as penholders in the drafting of resolutions
and chairpersons of subsidiary organs, inter alia. We
look forward to seeing the results of such discussions
adopted by the Council in due course so that the wider

12-60476

S/PV.6870

membership can better understand how the Council
intends to conduct its work in the future.
While acknowledging the progress made to date,
it is essential to further enhance the transparency of
the Council by steadily implementing note 507. The
efforts and cooperation of the Council, especially of the
permanent members, are indispensable for achieving
real progress in that area. Of course, periodic review of
the progress is necessary.
We all recall that last May, the group of five small
nations presented a draft resolution that had a direct
bearing on the improvement of the working methods of
the Security Council, but in the end the group withdrew
the draft resolution. The Permanent Representative of
Switzerland, Mr. Paul Seger, stated,
“We have listened carefully to the statements of the
permanent members of the Security Council that
they are ready to consider our recommendations
seriously, and we hold them to their promise,
with the Assembly as witness… If we see some
real substantive progress starting within the next
months, our efforts will not have been in vain”
(A/66/PV.108, p. 6).
Now we would like to know whether any tangible
progress has been made since then.
The participation of many non-Council members
in today’s meeting further testifies to the fact that the
working methods remain a critical issue. Recognizing
the importance of that issue, we look forward to seeing
the Council — including its newly elected members
for the next term — achieve greater progress in that
regard. I would like to reiterate Japan’s determination
to continue to actively contribute to promoting
improvement in the working methods.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore.
Mr. Chua (Singapore): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s debate. I will deliver a shortened
version of my statement; a longer version is being
circulated in the Chamber.
As is well known, Singapore strongly supports
Security Council reform, particularly in the area of
working methods. The working methods of the Security
Council are of fundamental interest to all Member
States. The Council has the power to authorize military
action and international sanctions — decisions that are
binding on all Member States. Through the veto, the
12-60476

five permanent members (P-5) can also prevent the
Council from taking such measures. Yet most of us
have no way of influencing the decisions of the Council.
We are called and dismissed entirely at the Council’s
discretion, even on issues that affect our countries
directly. We are expected to dutifully contribute to the
Council’s mandated operations and comply with its
decisions or lack thereof, even if they are not in the
interests of the international community.
Public statements made by the P-5 would
suggest that they share our position on the need for
improvements to the Council’s working methods. At
last year’s open debate (S/PV.6672), almost all of the
permanent members spoke in support of improving the
Council’s working methods. This morning, we have
also heard various permanent members express similar
support for and commitment to reforming the Council’s
working methods.
My delegation welcomes those commitments.
We are therefore puzzled that whenever serious
opportunities for improvements in working methods are
presented, they are more often than not blocked by none
other than the P-5. Naturally, the P-5 will point to an
increased number of open meetings and outreach to the
general membership as evidence of their commitment
to improving working methods. But meetings are no
substitute for genuine improvements.
Few issues galvanize the P-5 into a unity of purpose
and action as quickly as opposition to working methods
reform. Member States are no doubt familiar with what
happened in May when the group of five small countries
presented draft resolution A/66/L.42/Rev.2, designed
to improve the working methods of the Council. The
draft resolution’s aims were frankly rather modest, and
the impact of the recommendations would have been
limited even if they had been adopted, but the P-5
resorted to strong-arm tactics in order to ensure that
A/66/L.42/Rev.2 never saw the light of day.
One particular incident highlights the P-5’s
determined resistance to the reform of the Council’s
working methods, despite whatever they may proclaim
to the contrary. In response to a query from the
President of the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth
session, the Office of Legal Affairs (OLA) gave an
interpretation that “it would be appropriate if the
General Assembly were to adopt the draft resolution
with the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the General
Assembly membership”. Member States learnt of that
legal opinion, not from OLA or even from the President
27

S/PV.6870

of the General Assembly, who had first raised the
query. Instead, it was a permanent member who faxed
and emailed OLA’s legal opinion to all Member States
the morning of the formal consideration of the draft
resolution, with the admonition to all Member States to
support a no-action motion on A/66/L.42/Rev.2. How
did that P-5 mission procure the OLA’s legal opinion,
even before the President of the General Assembly
himself had circulated it to the United Nations
membership? What does that say about the P-5’s real
position on working methods of the Security Council?
Do deeds match words?
Let me cite another example. Draft resolution
A/66/L.42/Rev.2 had asked the P-5 to consider
refraining from vetoing action aimed at preventing
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity. That
aspect was considered particularly controversial by the
P-5, which were affronted by the suggestion that limits
be placed on the use of their veto power. That position
was shared by all the P-5, even those who fervently
support the principle of responsibility to protect. Those
permanent members that repeatedly express outrage
at what is happening within the Council on issues like
Syria are the same ones that blocked A/66/L.42/Rev.2.
Trumpeting moral outrage over the Council’s non-action
is particularly hypocritical because whatever divisions
there may be among the P-5, they are united in having
no limits placed on their use or abuse of the veto.
My statement today is not intended to be a diatribe
on the Security Council or the P-5. I hope that I will
not be misunderstood. Indeed, my delegation believes
that the Security Council, and permanent members in
particular, shoulder a long-standing responsibility on
behalf of the international community. By and large, the
Security Council does good work on behalf of Member
States in preserving international peace and security.
However, the P-5’s continued resistance to constructive
proposals on working methods does not serve the
interests of the United Nations membership or the
legitimacy and transparency of the Security Council,
or even ultimately the interests of the P-5 themselves. I
hope that it will not take a crisis of seismic proportions
to precipitate a fundamental change.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt): Egypt associates itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
28

At the outset, I would like to commend the Indian
presidency of the Security Council for convening
today’s open debate on the working methods of the
Council. I would like also to seize this opportunity
to congratulate Argentina, Australia, the Republic of
Korea, Luxembourg and Rwanda on their election as
non-permanent members of the Security Council for
the years 2013 and 2014. I would also like to thank
the outgoing members Colombia, Germany, India,
Portugal, and South Africa for their efforts during the
years 2011 and 2012.
Reforming the Security Council’s working methods
is an important component of the overall reform and
expansion of the Council in accordance with General
Assembly decision 62/557. It is indeed a positive step
to have annual open debates in the Security Council
on improving the Council’s working methods in order
to systematically analyse the progress achieved in that
regard. Convening such open debates, however, is not
an end in itself. The outcome of such debates should
reflect the views expressed by non-Council members if
the Council is to achieve efficiency, transparency and
inclusiveness.
A major concrete step towards improving the
working methods of the Council would be to reach
an agreement on the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, which have been in force for more than 60
years now. The effective functioning of the Council
has a direct impact on the general membership of the
United Nations.
Egypt appreciates the work of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, under the chairmanship of the Permanent
Representative of Portugal. We note the adoption of
presidential note 402 (S/2012/402), which contains
measures on the use of conference services and proposals
to enhance interaction during the consultations of
the whole. However, greater effort should be made
to promote full implementation of presidential note
S/2010/507, which was prepared two years ago. For
its part, the Secretariat should continue to update the
repertoire of the practice of the Security Council as
a valuable source of information about the Council’s
evolving practices on procedural and substantive
matters alike. We appreciate the Secretariat’s efforts to
develop the Security Council web page, making it more
informative and user-friendly.
The Security Council’s annual report should be more
comprehensive and analytical. The General Assembly
12-60476

S/PV.6870

should be well informed not only about the decisions
adopted by the Council but also about the reasons for
those decisions and the backdrops against which they
are taken, as well as their impact on situations on
the ground. We also expect the Council, in its future
annual reports, to add more detailed information on
measures taken to improve its working methods in
order for progress achieved in that area to be properly
assessed. The Council should submit special reports
for the General Assembly’s consideration, pursuant to
paragraph 1 of Article 15 and paragraph 3 of Article 24
of the United Nations Charter. The General Assembly
may also take the initiative and request such reports if
it deems them necessary.
Public meetings of the Council, including briefings
and debates, should take into account the contributions
of non-Council members, particularly those that
may be directly affected by the Council’s decisions.
Private meetings, informal consultations and closed
meetings should be kept to a minimum. They should
have written records, which should be available to
non-Council members. Such records could be made
publicly available — at least after a certain period
of time, in the way that some Member States release
restricted documents after a certain number of years
have passed — for the sake of transparency and also as
a historical record for the benefit of future generations.
Issues to be covered at any briefing by the
Secretariat should be determined in coordination with
the concerned State or party and after approval by
all Council members. Statements after such briefings
should not be restricted to Council members, and the
parties concerned should be given the opportunity to
express their views on such briefings. Any decision
of the Security Council to initiate formal or informal
discussions on the situation in any Member State or
on any other issues that do not constitute a threat to
international peace and security is contrary to Article
24 of the Charter. We urge the Council to observe its
mandate strictly in accordance with the provisions of
the Charter.
Members of the Security Council should consult
informally with interested Member States, including
countries directly involved or affcted, when drafting
resolutions or other outcomes of the Council. The
penholdership of draft resolutions should not be limited
to permanent members.
Egypt welcomes the Council’s continuing briefings
and consultations designed to help troop-contributing
12-60476

countries plan and fulfil peacekeeping operations
mandates. The Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations should engage troop-contributing countires
more frequently in its deliberations. The Chairs of the
country-specific configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as the countries concerned, should
be invited to participate in the Council’s meetings when
situations in those countries are considered.
When the brutal Israeli military campaign against
the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip began, the
Security Council managed to convene only one
private meeting and closed consultations to address
the situation and was unable to decide on convening
a public meeting. A body that is entrusted with the
responsibility for upholding international peace and
security should be able to do more than that. This is
a fresh reminder of the urgent need for reform of the
Council’s working methods.
In conclusion, what is needed is not additional
proposals but the political will to implement the
multitude of ideas that have been proposed for improving
the working methods of the Council. The General
Assembly and the Security Council should forge a
mutually reinforcing and complementary relationship
while respecting each other’s mandate. This is essential
to achieving the objectives of the United Nations and
to enabling it, and us, to remain relevant in addressing
the existing and emerging challenges facing the
international community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): At a
time when the world is witnessing the deterioration
of several crises in various parts of the globe, there
is only one organ mandated under the Charter of
the United Nations to play a key role in preventing,
mediating or ending conflicts. That is the Security
Council. It sometimes lives up to its mandate and to the
expectations of the peoples concerned. It has thus been
able to make some decisions in the space of only a few
hours, including, for example, resolution 2076 (2012),
seeking a way to resolve the crisis in Goma. I hope that
the Council will pursue its efforts to stop the violence
and to find a framework for a political solution to the
crisis.
That said, the Council has proved incapable of
reacting quickly to the crisis in Syria and the recent
events in Gaza. Similarly, it has shown no haste even in

29

S/PV.6870

dealing with more promising developments, such as the
ceasefire between Israel and Gaza. In Syria, civilians
are dying or being deprived of humanitarian assistance
while the Council debates procedural questions.
Six months ago, the group of five small nations
introduced draft resolution A/66/L.42/Rev.2 in the
General Assembly on the Security Council’s working
methods. While the draft resolution was subsequently
withdrawn, the group nonetheless received very positive
reactions from the wider membership before, during
and after its introduction. Switzerland has repeatedly
stressed that change in the Security Council must first
come from within. We have always seen improvement
of its working methods as an ongoing process during
which we should maintain a sustained and constructive
dialogue with the Council, which derives its legitimacy
from the membership as a whole.
That is why I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having taken the initiative to convene this open
debate and for drafting a concept note that gives food
for thought (S/2012/853, annex). The note is a reminder
and an excellent review of the practical measures that
can be taken to improve the Council’s transparency,
efficiency and interaction with the membership of the
United Nations as a whole. I take this opportunity to
thank another member of the Security Council, whose
term ends in a month. Portugal has done valuable
work as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, and I
would particularly like to thank Ambassador Moraes
Cabral for his personal commitment to that effort. We
hope that a new Council member will take up the torch
with the same enthusiasm and persistence.
That having been said, we became convinced
during the discussions in May with the permanent
members of the Security Council of draft resolution
A/66/L.42/Rev.2 that the Working Group could
make substantial progress. Like the representative of
Liechstenstein, we believe that the annex to the draft
resolution forms a basis for future discussion. While a
presidential note on conference resources was indeed
adopted (S/2012/402), the second part of that note, which
proposed establishing systematic horizon-scanning
meetings of the Council with the Department of
Political Affairs as a tool of preventive diplomacy, was
unfortunately not retained. A second note, on a more
transparent way of allocating the chairmanships of
subsidiary bodies and penholders within the Council,
has still not been adopted. Along with other delegations,

30

we therefore encourage the Council to return to the
tradition of regular horizon-scanning and make another
effort to finalize the note on subsidiary bodies and the
issue of penholders. We also hope that the allocation
of committee chairmanships will be more transparent,
enabling all members elected in 2013 to participate.
Another aspect that we would like to highlight here
is the potential for improving relations between the
Security Council and the International Criminal Court.
As many countries mentioned during the open debate
on the rule of law held on 17 October (S/PV.6849),
the Council should consider taking concrete steps to
strengthen the synergies between the two bodies. As
the representative of Liechtenstein remarked, it could,
for example, set up a subsidiary mechanism tasked with
addressing questions arising from their relationship.
Finally, the question of the veto must be addressed.
Switzerland has repeatedly suggested that member
States using the veto be obliged to explain their reasons
for doing so and to refrain from blocking action in cases
of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Such a practice would be perfectly in line with the spirit
of the veto, which was conceived as a mechanism to
protect vital national interests. We commend France for
its offer to take a step in that direction and encourage
other permanent members to follow that example.
Those are just some ideas on ways to continue
improving the working methods of the Security Council,
which we submit for the Council’s consideration.
Members have certainly heard ideas from many other
delegations, and we hope that the members of the
Council will not simply listen patiently to our appeals
but will take them up in a constructive spirit. We are
aware that there are some encouraging signs, and we
applaud the efforts the Council has made to enhance
transparency and inclusiveness within the Council
itself and in its relations with the wider membership.
Switzerland attaches great importance to the
question of Security Council working methods and will
continue to engage in joint efforts aimed at improving
them. While considerable progress has been achieved
in a number of areas, much remains to be done in
others. We therefore intend to continue our engagement
in the former group of five small nations under a new
configuration, and we are currently holding promising
consultations to that end. We look forward to continuing
the dialogue on working methods in a constructive
spirit with all members of the Council.

12-60476

S/PV.6870

It is said that imitation is the most sincere sort of
complement. We therefore hope that another presidency
will imitate yours, Sir, and hold a follow-up debate next
year.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have the
pleasure to speak today on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM). At the outset, I would like to convey
the Movement’s appreciation to the Indian presidency
of the Security Council for having convened this
important open debate to discuss the progress achieved
in the implementation of the measures set out in the
note by the President of 26 July 2010 (S/2010/507)
and the concept paper (S/2012/853, annex). This open
debate will help us direct the discussions towards
enhancing the transparency and efficiency of the work
of the Security Council and to meet the expectations of
the general membership of the United Nations. I would
also like to thank Ambassador Moraes Cabral, Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, for his briefing today.
This debate is the fifth on the working methods of
the Council. The increased frequency in recent years
of holding such debates is indicative of the fact that the
Member States attach great importance to this matter.
The same interest has been shown by the Non-Aligned
Movement. The Heads of State or Government of the
Non-Aligned Movement at its sixteenth Summit, held
this year in Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, reiterated
their long-standing position on the issue in the relevant
paragraphs adopted at the Summit.
At that NAM Summit meeting in Tehran, taking
into account the inter-linkage between Security
Council reform and improving its working methods,
NAM Heads of State and Government underscored the
need for United Nations Member States to fully respect
the functions and powers of each principal organ of the
United Nations, in particular the General Assembly,
and to maintain the balance among these organs
within their respective Charter-based functions and
powers. They stressed that the Security Council must
fully observe all Charter provisions and all General
Assembly resolutions, which clarify its relationship
with the latter organ and other principal organs. In this
context, they affirmed that Article 24 of the Charter
does not necessarily provide the Security Council with
the competence to address issues that fall within the
functions and powers of the General Assembly and the
12-60476

Economic and Social Council, including in the areas of
norm-setting, legislation, administrative and budgetary
matters, and establishing definitions, bearing in
mind that the Assembly is primarily tasked with the
progressive development of international law and its
codification.
In this regard, the meeting expressed its
grave concern over the increasing and continuing
encroachment by the Council on issues that clearly
fall within the functions and powers of other principal
organs of the United Nations and their subsidiary
bodies. It further stressed that close cooperation
and coordination among all principal organs are
indispensable in order to enable the United Nations to
remain relevant and capable of meeting the existing,
new and emerging threats and challenges.
The NAM Summit also recommended, inter alia,
the following. It urged all States to uphold the primacy
of and full respect for the provisions of the United
Nations Charter pertaining to the functions and powers
of the Assembly and called on the Presidents of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Security Council to conduct regular discussions
and coordination among themselves regarding the
agenda and programme of work of the respective
principal organs that they represent in order to establish
increased coherence and complementarity among those
organs in a mutually reinforcing manner, respectful of
each other’s mandates, and with a view to generating
a mutual understanding among them, in whom the
members of the respective organs that they represent
have vested in good faith their trust and confidence.
It also welcomed as a step forward the informal
meetings between the Presidents of the Council and
Member States regarding the preparation of the annual
report of the Security Council, including those convened
by Viet Nam in 2008, Uganda in 2009, Nigeria in 2010,
Germany in 2011 and Colombia in 2012, and called
for more regular interaction between presidencies of
the Security Council and the wider membership of the
United Nations, which could help enhance the quality
of such reports.
It called on the Security Council to submit a more
explanatory, comprehensive and analytical annual
report to the General Assembly, assessing the work of
the Council, including in such cases where the Council
has failed to act, and the views expressed by its members
during the consideration of the agenda items under its
consideration. It further called on the Security Council
31

S/PV.6870

to elaborate on the circumstances under which it adopts
different outcomes, whether resolutions, presidential
statements, press statements or remarks to the press.
It called on the Security Council, pursuant to
Articles 15 and 24 of the Charter of the United Nations,
to submit special reports for the consideration of the
General Assembly. It further called on the Security
Council to ensure that its monthly assessments are
comprehensive, analytical and issued in a timely
fashion. The General Assembly may consider proposing
parameters for the elaboration of such assessments.
It called on the Security Council to fully take into
account the recommendations of the General Assembly
on matters relating to international peace and security,
consistent with Article 11 of the Charter.
The Security Council should avoid resorting to
Chapter VII of the Charter as a tool for addressing issues
that do not necessarily pose a threat to international
peace and security. It should fully utilize the provisions
of other relevant chapters, including Chapters VI and
VIII, before invoking Chapter VII, which should be a
measure of last resort.
The Non-Aligned Movement notes the presidential
note of 5 June (S/2012/402), which expresses the
commitment of members to several efficiencyenhancing measures with regard to the working
methods, including on the management of the Council’s
programme of work, its meetings and their periodicity,
conference resources and interactivity, in maintaining
closer contact between the Security Council and United
Nations missions in the field.
The Security Council has taken some positive
steps pursuant to note 507. The Movement notes
the increase in the number of public meetings, and
expects that such an increase will be accompanied by
a qualitative improvement through the provision of
real opportunities and more meaningful exchanges of
view in order to take into account the contributions
of non-Council members, particularly those whose
interests are or may be directly affected by possible
decisions of the Council. Furthermore, the concerned
non-Council member should be given the opportunity
to express its views and position on such briefings.
The general observations and positions formulated
by numerous non-members of the Security Council
during its debates, including open debates, should be
properly taken into account in any possible outcome of
those debates and should be reflected in the Council’s
32

annual report. NAM appreciates the more frequent
convening of Arria Formula meetings as a practical way
to ensure more interaction with non-Council members
and regional and subregional organizations. It also
appreciates the holding of informal wrap-up sessions
at the end of each presidency to evaluate what has been
achieved.
The Non-Aligned Movement welcomes the
continued briefings and consultations of the Council
with troop-contributing countries (TCCs) as part of the
effort to plan and to execute peacekeeping operations
more effectively and with clearer mandates. The
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations should
involve TCCs more frequently and more intensively in
its deliberations through sustained, regular and timely
interaction.
To increase the transparency of its work, to achieve
a balanced approach in interaction with non-members
and to improve the efficiency of its working methods,
the Council should seriously address the shortcomings
and take into consideration the relevant provisions of the
Charter and the resolutions that clarify its relationship
with the General Assembly and other organs of the
United Nations.
Finally, the Movement believes that more steps
are needed, along with the necessary political will on
the part of Member States, particularly the permanent
members of the Council, to improve the working
methods of the Council through both the General
Assembly and the Security Council. Transparency,
accountability and consistency are key elements that
the Security Council should observe in all its activities,
approaches and procedures. Every effort should be made
to render the Council more democratic, representative
and accountable. In that way, the Security Council can
deal more efficiently and effectively with its increasing
workload and with the multiplicity and complexity of
the issues on its agenda in maintaining international
peace and security. The Non-Aligned Movement stands
ready to contribute to the achievement of those goals.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Ms. Anderson (Ireland): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this annual debate on the working
methods of the Security Council and for the excellent
concept paper (S/2012/853, annex) that you circulated
to help guide our discussion today.

12-60476

S/PV.6870

At the outset, let me state our clear view that the
question of improving the working methods of the
Security Council is a matter of legitimate interest to all
Member States. We fully respect the prerogatives of the
Security Council regarding its own working methods,
but we must never forget that the Council acts on behalf
of the world community on matters of peace and security
and that Member States are individually and collectively
bound by its decisions. Accordingly, we have a direct
interest in understanding its decision-making processes
and in working to ensure that those processes operate
with the maximum transparency and accountability for
all of us, who are pledged to be bound by its decisions.
Ireland has been a consistent supporter of initiatives
aimed at improving the working methods of the Security
Council, notably those proposed in recent years by
the group of five small nations. We acknowledge that
members of the Council have shown a willingness to
respond to aspects of those initiatives, as well as the
fact that steps have been taken internally by the Council
in the form of agreement on presidential notes. Those
developments address some of the concerns raised
by non-Council members. Such steps are welcome in
themselves, but we believe that much more needs to be
done to improve the transparency and accountability of
the workings of the Council.
A wealth of ideas and suggestions for improving the
Council’s working methods has been proposed in recent
years. A number of them are set down in the concept
paper. For the sake of brevity, today I will confine
myself to mentioning just a few elements that fall under
the overall headings of transparency, accountability
and openness.
First, there is the overriding requirement to take
measures that will add structure to the Council’s
working methods and that make them more transparent
to the wider membership. That would ideally involve the
adoption of formal rules of procedure and the inclusion
of an analytical element on the implementation of its
working methods in the Council’s annual report.
Secondly, there is the need to improve accountability
in relation to the missions and operations mandated by
the Council, which are a key output of its work. That
could, for example, include the provision of more
detailed and timely information to Member States on
all aspects of operations and missions, as well as more
regular participation by troop – and police-contributing
countries in informal discussions on the missions and

12-60476

operations in which they participate, and on ways to
improve the drafting and refining of relevant mandates.
Thirdly, we wish to see greater openness towards
the wider membership with regard to the Council’s
day-to-day work. There are many potential areas for
improvement in that connection. One example would
be the provision of regular briefings to the membership
on the work of the Council’s subsidiary bodies. Another
would involve seeking the views of the membership on
the Council’s annual report at the time of its drafting.
We believe that those and many other ideas are
worthy of consideration by the members of the Council.
Today’s annual debate provides a welcome one-off
opportunity to discuss such issues, but what is really
needed is a rolling dialogue on the matters between
the Council and the wider United Nations membership
in the period ahead. For our part, we are ready to
participate in such a dialogue.
Finally, I know that some members have
expressed reticence about moving ahead on working
methods, noting that that issue is but one element of
the comprehensive agenda for reform of the Security
Council. I understand such concerns, given the sharp
divisions within the membership on certain aspects
of the overall reform agenda. Like others, we are
frustrated by the lack of progress on a comprehensive
reform of the Security Council, on which discussions
remain stalled after almost 20 years.
However, the issue of working methods is unique
among the elements of the prospective comprehensive
reform in that it applies to the currently configured
Council equally as it would to a reformed Council.
The role of the Security Council in today’s world is too
important to leave on indefinite hold our wish to see a
more effective and transparent Council, accountable to
the community of nations on whose behalf it carries out
its vital work.
I believe that the great majority of States Members
of the United Nations want to see improvements in
the working methods of the Security Council that will
ensure that the work of the Council is more effective
and more transparent to the wider membership. It is
incumbent upon all of us to put aside our individual
political agendas and work for sensible and practical
changes that are readily attainable. Even modest
success in this important area will help to build the
wider confidence that will enable us over time to meet
the more complex challenges of comprehensive reform.

33

S/PV.6870

The President: There are still a number of speakers
on my list for this meeting. Given the lateness of the

hour, I intend, with the concurrence of the members of
the Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

34

12-60476
