UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

.~
< ..I.-.,
U,NLD3bdRY
JAN2 9 m6

18SS1”

MEETING:

~fq&b$
6 FEBRUARY

(-J-jkLE.ZJ

Dls\s

1976

NEW YORK

..

CONTENTS
\.

Page

. ... .. ... . ... ... .. .. ... . ... .. ... .. ...

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Comoros:
(a) Telegram dated 28 January 1976 from the head of State of the Comoros
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/ 11953);
(b) Letter dated 3 February 1976 from the Permanent Representative of
Guinea-Bissau to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/11959) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l@%)

S/PV. 1888

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures.$$ention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document...;
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Suppleme@ of the OfJicial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in’l964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1888th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 6 February 1976, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Daniel P. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America).

Mr. Rahal (Algeria),
Mr. Ecua Miko (Equatorial
Guinea),
Mr. Camara
(Guinea),
Mr. Fernandes
(Guinea-Bissau),
Mr. Maina (Kenya), Mr. Rabetafika
(Madagascar) and Mr. Hussein (Somalia) took places
at the side of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l888)

of the agenda

.. ,_

1.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the Comoros:
(a) Telegram dated 28 January 1976 from the head
of State of the Comoros addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/l 1953);
(b) Letter dated 3 February 1976 from the Permanent Representative
of Guinea-Bissau
to
the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/l 1959)
The meeting

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Security Council that I have also received
letters from the representatives of Saudi Arabia and
Nigeria asking that they be invited, in accordance with
rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure, to
participate in the discussion of theitem on the agenda.
Accordingly,
if there is no objection, I propose that
the Council, in .conformity with the usual practice,
invite them to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote., .I ~
3. The PRESIDENT:
In view of the limited number
of places availab@at
the Council table, I invite the
representatives of Saudi Arabia and Nigeria to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber, on the usual understanding that they will be
invited to take a place at the Council table when they
address the Council.

was called to order at 4.15 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia) and Mr. Harriman (Nigeria) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Comoros:
(a) Telegram dated 28 January 1976 from the head of
State of the Comoros addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/11953);
(b) Letter dated 3 February 1976 from the Permanent
Representative
of Guinea-Bissau
to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/11959)

4. The PRESIDENT:
I should like,to.draw attention
to the text of the draft resolution [S/11967] I mentioned
at the close of yesterday’s meeting [1887th meeting].
It is sponsored by Benin;Guyana,
the Libyan Arab
Republic,
Panama and the United
Republic
of
Tanzania.
5. -Mr. JACKSON
(Guyana): Mr. President,
the
practice has developed in the Council of congratulating
its new President at the first meeting of each month.
Today it is my pleasant duty to extend felicitations to
you on my own behalf and on behalf of the delegation
of Guyana and to affirm our fullest co-operation with
the presidency.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken previously [1886th meeting] I invite the
representative of the Comoros to take a place at the
Council table. I also invite the representatives
of
Algeria, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Kenya, Madagascar and Somalia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,
on the usual understanding
that they will be invited
to take a place at the Council table when they address
the Council.
At the invitation
Abdallah (Comoros)

6. We have had, Sir, during your brief stay with us,
ample evidence of your manifold talents-talents
which
you so unsparingly put at the service of your country.
I am confident that the weight of your contribution
to the work of the Organization will be given its true
and proper measure when this period in the history of

of the President,
Mr. Omar
took a place at the Council table;
I

the United Nations is written, with.!the objectivity
which accompanies mature reflection. I said that your
stay with us was short. Your presidency of the Council,
however, I venture to suggest, crowns that stay. I
trust that you may find this experience of the presidency of some benefit in whatever adventure engages
your irrepressible spirit in the future.
7. May I take this opportunity
torthank Mr. Salim
most warmly for the amiable, effrcientand constructive
manner in which he guided our deliberations
during
the month of January. His successfultenure
of office
as President confirmed our full confidence in him.
1-r.
8. In directing its attention to the item on the agenda,
my delegation takes as its reference point General
Assembly resolution 3291 (XXIX) bf 13 December
1974. We do so because that resolution, which, inter
aliu, reaffirmed the unity and territorial
integrity of
the Comoro Archipelago, was adopted without a vote.
There was neither a dissenting voice nor an expression
of reservation. All the Members of the Organization,
including France, adopted that resolution.
9. So it was that the people of the Comoros and the
international community,
fortified by such a display of
international
accord, looked forward with eagerness
to the logical unfolding of events in the Comoro
Archipelago.
And they did so with justification.
For
they bore in mind as well the agreement in the Joint
Declaration on the Accession to Independence
previously concluded between France and the Comoros’
and the repeated assurances given by’ the French
Government that consultations with the people of the
Comoros would be organized on an archipelago-wide
basis. As we expected, the French were true to their
word. The consultation were held, and of the 93 per
cent of the eligible voters who registered their choices
94.56 per cent opted in favour of independence-a
clear manifestation of the will of the people.
10. The way ahead for the then administering
Power-France-was
clear. It should have respected
then, as it should do now, the rights of the people
of the Comoro Archipelago to independence,’ as well
as the unity and territorial integrity of the Comoros.
Such action then would, as it would now, be fully
consistent with international law and would in no way
demean international
morality. But, instead, France
has erected obstacles by seeking to discern peculiarities
regarding one of the islands-Mayotte.
It may be that
some of the present realities of Mayotte, stemming
from past accidents of settlement and combining with
modem-day
strategic needs, have induced changes
in the perception informing France’s attitude on this
issue. It may be.
11. Nevertheless,
it is apposite, I suggest, to recall
that the Chamber of Deputies of the Comoros, even
hefore that State was admitted to membership in the
United Nations,
evinced concern lest the French
.Parliament
seek to introduce further delays and to

impose new conditions
compromising
the independence and territorial integrity of the Comoros. It was
a concern shared by other States Members of the
United Nations. Speaking in the Security Council
for my country, Guyana, on the *occasion of the
adoption by the Council of resolution
376 (1975),
recommending
to the General Assembly the admission of the Comoros to the United Nations [see
1848th meeting],
I indicated my Government’s
firm
expectation
that the resounding declaration
of the
people of the Comoros for their independence and
territorial integrity would be fully honoured.
12. It is also relevant to recall that the General
Assembly by a nearly unanimous vote on its resolution 3385 (XxX)-France
did not participate-not
only decided to admit the Comoros to membership
in the United Nations but also reaffirmed the necessity
of respecting the unity and territorial integrity of the
Comoro Archipelago,
composed of the islands of
Anjouan, Grande-Comore,
Mayotte and Mohtli.
13. My delegation believes that the position of the
overwhelming majority of the international community
on the fundamental
principles which should inform
the resolution of the conflict which has arisen between
the Comoros and France is not ambivalent.
That is
why, as a member of the Council, my delegation
listened intently to, and studied carefully, the statements delivered by the representative
of France in
explanation of his country’s current position. In order
to foster our understanding
of that position,
the
representative
of France has advanced several propositions some of which, I must confess, are novel to
my delegation.
14. The first relates to the constitutional
relationship in France between the legislative branch-and
I mention it first-and
the executive branch. In .the
view of my delegation, a conflict between the executive
and legislative branches in any State is an internal
matter. It is not up to us to say how such a conflict
should be resolved, for were we to embark on that
hazardous course we would be interfering
in the
ddmestic affairs of that State., What can be said,
however, is that the international
community
cannot
be held hostage for the internal dilemmas
of any
State. The axioms which are the underpinnings
of
inter-State relations will no longer remain credible if
any State can, when it chooses, shelter behind
conflicts which inhere in its own internal constitutional
processes. And our collective efforts at international
collabora1ion and co-operation can only be viable if
States Members of the United Nations act in accordance with the principles and purposes of its Charter
and if their Governments
are held responsible, and
accountable, for statements made on their behalf no
less than for the actions which they purport to take
on behalf of their peoples. I believe that it was as
long ago as 1933 that the Permanent Court of International Justice reached the conclusion that the statements of duly qualified leaders of Governments, when

made in their official capacity and within their fields
of competence, have a binding effect in the intemational dealings of the Governments they represent.

18. Mr. SALIM (United Republic of Tanzania): On
behalf of the delegations of Benin, Guyana, the Libyan
Arab Republic,
Panama and my own, I have the
pleasure to introduce draft resolution S/11967. The
draft resolution
is self-explanatory;
it is simple,
straightforward
and clear-cut; it avoids any condemnations,
but simply states certain fundamental
principles
which the sponsors consider to be of
paramount importance. It does so because the sponsors
are convinced that the situation with which the Council is faced is a rather anomalous one-anomalous
in
the sense that the Council should never have been
faced with it in the first place, bearing in mind the
circumstances of the situation, the decisions of the
United Nations on the question and the fact that
hardly three months ago the United Nations itself
admitted the Comoros as a new Member of the United
Nations and left no doubt about what it meant by the
State of the Comoros.

15. Another proposition which my colleague to the
right advanced concerns the Comorian assertion of
aggression by France against the Comoros. I will
confine myself mainly to a few questions in this
regard. Is the presence of uninvited alien armed forces
on the territory of a State that is inconsistent with
the sovereignty,
territorial
integrity
and political
independence of that State not an act of aggression?
Why is the French Government still exercising control
in Mayotte despite its assurances that it would respect
the unity and territorial
integrity of the Comoro
Archipelago
and contrary to the wishes of the
Comorian people? And there is a derivative question:
Even if the French authorities had a right to be in
Mayotte today, should not the Council, on the basis
of the account given to us by the leader of the Comorian
delegation, require answers to the disturbing allegations that the French authorities have been engaged
in systematically
and literally setting adrift persons
in Mayotte who are known to support the unity of
the archipelago?
It follows that my Government
cannot consider the generous invitation of the French
Government
to be a witness to its operations in
Mayotte, since such an involvement
might be interpreted as giving legitimacy to the French presence in
that island.

19. I shall therefore refrain from making elaborate
explanations of the various preambular and operative
paragraphs that this draft resolution contains. But
I will make certain observations which, in the view of
the sponsors of the draft resolution, it is important
that all our colleagues who are required to pronounce
themselves on this text should understand.
20. We have before us a telegram from the head of
State of the Comoros. It is on the basis of this telegram
that the Council is meeting. We have heard a very
eloquent
and statesmanlike
presentation
of the
Comorian case, presented to us by Mr. Omar Abdallah,
head of the Comorian delegation. Those two points are,
of course, taken into account in our draft resolution.

16. A third proposition
relates to the concept now
advanced by France regarding the application of the
principle of self-determination.
There is abundant
evidence-much
of it mentioned
by previous
speakers-that
the population of Mayotte have historically
shared their destiny with their brothers
in the rest of the Comorian community.
I believe that
it was on this basis of a shared destiny that the people
of the Comoros selected representatives
who from
1946 on sat in the Parliament of France in Paris; and
it is on this basis as well that the Comorian people
opted for independence
on 22 December 1974, in
exercise of their right to self-determination.
In the
light of this, the act of self-determination
in the
Comoros has already been completed. Were the French
Government
therefore to proceed with a referendum
in Mayotte it would be violating that act of selfdetermination
by the Comorian people. It is therefore
clear that we must reject the French interpretation
of self-determination.
For, if we succumb to such a
deviation, we shall not only be abandoning cherished
principles, but we shall also, I fear, be opening a
Pandora’s box.

22. We believe that, if the French Government were
to continue on its present course of action which would
ipso fnc’ro imply the Balkanization
of the Comoros,
such an act would have serious consequences for the
stability of the Comoros and for the stability of the
African region, and serious implications
for the
Organization.

17. Over the long sweep of history, decolonization,
like progress, has come to be regarded as irreversible.
Despite some setbacks, the French have enjoyed a
proud record in the field of decolonization.
We appeal
to them now to desist from an ill advised course of
action in relation to the Comoros which would tarnish
that image.

23. On 12 November
1975, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation
of the Security Council,
admitted the State of the Comoros to membership in
the United Nations by its resolution 3385 (XXX). In
consistency with its previous position, the General
Assembly, in that resolution, reaffirmed the territorial
integrity,
unity and political
independence
of -the

21. The request made by the President of the
Comoros for the convening of an urgent meeting of
the Council and fully supported by the representative
of the Comoros in a speech [see 1887th meeting]
which was very moving is a request made against the
background of the Comoros’ concern that its territorial
integrity and its political
independence
are being
questioned. The sponsors of the draft resolution are
aware of and concerned with that particular aspect of
the Comorians’ preoccupation.

3

Comoro Archipelago.
To that end it reaffirmed that
the Comoros consisted of the islands of Anjouan,
Grande-Comore,
MohCli and Mayotte.

people of the Comoros for self-determination
and
independence.
We therefore all rejoiced when the
Comoros became a sovereign nation and was admitted
as a Member of the United Nations, for to the sponsors
of the draft resolution, as I believe to the membership of the United Nations, the independence of yet
another African State represented an important victory
for the international
community
in our collective
struggle against the subjugation of peoples and the
right of all peoples to independence and to the enjoyment of full human rights and human dignity.

24. Thus the Assembly left in no doubt the geographical limits of the new African State. Therefore,
as far as the United Nations is concerned, Mayotte
is part and parcel of the Comoros, and thus there is
no question of Mayotte exercising any right of selfdetermination
of its own, in separation from the
Comoro entity as a whole. To the sponsors of the draft
resolution, therefore, the continued presence of the
French authorities
in Mayotte and their declared
intention of holding a referendum in that island constitute an obvious violation of the political independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the
Comoros. Thus the fifth and sixth preambular paragraphs of the draft resolution must also be read in
conjunction with operative paragraphs 1 and 2, in so far
as they concern the proposed intention of the French
Government to hold a referendum in Mayotte.

28. Our draft resolution is reasonable. I said before
that it is not a condemnatory resolution. Not that one
could not deplore the policies adopted by the French
Government
-in connexion
with Mayotte,
but our
desire here is not to deplore; our desire here is to make
the French Government realize the futility of its current
course of action and make all the responsible authorities in France realize the perilous course which their
present policy in regard to Mayotte wihlead them on,
because it can only lead to confrontation,
not merely
within but also outside the Council. It can only lead
to a policy of constant friction, not between the
people and Government of the Comoros and the people
and Government of France alone, but-and this is of no
less importance-of
constant friction between the
Government
of France and the .United .Nations,
because, clearly, the position of the Government of
France contradicts the position of the United Nations.

25. Needless to say, the sponsors take a very
serious view of anything which would tend to call in
question the territorial
integrity of the Comoros.
While we recognize that there may be some differences
between the French Government
and the sovereign
Government of the Comoros, we find no justification
whatsoever for the French intention of holding yet
another referendum
in Mayotte.
The sponsors,
conscious of the fact that there is a need for a relationship based on mutual respect, friendship and co‘operation between the Comoros and the Government of France and that there is a need to settle
outstanding differences, request the Government
of
France, in the draft resolution:

29. The Organization will be failing in its duty and in
its responsibilities
if we do not continually
keep
vigilant by safeguarding the right of the peoples of all
States, of whatever size, to enjoy the rights which
would otherwise be enjoyed by more powerful States.
That is why the sponsors also are involving the United
Nations by entrusting
the Secretary-General
with
following the implementation
of the present draft
resolution, because we believe that the best safeguard
that small countries like the Comoros can have-and,
for that matter, those small countries which are the
very sponsors of the draft resolution-lies
in respect
for the decisions of the United Nations, respect for
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
respect for the provisions of its important decisions,
to which all of us adhere.

“to enter into immediate
negotiations
with the
Government
of the Comoros for the purpose of
taking appropriate measures to safeguard the unity
and territorial integrity of the State of the Comoros
composed of the islands of Anjouan,
GrandeComore,
Mayotte
and Mohtli”.
[See S/f 1967,
para. 4.1

26. We are not asking for the impossible. We are not
asking for something which is unprecedented. ‘We are
only being faithful to the decisions of the Organization.
We are also being faithful to the declared intentions
of the French Government.
France, as the former
administering
Power of the Comoros, has a particular
responsibility
to ensure that nothing it does in its
policies towards that country would have the effect
of dismembering
that country, of disrupting
the
national unity and the territorial
integrity of the
country, because such a course of action would be
incompatible
with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

30. In Article 25 of the Charter, Member States
agreed to be bound by the decisions of the Security
Council. In so agreeing they recognized that the
Council would be acting on their own behalf. It is only
fair, therefore, that in acting on behalf of the international community,
the Council should take into
account the views of the Member States.
31. In the case of the Comoros, the views of the
whole membership
have been expressed in resolution 3385 (XXX). As I have indicated, that resolution,
which was opposed by no one-I emphasize this point,
that it was opposed by no one, not even by the French,
though with all due respect to the French position,

27. The sponsors of the draft resolution, all nonaligned members of the Council, have followed with
interest, sympathy and solidarity the struggle of the
4

they did not participate in the voting on that resolution-recognized
clearly and without any equivocation
that Mayotte is part and parcel of the Comoros.

belonged to the Comorian people and is an inalienable
part of the territory of the State of Comoros. The
Comorian people’s struggle against the division of
their territory and for the safeguarding of their territorial integrity is entirely just and they have won
widespread support and the sympathy of numerous
third world countries and all the justice-upholding
countries.

32. The Security Council must therefore see to it
that the territorial
integrity,
the political
independence and the unity of the Comoros are respected.
The Council cannot but call upon France to respect
the aforementioned
principles, and it is in pursuance
of respect of such principles that the sponsors of this
draft resolution are confident of the support of the
Council.

38. The Chinese Government and people have always
sympathized
with and supported
the Comorian
Government and people in their just struggle to safeguard State independence,
unity and territorial
integrity. The relevant resolutions of OAU and the
General Assemblybave reaffirmed the inalienable right
of the State of Comoros to maintain its unity and
territorial
integrity. All these resolutions are correct
because.they reflect the just demands of the Comorian
people.

33. Finally, let me say that the sponsors of our draft
resolution have, in the course of the last 48 hours,
been engaged in very active consultations, particularly
between us and the delegation of France. To our very
profound regret, the differences of principle are so
fundamental that these consultations have not enabled
us to reach a solution which could command. the
collective
support of both the sponsors and the
French delegation. But I want to stress that there is a
limit to which Members of the United Nations can
entertain positions of compromise, positions of trying
to resolve the differences whenever a situation arises
before the Council, and you go beyond that limit
when, if you compromise, you compromise a principle.

39. ’ We hold that the unity and territorial integrity
of the State of Comoros must be respected and that
no action which may jeopardize its unity and territorial
integrity’ should be taken. Basing itself on this principled position, the Chinese delegation is in favour
of draft resolution S/l 1967.
40. Mr. AKHUND
(Pakistan): Mr. President, I join
previous speakers in extending to you, on behalf of my
delegation, congratulations on your assuming the office
of President and in expressing regret that you have
decided to leave us after so brief a stay and our good
wishes for success in your task here this month and
in your future endeavours. Speaking for myself, may
I put on record my personal admiration and esteem
for the sense of conviction and vigour with which you
always advocate your views-views
which, if they
did not always persuade, never failed to stimulate
thought and to provoke discussion.

34. I am sure that my colleague from France will
understand that the sponsors of the draft resolution
tried their level best to see the point of view of
France, short of compromising
certain fundamental
principles, and as I commend this draft resolution to
the members of the Council for their collective support
I want them to bear in mind that all we are seeking
is reaffirmation of the position which had been adopted
by the United Nations.
Hua (China) (trunslation~rmn
Chihas listened attentively
to the speech made by the representative of the State
of Comoros as well as the speeches made by the
representatives of other countries. Now, I would like
to make the following observations on the question
we are considering.
35.

Mr. HUANG

nese): The Chinese delegation

41. I take the opportunity to pay a tribute also to your
predecessor, our colleague Mr. Salim, for the distinction and sense of mission with which he guided our
deliberations,
both formal and informal,
during a
month when the Council had to deal with an exceptionally heavy and difficult agenda. If the endeavours
made by the Council under Mr. Salim’s skilful and
energetic guidance on the Arab-Israeli question did not
meet with full success, our deliberations
may have
served to facilitate future efforts in the Council and
elsewhere.

36. To achieve State independence
and national
liberation,
the Comorian people had carried out a
protracted struggle against the colonialists.
With the
sympathy and support of the African people, the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and people of the
whole world, the Comorian State finally attained its
independence
on 6 July 1975 and became a State
member of OAU and was later on admitted to membership in the United Nations. This is a great victory
achieved by the Comorian people and the African
people as a whole in their struggle against imperialism
and colonialism.

42. The Council is dealing today with’an issue which,
in my delegation’s
view, should not have arisen ‘at
all. Having heard with careful attention the statements
made here by the representatives of the Comoros and
of France, my delegation is more than ever convinced
that the situation which has been brought to the
Council’s attention could have been avoided and that
even now there is time and opportunity
to redress it
and to remove the difficulties that have arisen. The
. facts of the case are well known and have been so

37. The State of Comoros is a country consisting of
the four islands of Anjouan, Mayotte,
Moheli and
Grande-Comore.
The Island of Mayotte has always
5

well recounted a d analysed in the course of these
meetings that t I?ere is little that I can .usefully add.
On the face of it the issue involves a conflict between
two principles, both of which are enshrined in the
Charter and considered by Member States as fundamental and inviolate,. namely, the principle of selfdetermination
of people and the principle of the territorial integrity of States.

of Mayotte declined independence whereas 4,000 or
so joined the 150,000 in the other islands in opting for
independence.
46. The legal position was stated by none other than
Mr. Olivier Stim, the French Minister for Overseas
Departments and Territories,
18 months ago when he
said in an oft-quoted passage:
“The French Government has opted for an archipelago-wide consultation for three reasons: first, for
the legal reason that under the rules of international
law a Territory retains the frontiers that it had as a
colony; secondly, a multiplicity
of different statuses
for the various islands of the archipelago is inconceivable.”

43. The entire case of the former colonial Power,
as put to us by the representative of France, is based
on the principie of self-determination.
He said that
“everywhere in the world the possibility of choosing
one’s own destiny is acknowledged as belonging to
entities
determined
by history
and geography”
[1886th meeting, pat-u. 231. The requirement of selfdetermination
is, in the French view, of so absolute
a nature as to override all other principles and considerations, including that of the territorial integrity of
States. My .country, which owes its independent
existence to this very principle and which, as the
Council is well aware, has supported, fought for and
continued to advocate the right of the people of Jammu
and Kashmir to exercise their right of self-determination, cannot possibly disagree with the fundamental
importance
of the principle of self-determination
in
the life of nations. In this context, the representative
of France referred to the case of Bangladesh, a tragic
and avoidable strife between brothers. I do not know
what analogy can be drawn between that tragedy,
whose outcome was decided by foreign intervention
and invasion rather than by any process of selfdetermination,
and the emergence of the Comoro
islands from colonial dependency to sovereignty and
independence.

Having thus clarified the legal juridical position, the
Minister of France went on to state the policy of
France in saying: “It is not for France to set the
Comorians against each other; on the contrary, its role
is to help to bring them closer together.”
47. We consider that this statement of policy, which
was endorsed in even more emphatic terms by the
President of the French Republic, reflects wisdom
and statesmanship and is the only policy for France
to follow in its dealings with its former dependency.
48. Why then is the Council having to deal with this
problem? What caused the seemingly orderly progress
of the Comoros towards independence to take a turn
towards tension and confrontation-if
one can speak
of confrontation between a great and powerful country
and a tiny group of islands far away from its shores?
Reference was made to possible differences on the
subject between the different branches of the French
Government.
We appreciate and are not incapable of
understanding
the exigencies of such constitutional
arrangements and can sympathize with the difficulties
which they can create. It would hardly be proper for
members of the Security Council to become involved
in such matters. For the same reason, the United
Nations cannot accept the position that the constitutional difficulties
or the domestic
inhibitions
of
one kind’or another of one of its Member States can
have the effect of overruling the decisions of the
United Nations. I use the word “decisions”
advisedly,
since the matter of the admission of new States, unlike
matters of other kinds, is one in which it is the General
Assembly which has the power of decision, exercised,
of course, on the recommendation
of the Security
Council..

44. At all events, my delegation does not see the
case of the Comoros as involving an irreconcilable
conflict between the principles of self-determination
and territorial
integrity.
In the referendum held in
December 1974, 93 per cent of the voters, that is to
say, virtually
the entire nation, went to the polls
and nearly 95 per cent of those who did so voted for
independence.
There are few cases of a truly democratic consultation
which would show such a high
turn-out of voters and such an overwhelming majority;
a more conclusive decision can hardly have been hoped
for or expected.
45. The fact remains that most of the 5 per cent or
so who voted against independence live in the island
of Mayotte which, not surprisingly, is separated from
the rest of the Territory by a body of water-the
rest
of the Territory consisting also, as we know, of islands.
Furthermore,
we were told that Mayotte came into
French possession much earlier than the remaining
islands. Lastly, we also know that Mayotte is better
endowed with natural resources than the other islands
of the Territory. The question which arises is what
juridical and political weight should be given to these
differences and particularities
of history and ‘geography or indeed to the fact that some 8,000 inhabitants

49. As we all know, in accepting the Security Council’s recommendation
to admit the Comoros to membership, the General Assembly specified that the
State should consist of the four islands which have
always formed part of its territory. The reservation
entered by the French delegation on the Assembly
decision cannot affect the legal validity of the Assembly’s action-and
we do not believe that it was
intended to do so.
6

50. The question of the Comoros had been discussed
before that in various forums of the United Nations
over a number of years. On every occasion and in
every forum the United Nations had reaffirmed the
territorial integrity of the four islands. The necessity
of doing so arose precisely because of doubts among
the inhabitants that, for reasons of sympathy or selfinterest, the colonial Power or certain elements therein
might engineer or might encourage the dismemberment
of their territory.

in the General Assembly on the occasion of the
admission of the Comoros,* when he reiterated his
Government’s
hope that an agreement among the
Comorians would make possible the establishment of
a framework within which the Comoros would start
their new life and that it would be the endeavour of
France to reconcile the points of view of the parties.
My delegation sincerely believes that this remains the
appropriate task and function of France in a Territory
whose destiny was-linked to it for more than a century
and whose people, as we heard yesterday from its
eloquent representative,
continue to look to France
for friendship and for support.

5 1. These fears and suspicions were undoubtedly the
reason why the islands declared their independence
immediately
upon the result of the referendum of
December 1974 and without waiting for the French
Parliament to take consequential
action. We do not
consider that this departure from the scheme laid
down by the French Government for. the independence
of the Territory can justify any derogation from the
Territory’s,
the people’s, fundamental right to independence, sovereignty
and the integrity
of their
territory.

56.

Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Russian):
Mr. President, before ’
expressing my views on the substance of the question
under discussion, I should like to welcome you to the
post of President of the Security Council. On the
basis of press reports. I understand that your presidency of the Security Council will be your. last act
of responsibility within the United Nations before you
leave us. It will be, as it were; your swan-song in the
United Nations, and I should like to express the hope
that this swan-song will be inspired by the spirit of
strengthening international
peace and enhancing the
role of the United Nations as the single international
political organization founded upon the principles of
the peaceful coexistence of States with different social
and political systems.

(interpretation

52. This seems to us the central issue of the question
before the Council. We are not primarily concerned
with the question-though
it is very important for the
Comoros themselves-f
how the 154,000 Comorians
who voted for independence will come to terms with
and reassure the 8,000 who, in what does seem an
unusual departure .from the norm, preferred the continuation of colonial rule. The separate referendum in
Mayotte scheduled for next Sunday is unlikely to
reveal a different division of opinion. We have noted
the assurance of the French Government
that the
referendum will be held in conditions of scrupulous
impartiality
and -freedom. We do not doubt that this
will be so. The question is not whether the referendum
will be held in the proper conditions but whether it
should be held at all.

from

57. I should also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor, the representative of the United Republic of
Tanzania, Mr. Salim, for his tireless and selfless work
as President of the Security Council last month.
Under his. presidency,
the Council discussed two
important problems. The discussion of one of them led
to the adoption of a positive resolution unanimously
supported by all the members of the Security Council.
The discussion of the second extremely important
problem, for quite independent reasons, unfortunately
was not concluded by the successful adoption of a
resolution. I should also like to salute him and express
my gratitude to him for the fact that while he was
President he managed to avoid convening the Security
Council on Saturdays and Sundays.

53. On that question, the United Nationsdf
which
the Comoros is ‘now a Member--can
only give one
answer. If, despite the Council’s friendly advice and
exhortations, the French Government feels compelled
to go ahead with the proposed referendum, it must not
expect the United Nations to recognize or to accept
the results, if those results infringe on the territorial
integrity of one of the States Members of the United
Nations.

58. In concluding this part of my statement, I should
like to associate the voice of the Soviet delegation
with the voices of those who have expressed in the
Security Council their condolences and sympathy for
the people of Guatemala because of the catastrophe
they have suffered.

54. The representative of France asked here yesterday: “What would the opponents of the referendum
of 8 February suggest by way of an alternative solution? What solution is suggested? Should force be used,
or be allowed to be used?“.
[1887th
meeting,
paru. 94.1 Most decidedly not. We do not think either
that the referendum which France proposes to hold
on Sunday is the solution. We fear that it will not
simplify matters; it will complicate the solution.

:
59. Recently, in the course of the work at the thirtieth
session of the General Assembly, the Security Council
considered the application of the Government of the
Comoros for the admission of that young State to
membership
in the United Nations. The Council
adopted resolution 376 (1975), recommending
to the
General Assembly the admission of that State to
membership. Consequently, in resolution 3385 (XXX),

55. For an answer to Mr. de Guiringaud’s question,
I should like to turn to a statement that he made
7

adopted by consensus, the Assembly decided to admit
the Comorcs to membership in the United Nations,
thus confirming the -necessity of respecting the unity
and territorial integrity of the Comoro Archipelago,
including as its constituent
parts all four islands:
Anjouan, Grande-Comore,
Mayotte and MohCli. This
decision ‘of the United Nations has come to constitute the international
legal basis for recognition of
this new young Coniorian State and its territorial
integrity.

Soviet Union, in keeping with the Leninist policy of
granting freedom and independence to all countries,
that as far back as 1960, at the fifteenth session of the
General Assembly, it put forward the proposal for the
adoption of the Declaration.
That initiative
of the
Soviet Union was at that time widely and actively
supported by the non-aligned countries. The Assembly
then adopted the historic Declaration.
65.

60. The Soviet Union supported both resolutions,
that of the Security Council and that of the General
Assembly, and voted in favour of them. In strict
compliance with the principles of its foreign policy
with regard to the recognition
of the fact that all
colonial peoples must enjoy the right to self-determination and national independence,
the Soviet Union
recognized the Comoros as a sovereign independent
State and established diplomatic relations with it.

One of its fundamental

principles

states that:

“Any attempt aimed at the partial or total disruption of the national unity and the territorial
integrity of a country is incompatible
with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.”
The delegation of the Soviet Union cannot but comply
with that principle. This Declaration has become a
programme document for the struggle of the colonial
peoples for their freedom and national independence.

61. In .the telegram
dated 29 December
1975
addressed.to the Chairman of the National Executive
Council of the Comoros, the Chairman of the Presidum
of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union, Comrade
Podgorny, stated: “The peoples of the Soviet Union
wish the people of the Comoro Archipelago, who are
now approaching the construction of a new life, success
in the strengtheningoftheiryoungindependent
State.”

66. At the end of last year the United Nations
solemnly marked the fifteenth anniversary
of the
adoption of the Declaration. During that period dozen
of countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America freed
themselves from colonial slavery; they embarked with
confidence upon the course of independent development and have been admitted. to membership in the
United Nations as equal, sovereign States.

62. Only three months after the admission of that
country to membership in the United Nations as an
independent
sovereign State, the Security Council
once again is considering the question of this State, this
time in connexion with its request for the urgent
convening of a meeting of the Security Council for the
purpose of preserving peace in the archipelago and
adopting the necessary measures to guarantee the
integrity of that country.

67. In this regaid it is appropriate to draw attention
to the following abnormal
phenomenon
of recent
days. Recently certain highly placed persons, including
one representative
to the United Nations and one
Secretary of State, that is, a Foreign Minister, have
been attempting
to distort the policy of the’ Soviet
Union in matters of decolonization.
In disregard of the
actual state of affairs and universally
recognized
facts, they have be&n attempting
to ascribe to the
Soviet Union aggressive intentions; they have been
making a lot of noise about so-called Soviet expansion
and they have even shamelessly been making slanderous charges against the Soviet Union to the effect
that it intends to colonize Africa.

63. The Soviet delegation has listened with great
attention to the statements in the Security Council
on this question by the representative of the Comoros,
the representative of France and the representatives of
many other States Members of the United Nations.
The position of the Soviet Union in this regard is devoid
of any ambiguity whatsoever. It is determined by the
following principles:

68. Now what can we say about people of this kind
who distort the peace-loving
foreign policy of the
Soviet Union? Take care, gentlemen, that you do not
place yourselves in a ridiculous position by your antiSoviet fabrications. All those people who objectively
and justly assist both the general foreign policy of the
Soviet Union-a
policy of peace based upon the principles of peaceful coexistence and non-intervention
in the internal affairs of other States-and
the policy
of the Soviet- Union with regard to decolonization
are laughing about you and your fabrications.

-First,
the solidarity
of our country with the
struggle of the colonial peoples for their freedom and
independence
and for the strengthening
of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of their States;
-Secondly,
strict compliance with United Nations
decisions on questions of decolonization
adopted in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peopes.

69. The peoples who have freed themselves from
colonial slavery are well aware of and remember
the fact that it was precisely our country which was
the major force barring the way of German fascism to

64. In this regard the Soviet delegation cannot refrain
from reminding the Council that it was precisely the
8

suffering, taken so many victims
material damage in that country.

world domination.
It was that country which bore the
brunt of the Second World War. They are well aware
of and will never forget that the defeat of German
fascism promoted
the powerful upsurge of the
national liberation movement and the defeat of the
colonial system of imperialism.
Leaders of the liberated
countries have told us: “We shall be eternally grateful
to the Soviet people and its armed forces. Without
the victory of the Soviet U,nion and iis armed forces
over fascism, the So.viet people would .have become
slaves and we would have remained slaves.”

74. Mr. President, I-should like to congratulate you
sincerely on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and to express my conviction that
under your leadership the Council will successfully
perform its important tasks. I should like to extend to
you my best wishes for success inthis task and in any
other activities in which you may engage in the future.
75. On behalf of the Romanian delegation, I should
like to take this opportunity
to express to our colleague and friend from the United Republic of Tanzania, Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, our admiration and our
great gratitude and thanks for the competence and
devotion with which he conducted our proceedings,
in January, which, as we know, was a particularly
busy month.

70. There is another fact, too, whidh is universally
acknbwledged
by ail countries which have freed
themselves from colonial slavery, namely, that the
Soviet Union, in providing assistance and support for
the national.liberation
movements in theirjust struggle
for freedom and national
independence
of their
peoples, did not seek for itself any economic, military
or other kind of advantage. The only sincere wish of
the Soviet people and its Government is to see these
countries and peoples free and independent. And that
universally acknowledged historical truth cannot be
covered up or distorted by anyone-be
they ministers,
ambassadors or senators.

76. In the consideration
of the item on the agenda
of the Council, my delegation takes as its point of
departure the position of principle of Romania, which
has always actively supported the struggle of the
peoples of the world to exercise their right to independence and liberty and to attain their total liberation,
and also the efforts of countries which have recently
become independent
to achieve development
and
progress.

71. .The renresentative of France did us the honour
and paid.us the compliment yesterday of quoting from
an article from the Constitution of the Soviet Union.
However, he failed to mention the fact that the Soviet
Union, fortunately,-is not a colonial Power and has no
colonies. Therefore, references to .the Constitution
of the ‘Soviet Union cannot serve as a basis for
justifying a continuation
of colonial ‘-dominatioh.
In
matters of decolonization,
as I have:already pointed
‘out, the Soviet Union is guided by the principles and
provisions of .the Declaration
on ..the Granting of
Independence
to Colonial Countries. and Peoples,
adopted by the General Assembly on the initiative of
the Soviet Union,
I

77. We believe that the very essence of the Charter
and the fundamental purpose of the United Nations
is to give firm support to the aspirations of these
peoples. It is entirely logical to think that once a
Non-Self-Governing
Territory has become independent, the former colonial regime and the relationship
of dependence
vis-a-vis the former metropolitan
country should cease once and for all. This puts an
end ipso jkc.to to the competence and attributes of
the former colonial Power vis-a-vis the whole Territory in question and each of its constituent
parts.
Hence, between the new State and all other States,
including the former metropolitan
country, relations
should be based on the rules of international
law,
which alone guarantee the new State the status of a
sovereign and equal partner.

72. The draft resolution
on the question under
consideration in the Council, introduced by Mr. Salim
on behalf of a group of members of the Security
Council, in the view of the delegation of the Soviet
Union, is in keeping with the Charter of the United
Nations, the aforementioned
Declaration and earlier
United Nations decisions on the Comoro islands. It is
designed to ensure the independence, unity and territorial integrity of that young State. The delegation of
the Soviet Union intends to support this draft resolution. The Soviet delegation wishes to express the hope
that the discussion of this item in the Security Council
and the adoption of a decision on this question by the
Council will promote a settlement by peaceful means.
73.

and done so much

78. The Comoro Archipelago having proclaimed its
independence on 6 July 1975, the General Assembly
decided on 12 November last to admit this new State
to membership in the United Nations. There is no doubt
that the coming to independence of the Comoros was
brought about as part of the expression of the desire
of the vast majority of its people. The will of the ,people
of the Comoros was determined in a peaceful way, in
total agreement with the administering Power, through
the referendum of 22 December 1974. That referendum
took place throughout the Comoros Territory, and the
results of it and the decisions thus taken are considered
by us to be valid for the whole Territory. And so the
right to self-determination
was thus exercised ,by all
the people of the Comoros and throughout its Territory.

Mr.

DATGU
(Romania)
(itztcrprctotion
from
My delegation would first like to associate
itself with the condolences which you, Mr. President,
and the Secretary-General
have expressed to the
Government
and people of Guatemala in connexion
with the earthquake
which has caused so much

French):

Y

79. The result of this is that the Comoros became
independent as a&vereign
nation, with its territorial
integrity.
When that country was admitted to the
United Nations, the General Assembly, in resolution 3385 (XXX), sponsored by a .large number of
countries,
reaffirmed
explicitly
the necessity of
respecting the unity and territorial
integrity of the
Comoro Archipelago,
composed of the islands of
Anjouan,
Grande-Comore,
Mayotte
and MohCli.
Romania, one of the sponsors of the aforementioned
resolution, is in favour of respect for andfaithful implementation of that resolution of the General Assembly.

that those principles are of universal validity and are
imperative in character, and that we may not depart
from them or interpret them unilaterally,
or differentiate in our application
of them in the light of
subjective circumstances or facts which fall outside
the domain of international law.
85. In the course of this debate the representative
of the Comoros and our colleagues from African countries particularly have given sufficient data and facts
which leave no doubt that the Comoro- Archipelago
has always been and remains a unitary, political and
territorial entity. Now, particularly,
after the coming
to independence of the Comoros; in accordance with
the wishes of the vast majority of its people, no State,
no international body, has the right to call into question
the attributes of the State of the Comoros.. It is for
that reason that the Romanian delegation considers
that we must respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of the Comoros, as is required
by the General Assembly.

80. In considering the request of the head of State
of the Comoros, the Security Council should proceed
from the clear premise that the Comoros is already
a sovereign and independent
State, enjoying in the
United Nations equal rights with other Members. That
is why all the principles of the Charter, as well as the
fundamental principles laid down in other instruments
of the Organization,
are naturally equally valid with
regard to the State of the Comoros, which should
enjoy all rights and guarantees provided in the Charter.

86. We believe that the Comoros, as a State Member
of the United Nations, is entitled to call upon the
Security Council to pronounce in favour of unconditional respect for its unity and territorial integrity,
and to require all States to refrain from any action
liable to affect its political status.

81. In other words, from the moment when a State
becomes independent and is admitted to the United
Nations, that which should prevail in determining
its
status vis-a-vis other States and the sovereign rights
of the new State are the provisions of the Charter,
as well as the other fundamental priciples of international law. We refer particularly
to Article 2 of the
Charter, which has laid down the principle of sovereign
equality of all the Members of the United Nations
and the principle of respect for the territorial integrity
and political independence
of all States. These are
principles repeatedly reaffirmed both by the General
Assembly and the Security Council.

87. The Romanian delegation associates itself with
the appeal made. to France in this debate by African
countries to stop the referendum in Mayotte planned
for 8 February. We are convinced that it is possible
to resolve this dispute in a friendly fashion in respect
for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the
State of the Comoros, in a spirit of friendship and cooperation with African States and in the best humanist
traditions and traditions ofjustice of the French people.

82. It suffices in this regard to recall just one paragraph of the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, annexed to resolution 2625 (XXV),
in which the General Assembly stipulates that every
State should refrain from any action-and
I stress,
any action- “aimed at the partial or total disruption
of the national unity and territorial integrity of a State
or country.”

88. My delegation will vote in favour of draft resolution S/11967 submitted by the delegations of Benin,
Guyana, Panama, the Libyan Arab Republic and the
United Republic of Tanzania.
89. ’ Mr. MURRAY
(United Kingdom): Mr. President,
let me warmly congratulate you upon your assumption this month of the presidency of the Security
Council. It gives me great pleasure to have presiding
over our proceedings the distinguished
representative of the United States, whose dedication to the cause
of justice, peace and international
co-operation
has
been, and remains, the foundation
on which the
relations between our two countries are based. Moreover, we are particularly glad to have your personal
ability,
your dedication,
your wide experience of
government and public affairs, and your ready wit to
guide us in our work. My delegation wishes you
well in whatever the future may bring you. The United
Nations will be a greyer place without you.

83. As we are aware, that Declaration was adopted
by consensus. Of course, the Comoros is only a very
small State, one of the smallest in the United Nations.
But international
legality can draw no distinctions
between great and small to the disadvantage of, the
latter. International
legality is and must be single and
equal to all and to all peoples and States whatever their
size, power, population or geographical situation or
form.
84. Briefly,
of principles
consideration

those are some of the considerations
which my delegation is guided by in the
of this ‘item on the agenda. We believe

90. May I also congratulate my next-door neighbour
and Commonwealth
colleague, Mr. Salim, upon his
10

immensely skilful and patient handling of the affairs
of the Council last month. We have every reason to
be grateful to him for the way in which he carried out
the duties of .the presidency during pne of the busiest
and most difficult
months that the Council has
experienced for a long time.

to the approval of Parliament”.
I dare say that the
phrase often goes unnoticed, but it is not inserted
frivolously or accidentally.
Dependent Territories of
the United. Kingdom
are, as a rule, parts of Her
Majesty’s dominions. An Act of the United Kingdom
Parliament
is .necessary before any part of Her
Majesty’s dominions can cease to have that status or
before it can become independent of the United Kingdom Government.
It is normally the case that the
Parliament of the United Kingdom is in agreement with
the Government of the day both upon the principle of
decolonization
and upon the need to give it effect in
respect of particular Territories proceeding to independence. But Parliament
has the last word, and
unless it pronounces that it is in favour of independence, independence
cannot legally be achieved.
I might add in passing that Members of Parliament,
as indeed of the Government, take a particularinterest
in the question of minorities in dependent Territories
which are unhappy about their future prospects as
independence approaches. Sometimes this results in
guarantees for these minorities
being incorporated,
with the agreement of the governments of the Terri-.
tories in question, in the constitutions
which they
assume on independence.
Sometimes it does not. It
has been said forcefully in the Security Council that
niajoeties have their rights as well as minorities, and
no one would question this for one moment. But the
political problem remains, and it would certainly be
our wish that in all Territories of ours on the point of
independence the greatest efforts should be made to
reconcile local views and differences as harmoniously
as possible.

91. Before I turn to the question of the Comoros, my
delegation would like to associate itself with the
remarks made yesterday by the representative
of
Panama and with the message of the Secretary-General
concerning the disastrous earthquake in Guatemala.
Our deepest sympathy goes to the families of all those
who lost their lives or were injured in that terrible
disaster. My Prime Minister
has already sent a
personal message of condolence to the President of
Guatemala with an offer of any relief aid and humanitarian assistance that the Guatemalan
emergency
services may require.
92. My delegation has followed this week’s debate
on the question of the Comoros with the closest
attention and interest. I must say at the outset that
the links between my country and the Comoros have
not been great in the past, though I was delighted to
learn that the representative of the Comoros opposite
me received a part-indeed,
I would hope the best
part-of his education at Oxford University.
Despite
this distinguished exception, our contacts still remain
regrettably slight. This does not prevent us, however,
from warmly welcoming the accession tb independence
of the new State of the Comoros as a further step in
the process of decolonization.
We wish the people of
the Comoros all possible success in the shaping of
their new destiny.

95. The representatives
of France and the United.
Republic of Tanzania touched on a very important
question at our 1886th meeting in discussing the
extent to which delegations
here represent their
Governments.
It.is certainly the case that the French
Government expressed itself very clearly throughout
1974 in favour of the unity and territorial integrity of
the Comoros. We believe that it was sincere in doing
so, and we have noted the remark of the representative of France that France has no interest in keeping
Mayotte within its constitutional
framework. But the
policies of the French Government are subject to the
approval .of the French Parliament,
which in this
instance was not forthcoming.
I can well understand
the views of the representative of the United Republic
of Tanzania and other speakers, but clearly intentions
are different from commitments,
and parliamentary
authority was necessary before the French Government could make such commitments.

93. Our interest in this debate, however, derives
mainly from the general principles of self-determination
which have been adduced and discussed by a number
of speakers. I think the importance goes far beyond
the particular field which we are here discussing.
My delegation
openly declares an interest in the
question both as an administering
Power committed
to the principle of self-determination
and .as representative of a country in which, like France, Parliament also reigns supreme. With this in mind, I should
therefore like to explore some of the points which have
been made in the course of this debate.
94. I said a moment ago that in Britain Parliament
reigns supreme. This is a general proposition
but it
applies with equal force to the procedures which we
adopt in Britain to give effect to the independence of
our dependent Territories. In a number of communications to the Genreal Assembly and to the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration
on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples over
the past year, we have had occasion to reproduce
‘the texts of communiqds
announcing that this or that
Territory is proceeding to independence. These communications have often contained the phrase, “subject

96. We have also listened with the keenest interest
to the views expressed in the Security Council on the
application
of the principle
of self-determination.
I need hardly say that my Government
stands
unreservedly by that principle. We have not only said
so; we have acted accordingly, as the presence here
of some 35 delegations from former British dependent
Territories
shows. We believe that any dependent
11

Territory, howeve small its population or territory,
has a right to d ecide its own future in the way it
wants, whether it chooses independence,
integration
with the ‘administering
Power or perhaps association
with another country. We shall continue to argue that
all our Territories
are free to choose their future,
whether they are islands or continental
countries,
whatever their .racial composition
or geographical
position.

ment would not spare any efforts to restore harmony.
We hope that some formula can ,be found. which will
allow the links.which existed in the past between the
four islands to .persist in some form or another in the
future. Only by adopting positions of flexibility
can
the friendship and co-operation, which representatives.
of both Governments
have told us here that they
desire, be restored.
100. So much for the substance. Before closing,
however, I feel that I must make at least a passing
reference to the statement by’the Soviet representative, Mr. Malik. Mr. Malik has his own way of looking
at things, whether it be the events of long ago or what
is happening in Angola now. As far as I am concerned,
the facts are clear: Cuban soldiers, extremely well
armed with Soviet weapons, are’killing
Africans in
Africa, having crossed the Atlantic Ocean for that
purpose.

97. We also know, however, that. the problems
facing our remaining small Territories are hideously
complex. Islands, particularly small islands, tend to be
cut off from the current of world events and to be
suspicious. even of their immediate neighbours. When
a visiting .mission from the Special Committee
went
to Montserrat last year, for example, it was evident
that the Montserratians
were not worried so much
about their relations with the United Kingdom as
about their relations with their Caribbean neighbours.
Two years ago, another visiting mission from the
Special Committee observed a referendum in the Ellice
Islands on separation from the Gilbert Islands, a
separation which, incidentally,
has now taken effect.
The Ellice Islanders admitted that separation might
not make economic sense, but they felt themselves to
be different from their Gilbertese neighbours, and they
were worried about their future prospects .as independence approached. Indeed, these tensions between
different islands tend to mount as the day of independence or self-determination
draws near.

101. Mr. KANAZAWA
(Japan): Mr. President, first
of all, it is my pleasure to congratulate you on your
assumption .of’the duties of the presidency for this
month, and I wish you every success. I am confident
that your outstanding qualities will give the Council
enlightened and effective guidance in the fulfilment
of its tasks. I am particularly happy to see you in the
Chair in view of the warm and friendly relations
between the Government
you represent and Japan.
I hope that these relations will be,further strengthened
through the close co-operation of the two Governments
both within and outside the United Nations.

98. I do not believe that the United Nations has
any ready-made or universally applicable solution to
these problems.
We argued forcefully
only last
year in the Trusteeship
Council that Papua New
Guinea should proceed to independence as a whole,
and that any attempt to dismember it was unjustifiable.
We, for our part, certainly do our best to bring our
dependent Territories
to independence
as one unit.
But at times, I confess, we have failed. We failed in
the Indian subcontinent in 1947, and I doubt whether
anyone would now argue that it was politically feasible
to have kept the subcontinent united. There have been
one or two other failures elsewhere, but happily we
have by and large been successful. We also understand and sympathize
with the African States’
legitimate
preoccupations
-and with their desire to
inherit in full their colonial boundaries.

102. I wish- also to pay my tribute to the admirable
achievements of the President of the Council for the
month of January, Mr. Salim of the United Republic
of Tanzania. All Mr. Salim’s gifts as a presiding offtcer
and negotiator were brought into play in his efforts to
help to find satisfactory solutions for some of t.he most
difficult and intricate problems that the Councii has
ever encountered,
and these efforts were rewarded
with great success.
103. Turning to the question now before us, the
delegation of Japan takes note of the fact that, in a
free expression of their will, the people of the Comoro
Archipelago
declared themselves overwhelmingly
in
favour of independence
in the referendum held in
December 1974. We were appreciative also of the firm
commitment
and efforts of the Government of France
to ensure the decolonization
of the Comoro Archipelago, which enabled the people of the Comoros to
exercise iheir right of self-determination
in a peaceful
and orderly manner.

99. In applying these general considerations
to the
question before us, we recognize that the situation is
complex. We well understand both the strongly held
view of the Government
of the Comoros that, their
former colonial boundaries should be retained now that
they are independent, and we understand equally the
constitutional
imperatives
with which the French
Government is confronted. It is our earnest hope that
these unhappy differences between the two Govemments can be settled by continuing
negotiations
between them. We have noted the statement, of the
representative
of France yesterday that his Govern-

104. However, we have observed the subsequent
events affecting the Comoro islands with a mixture of
perplexity and concern. Indeed, we had wanted to see
the successful conclusion of talks on a mutually
acceptable
settlement
between France and the
Comoros to reconcile the differences that have arisen
subsequent to the referendum in 1974. To our regret,
12

.

110. I should, like also to associate myself with the
well-deserved thanks and congratulations
that have
been unanimously addressed to your predecessor, the
representative
of the United Republic of Tanzania,
Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim. We were indeed..fortunate
-as I said when he first took up the presidency in a
month already charged with a very heavy scheduieto have been granted throughout our meetings and
labours in that month the skill, integrity and intelligence
of our colleague, Mr. Salim. We shall remember his
outstanding performance and we believe that we are
all indebted to him.

talks between the two parties concerned have failed
to produce agreement on the future of one of the
islands of the archipelago and have been suspended.
105. My delegation regrets that the French Govemment is planning to hold another referendum in Mayotte
next Sunday despite the absence of any mutually
acceptable solution, which we continue to hope will be
achieved. This referendum is strongly .opposed by the
State of the Comoros as a denial of the aspirations
of the majority of the Comorian people for the national
unity and territorial
integrity
of the archipelago.
I understand well the constitutional
difficulties
the
Government of France is now facing, but I feel strongly
that the aspirations of the people of the Comoros must
be respected.

111. Before turning to the matter which is being
debated by the Council, I should like to join you,
Mr. President,
and previous speakers who have
expressed their sympathy to the people and the
Government
of Guatemala tragically stricken by a
disastrous earthquake.
I wish to reiterate to that
friendly country of Latin America the feelings .of
brotherhood and solidarity already conveyed by the
President of the Republic of Italy to the head of State
of Guatemala.

106. Taking into account these conflicting views on
the very fundamental principles involved, and in the
absence of a solution mutually
acceptable to the
two parties, my delegation considers it appropriate that
the talks between the Governments of France and the
Comoros be resumed with a view to reconciling these
differences and arriving at a mutually
acceptable
solution regarding the future status of Mayotte. Meanwhile, the French Government might find it conducive
to a settlement to suspend the Mayotte referendum
pending the outcome of talks with the Comoros.

112. On 17 October 1975, [184&/z lneeting], on the
occasion of the vote on the admission of the Comorian
State to the united Nations, I had the opportunity to
express our cordial and friendly welcome to the people
and the Government
of the Comoro Archipelago.
I expressed as well our trust in the posit.ive contribution that a country like the Comoros, holding such an
important
asset as its valuable heritage of both an
African soul and the faith of Islam, could make in the
fulfilment of the principles and purposes of the United
Nations.

107. My delegation believes that the Security Council
should appeal to the two parties concerned to resume
the negotiations
as soon as possible, and that the
Council should decide on the measures and principles
that will guide the negotiations towards the prompt
and constructive
settlement that we hope for. My
delegation hopes also’ that the Council will take appropriate measures for their speedy resumption.

113. On the same occasion, I expressed our appreciation for the assistance that France had given to the
new State in its endeavours towards political and
economic emancipation
as well as our trust in the
traditional
vocation for democracy of the French
nation. With regard to the legal difficulties then still
confronting
the two Governments
in Paris and in
Moroni, I expressed our confidence that they would be
able to find the best solution to the problem besetting
them..

108. Before concluding,
my delegation aSsociates
itself with the message from the Secretary-General
to
the President of Guatemala expressing his sympathy
over the heavy loss of life and property in Guatemala
caused by the unfortunate earthquake. We extend our
deep sympathy to the representative of Guatemala and,
through him, my delegation would ask him to communicate to the Minister for External Relations of
Guatemala the sympathy of my Government for the
Government and people of Guatemala.

114. Since that very same problem seems to be still
pending between the two countries, it is that same
confidence and trust that we should like to reiterate
here today. We followed this debate very carefully
and listened attentively to all the statements made,
especially the one by the representati<e of the State
of the Comoros, Mr. Omar Abdallah, which was quite
impressive because of the high standard of its contents
and the exemplary sense of responsibility
and balance
it displayed. The first conclusion my delegation drew
from all these statements is that none of the speakers
seemed seriously to question the good will and the
earnest purposes of France. Its record in decolonization-its
proud record, as stated by Mr. Jackson,
the representative of Guyana,-is
generally acknowl-

109. Mr. VINCI (Italy): Mr. President, may I first of
all convey to you my warm congratulations
and best
wishes on your accession to the high office of President
of the Security Council for February and express to
you our conviction
that under your guidance the
Council will continue to work efficiently and swiftly,
as it has done from the beginning of this month. It is
indeed a pleasure for my delegation to assure you,
the representative of a great country with which Italy
has the closest relations, of the full collaboration of my
delegation. We also wish you well in your future life,
whatever career you choose in the academic field or
once again in the service of the Government.
13

edged and praised. This being the case, I wonder how
many participants in this debate would be so understanding and graceful as openly to clarify a constitutional issue concerning their respective countries, as
Mr. de Guiringaud has done several times. I am afraid
that many, if not most of the ‘Member States would
refute questions on such a matter as interference
-unlawful
interference-in
their national sovereignty
and in their domestic jurisdiction.

be, in order to bring about the final solution we all
advocate without producing unnecessary disputes or
conflicts of interests in the Comoro islands, which
might lead to unpredictable
and unfortunate
consequences.
119. What we need to do, in our view, is to help the
Comoros to achieve the unity and territorial integrity
of their State and their full political independence.
And the question arises as to how this can be .done in
the most effective way. I humbly suggest that it is by
a practical and constructive approach rather than by
any other means that we would bring closer the day
when all the people of the Comoro Archipelago,
including the population
of Mayotte, will live and
work together in one united country. The respect paid
to principles in some abstract form with no relation
to a factual situation, however intricate, does not
enhance those principles; it may even weaken their
effectiveness in practice. And I think that this also
should be kept in mind before a decision is taken.

115. On -the basis of this assumption, we hold the
view that it would not be useful, and might even be
wrong, to take a position which would sound rather
inflexible and nearly dogmatic in respect to the main
principles guiding the process of decolonization.
In
order to avoid any misunderstanding,
I hasten to say
that my country respects and fully supports these
fundamental principles-and
I believe that our record
is quite clear on this point. What I mean is that these
principles should guid,e our action in trying to solve
a specific problem but that this same problem should
not be taken as a test case of the correct interpretation to b.e given to those principles. The more so
because, on previous problems discussed recently by
the Council, a spirit of compromise and conciliation
has to a certain extent inspired its conclusions. And
what was good for neighbouring
countries in Africa
and Asia should be good enough in this case.

120. For all the reasons that I have just indicated, my
delegation will not be in a position to support the fivePower draft resolution if it is put to a vote, although
we do share its objectives and main aspiration, so
eloquently emphasized by Mr. Salim in introducing
the text on behalf of the sponsors.

116. In other words, we see neither the purpose nor
the usefulness of a confrontation
on the issue of the
island of Mayotte, for we believe that it is, rather,
the interests of the populations
in all the Comoro
islands that we should pursue here. It seems to us
that the interests of those populations call for some
kind of an agreement on a realistic basis, an agreement
to be sponsored and backed by the Council.

121. In conclusion,
my delegation feels that the
Council should still aim in the first instance at herping
the Comoros to develop their independence
and
statehood with all the required economic, political and
geographical components. We would therefore like to
appeal to all parties concerned in this matter to cooperate amicably to reach this objective. At the same
time, we feel that our debates on this issue, as on
other issues, will carry more weight if the Security
Council expresses itself unanimously.
Its voice, we
believe, ‘would have a better chance tc be heard
and heeded both in the archipelago and in France.

117. We believe, in fact, that there is enough ground
for a realistic compromise
between the parties concerned without touching upon fundamental principles,
which, of course, must be upheld. We are not sure,
however; that it is .necessary or wise to spell them
out again and again in each case. May I indicate that,
in the view of my delegation, there still seems to be
at this stage ample common ground for a pragmatic
solution to this case.

122. Mr. AKHUND
(Pakistan): I wish to be excused
for asking to speak once again. I was inspired by one
or two, observations made by our learned colleague
from the United Kingdom and I thought I might share
with him and with other members of the Council some
thoughts of my own.

118. Taking into account the excellent record of
France in the decolonization
process, I think that
nobody here seriously believes that in the year 1976
Paris intends somehow to prolong its role in Mayotte
for some arcane purpose. Let us face it: nothing would
indicate a reason for France to be willing to pay the
disproportionate
cost of its permanent settlement in
Mayotte. On the contrary, we detect the earnest will
of the French Government to face its responsibilities
at home and towards the world community-on
the
one hand, to act in accordance with its Constitution
and, on the other, to alleviate the present economic
preoccupations
or anxieties of the population
of
Mayotte, however well founded these motivations may

123. Before I do so, may I join previous speakers in
expressing the shock and sympathy of my delegation
with regard to the catastrophe which has struck the
people of Guatemala. I wish to say, on behalf of my
country, that, in whatever modest way we can, we
stand ready to be of assistance to them at this moment.
124. .Mr. Murray made a statement which has taken
me a little while to absorb: “If the British Parliament”, he said, “does not act, independence is dot
achieved.”
Sometimes we get a little satiated, shall
we say, with lessons in parliamentary
procedures and
constitutional
niceties. I think the United Kingdom
14’

justifiably proud of the fact that it sees here 35 of its
former colonies, proteges and pupils occupying seats
as independent, sovereign Members.

British Parliament has not taken the necessary action
it cannot, in our view, be ‘legally independent.
,130. The PRESIDENT:
As the representative of the
UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA,
I dare to corn-~
ment in this bicentennial
year that I believe I have
the honour to represent another country that did not
obtain an act of Parliament in time.

125. Pakistan was indeed the first ,of the British
possessions to break loose and was followed 24 hours
later by India. And it all happened, as we know, in
an extremely orderly, friendly and even gentlemanly
manner. There were the proper acts of Parliament,
there were bands, there were receptions and parades
and the usual things. But let us not forget that such a
purely formalistic view of history as Mr. Murray put
forward does grave injustice to history. Thousands of
people spent years in gaol and hundreds gave their
lives.

(Union of Soviet Socialist Repub131. Mr. MALIK
lics) (interpretation from Russian): In connexion with
the unfriendly
attack on the Soviet Union by the
British representative
I should like to make some
comments.
For about seven years I was Soviet
Ambassador to the United Kingdom.
I came to the
conclusion-I
was indeed deeply convinced-that
if
the. British Tories had the opportunity to get us by the
throat they would not let us go until the morning.
But I thought that hatred which dictated the attack
against the Soviet Union was characteristic only of
the Tories. Today I realize that that is a cancer
suffered by the official representative of the Labour
Government.
The inappropriate
and malicious attack
against the Soviet Union is really a cancer. Many
representatives of British ruling circles have suffered
from this, and recently Mrs. Thatcher, the Tory leader,
once again confirmed this impression by her hostile
attack’on the Soviet Union.

126. The British came to our subcontinent 200 years
ago and took over the empire of the Moguls. In 1857
the first war of independence broke out, which to this
day the British prefer to view as “the Indian mutiny”.
We fought them throughout, as I said, more or less in
a gentlemanly
manner. We were not altogether
unhappy to have made their acquaintance,
but we
were happier when they left. And because our relationship was of an ambivalent
nature, it has lasted,
something of it has remained.
127. I am sorry indeed that the renresentative of the
United Kingdom feels that they failed on the subcontinent, that they failed in keeping the unity of the
subcontinent.
Well, their failure is our triumph,
because but for that failure I would not be sitting here
representing a sovereign and independent country.

132. Who is killing Africans in Angola? The South
African racists who think like the British do and are
their friends. Those are the people who are murdering.
The British representative
was silent about that.
I have no intention of answering for the Cubans. The
outstanding representative of Cuba, Mr. Alar&n, has
been here and he can defend himself against the
attacks delivered by the British representative against
Cuba..

128. Indeed, it is true that the British opposed the
establishment
of Pakistan. Our people struggled and
fought against all sorts of opposition, including that of
the United Kingdom, to achieve nationhood through
self-determination
and we succeeded. I thought that we
had shaken hands over that with the British; we even
stayed in the Commonwealth
for a. while. But if
Mr. Murray would like a full-scale discussion on that
on some other occasion-not
tonight and not in this
forum-we
shall be very happy to engage in it.

133. Who is helping the South African racists in
Angola? Who is sending and forming detachments of
international
bandit murderers, the so-called mercenaries, volunteers, hirelings? It is London. According
to American newspapers, London is the place where
these bands of mercenaries are formed and recruited
to murder Angolans, Angolan patriots who want to be
free and independent.
Who are they helping? The
anti-patriotic
elements in Angola, and of course the
South African racists. Those are the people who are
guilty of continuing the fratricidal war in Angola. To
help anti-governmental
elements is one of the habits
of the United Kingdom.

129. Mr. MURRAY
(United Kingdom):
I will only
say at this stage that when my learned staff drafted
this passage, including these historical parellels, I did
not think it would provide the occasion for this
interesting contribution
from my colleague which has
cast light on a certain past and enlightened us and
given someone like me, who spent many happy years
in his country, a little touch of nostalgia. I thank the
representative
of Pakistan. On the point with which
he began, my observation was not quite in the terms
he quoted. What I did say was: “But Parliament has
the last word, and unless it... is in favour of independence, independence cannot legally be achieved.”
[See paragraph 94 above.] “Legally”
is the’word, and
it is not without relevance because we hear from time
to time of a Territory called Rhodesia, which would
like to think itself independent,
but because the

134. Let us recall that the United Kingdom, in the
course of the civil war in the Soviet Union, after the
socialist revolution,
helped the enemies of the young
Soviet Republic,
the Czarist generals, Kolchak,
Denikin, Yudenich, and others, who did not represent
the Soviet people. And now London has become the
headquarters
for the formation
of international
murderers, to be sent and supplied to fight against the
Angolan people. In other words, that old tradition
15

which was begun as far back as the year following the
1917October revolution is still going on today. And this
intervention on the part of the United Kingdom is
very well known to us. These are the people who are
attempting to continue a struggle in Angola and Jo
kill Africans.

outside against the sovereign State in the form-of the
People’s Republic of Angola. This VviiI enable the
Angoian people itself to decide its own fate. The
imperialist propaganda is confusing two concepts:
intervention and the provision of assistance.

135. In those times it was the British working class
that helped us. It told the Tory Government: “Hands
off Soviet Russia.” And that was the decisive thing to
prevent further intervention on the part of British
imperialism in the affairs of our country. Let us hop&
that there will be found progressive resistance in the
United Kingdom which will tell the present Govemment: “Hands off Angola, and no more murdering
of Angoian patriots, no more sending international
bands of murderers, mercenaries, to Angola to continue murdering Angoians.”

139. The sending from London of thousands of
international. bandits and murderers in, the form of
mercenaries is intervention, just as it was intervention
in the affairs of the young Soviet Republic in thk 1920s
after the October revolution..The provision of assistance, however, to the lawful Government of Angola,
upon its request, is international assistance to, the
Angolan patriots which are fighting- valiantly, selflessly, for the freedom and independence of their
country. That is the situation with regard to Angola,
and no fabrications on the part of the British representative will serve to distort the substance of this
truth or cover it up.

136. With regard to the Soviet Union, it is firmly’
in favour of the Angolan people enjoying, as soon ai
possible, the fruits of their valiant struggle for freedom
and natidnal independence and that it should begin to
build a new life for itself based on freedom, independence and social progress. Everyone knows that
the basis for the position of the Soviet Union in the
Angoian matter is the consistent line of support for
countries struggling for national independence and
freedom.

140. Mr. MURRAY (United Kingdom): As far as this
body is concerned, there is only Her Majesty’s
Government-neither a Tory nor a Labour Govemment. I represent Her Majesty’s Government here.
But let me assure Mr. Maiik that it is certainly not
the intention of Her Majesty’s Government to go for
his throat and my Government attaches the greatest
possible importance to good relations with the Soviet
Union. But that does not mean that we must nticessarily
approve every aspect of the policies of that great
country.

137. For many years the Soviet Union has been
giving moral and material support to the patriotic
forces of Angola in their struggle for the liberation
of their country from the colonial yoke. Faithful .to
our international duty, the Soviet Union responded to
the request-the request, I stress this-f
the iegitimate Government of the People’s Republic of Angola,
and gave it the necessary assistance to defend its
achievements. That is the state of affairs. The Soviet
Union, as already pointed out, does not seek in
Angola either economic, military or any other
advantages. There is no multibillion investment on
the part of the Soviet Union in Angola. We have no
interest in plundering the natural resources of Angola
or of the Angoian people. Our assistance and support
to the legitimate Government of the People’s Republic
of Angoia flows from positions of principle of Soviet
foreign policy and is entirely in keeping with the
resolutions of the United Nations and of OAU on
decoionization-United
Nations resolutions which
the United Kingdom voted against.

141. The Soviet representative. has devoted a certain
amount of his statement to the question of mercenaries. We acknowledge that there are a certain
number of scailywags from my. country intervening
in the affairs of Angola, but they. are not doing so with
the encouragement of Her Majesty’s Government.
There are a few scaiiywags, I say.
142. I have in front of me a statement made, byMr. Ennals, the Minister of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs, as recently as 4 February,
the day before yesterday, in which he said:
“In connexion with the recruifment of mercenaries in this country I want to make two things
quite clear. First, the British Government condemns, without reservation, the dispatch of Britishmercenaries to Angola. Secondly, we strongly urge
ail who are contemplating such dangerous and selfdefeating action to think again.

138. The direct military intervention in Angola is on
the part of the South African racists and imperialist
forces and their mercenaries, which receive assistance,
open and covert, from foreign intelligence services.
The imperialists and racists do not want to resign themselves to the loss of the possibility for plundering, as
formerly, the natural resources of Angola, and are
trying to establish there a rigime favourable to themselves. The key to the resolution of the Angolan
problem is the cessation of armed aggression from

“Mr. Caliaghan has already, in Parliament,
deplored the action of these soldiers of fortune.
It is important that it should be unders1ood overseas
that these foolhardy men are acting. in defianc.e of
British Government policy. We” have condensed
ail forms of external intervention- in Angolan affairs.
Britain’s objective is an end to-the- fighting and the
establishment of a representative g,overnment. in
Angola.”
16

Mr. Ennals went on to end this part of his speech
by repeating advice reported by the British press to
have been given by an ex-RAF sergeant who had
returned to London from Angola. The sergeant said,
“I hope that anyone contemplating going to Angola will
take my advice. Don’t”.
So that reflects the formal
British attitude ‘to mercenaries.

lannuage of civilitv and in a search for solutions. We
find o&-selves caught between the clear expectations
and rights of the peoples of the Comoros and the
clear effort of the Republic of France to accommodate
those desires and rights. Mr. Vinci has spoken of the
goodwill and earnest purpose of France. I might only
say the transparent goodwill and earnest purpose of
France. Mr. Omar Abdallah, as several of-my colleagues have pointed out, spoke to the Council in the
most learned and persuasive, understanding terms.

143. As for the rest of Mr. Malik’s speech, I think
he dealt rather inadequately with my main point that
Soviet arms were being used to kill Africans, but
I would hope that if I assured him that I had listened to
his speech carefully he would not take me up on that
comparatively
mild observation.

151. Suddenly in this atmosphere comes the language
of the purge trial, of threat, of fear. But spoken to men
who are not that easily threatened. Not only do we go.
back. to the grimmest days of the cold war. We find
ourselves taking up an issue that brings us back to
the grimmest days of colonialism.
The fact of the
matter is that in Africa the last bits of decolonization
are before us; only one small area remains. But
suddenly, for the first time in a century, a European
army has reappeared in Africa.

144. The PRESIDENT:
At this noint. as the renresentative of the UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA,
I should like to exercise my right of reply to the
statements made by the representative of the Soviet
Union. I assure the speakers remaining on the list that
they shall not be kept long waiting, and I speak not
least in view of the repeated interventions
by the
Soviet representative on this matter.

152. As the representative of the United Kingdom
said: “AS far as I am concerned, the facts are clear.
Cuban soldiers, extremely well armed with Soviet
weapons, are killing Africans in Africa, having crossed
the Atlantic Ocean for that purpose”. The blue eyes
are back with their European arms-and their murderous
intentions. If Africa is not being recolonized, what is
that foreign army doing there?

145. Mr. Malik’s language just an hour ago in the
Security Council took us back to the grimmest days
of the cold war146. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
lics): Point of order, Mr. President.

Repub-

147. The PRESIDENT:
upon the representative

I call

As PRESIDENT,
of the Soviet Union.

153. Now, gentlemen
of the Council,
we have
perhaps too artfully avoided taking up this issue. My
Government has not raised it. The first Government to
have done so is the Soviet Union. The Soviet representative spoke with respect to the purported intentions of other nations. He spoke of their desire to be
“plundering”
the resources of Angola, afar-away place
of which I surely know little.

148. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Renublies) (interprelafion‘
from Russian):
If I am -not
mistaken, Sir, the Security Council is discussing the
question of the situation in the Comoros, and you
might start at least from that, Sir.
149. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative
of the. Soviet Union. As the representative
of the
UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA,
I will say in the
most solemn terms, Sir, that we have gone under your
direction, and at your initiative, from discussing the
Comoro Archipelago
to evoking the Gulag Archipelago. We have gone back to the language of
intimidation,
the language of threat. It is said that this
representative and his Secretary of State have “shamelessly been making slanderous charges against the
Soviet Union to the effect that it intends to colonize
Africa”. “Take care” we are told, beware your “antiSoviet fabrications”.
Now, gentlemen, the representative may speak, as any of you may speak, as he will,
of this representative.
Do not, however, presume to
speak of my Secretary of State in such terms. Do not
address the Secretary of State in the language of a
purge trial. We are not intimidated;
we are not afraid.
We will not “take care”, we do not give a damn.

154. Well that word “plundering”
evoked a memory
of two weeks ago. The President of Zambia, President Kaunda, spoke of the “plundering
tiger with its
deadly cubs”. Now, who do you think President
Kaunda thought to be that tiger, and which the cubs?
There is not a person in this room who does not know.
It is not in the end the responsibility
of the United
States to raise the issue if no one else will. But you
all know, every member of the Security Council
knows, whom President Kaunda meant when he talked
about the plundering tiger and the deadly cubs. If it
is not the wish of the Council to discuss it, so be it.
It has not been a United States initiative that has done
this. But have a care, gentlemen,
with respect to
the good name of the Secretary of State of the United
States. I will not have him at this table subjected to
the Stalinist bullying of a generation long gone and
well rid of.

150. We are here to discuss the Comoros, and we
have sought to do so in the language .of law, the

155. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): In welcoming the
representative of the. United States to the presidency
17

of the Council I said that this would be his swansong. We have just heard it.

160. This is the fundamental difference. I think that
everyone in this room can understand this full well.
No efforts on the part of the President to distract
attention from this basic truth can be successful.
Mr. Moynihan, please do not try to do this.

156. I think the United States representative incor-.
rectly understood what.1 said in my statement, which
can be read. There was no word of threat. I emphasized
that you should beware of falling into a ridiculous
situation with your .slander of the Soviet Union, to
the effect that the Soviet Union is trying to colonize
Africa. You will be laughed at, I said, with this sort of
fabrication against the Soviet Union.

161. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative
of Madagascar. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
162. Mr. RABETAFIKA
(Madagascar) (interpretation from French): Mr. President, I would be remiss
with regard to the usual custom if I failed to express
on the ‘part of my delegation our wishes for your
success in the presidency which you have assumed this
month, and through you, to convey our thanks to the
members of the Council for having invited us to
participate in the discussion on the question which
we now have :before us.

157. I did not call anybody by name; But the author
of one of those statements himself named his own
name. Well, after all, that makes it clearer who it is.
I said that these sort of people who are responsible
people, who are ministers
and ambassadors,
are
distorting the policies of the Soviet Union. And the
statement of the representative. of the United States
bore out the fact that this is a policy aimed ‘at. distorting the position of the Soviet Union on the Angolan
question. It continues, and it is the same sort of distortion that has been repeated by the American representative here.

163. Since the independence of the Comoro Archipelago was proclaimed,
the Comorian Government
authorities have at least four times drawn the attention
of the Organization to facts which without doubt are
not conducive to enabling this new State to exercise
fully its sovereignty while safeguarding its unity and
.ensuring respect for its territorial
integrity.
These
repeated actions deserve to be highlighted since they
do represent the desire of the Comorian people to
respond peacefully and in accordance with intemational morality to the provocations
of the former
administering
Power which, in order to ward off the
frustrations that result from an opinion which hardly
falls into line with the new requirements
of history,
seems to take pleasure in ambiguity and contradiction.

158. What I said in response to the attack of the
United Kingdom representative is fully relevant also
to the statement made by the United States representative. The Soviet Union: is ‘not intervening in. the
affairs of Angola. It, is giving legitimate assistance to
the Government
of the Angolan People’s Republic.
This is the difference between the secret and covert
means of assistance to those who are fighting against
that Government
and .to the South African racists
and open, honest, legitimate
actions by way of
rendering assistance to the legitimate Government of
the Angolan Republic. This is the main and fundamental difference. But in order to stir matters up,
some people are trying to distort the essence of the
position taken by the Soviet Union.

164. First they resorted to an electoral technique,
which was ostensibly innocent, but which concealed
the possibility of unilateral interpretation;which
would
run counter to the reassurances that had been given
to the Comorians.
In effect, Law. No. 74-965 of
23 November 1974, which provided for the organization of a refereundum
among the people of the
Comoros, made it clear that. the results would be
classified according to electoral districts, a normal
procedure since the Territory of the Comoros was
divided into constituencies
which corresponded
to
the four main islands. The Comorian authorities, who
were reluctant at the outset, -because of the title of the
law and because of the provtston which made it possible
for the French Parliament to pronounce subsequently
on how it intended to follow up on that referendum,
however, went along with the formula which had been
advocated, because in all good faith they felt that the
unitary character of the Comoro Archipelago would
thus be preserved pursuant to paragraph 4 of the
joint declaration of 15 June 1973.’

159. I drew attention to this in my statement. I did
not name any names.. But what can one do, after all?
I do not wish to use a Russian proverb which might
be *rather out of place here: “the cap fits”, as we
say. If the cap fits-wear
it. Without naming any
names, I would again advise those who are distorting
and misrepresenting
the policies and position of the
Soviet Union in the Angolan matter, take care, gentlemen. And I am not. saying this as a threat, but simply
as a friendly piece of advice. Your fabrications which
distort the position and the policies of the Soviet Union
will be laughed at. You will become objects of scorn
and ridicule. Our African friends have told you this
because they see what the essence of the matter is.
They know who is in fact interfering: who is financing
and providing planes, supplies and murderers, intemational assassins from London and-not
only from
London, by the way-and who helps the South African
regime to invade the territory of Angola with its armed
forces; and who is openly, before the eyes of the entire
world, giving honest assistance to the legitimate
Government of Angola?

165. It should also be added that the statements
made by the French Minister of State for Overseas
Departments and Territories and the President of the
French Republic, dated respectively 26 August and
18

24 October 1974 and therefore made before the vote
was taken on the law of consultation,
gave to the
Comorian Government
formal assurances regarding
the intentions of France concerning the recognition
of the homogeneity
and the common destiny of the
Comorian people, the preservation of the unity which
has always been a feature of the archipelago and also
respect for its territorial integrity.
166. In this connexion it must be emphasized that
the law of 23 November
1974 despite its rather imperfect drafting, remained faithful to the spirit of those
statements, since nowhere did the text provide that the
French Parliament should consider the results of the
consultation
island by island. The results were
announced on an over-all basis, the pattern of the
votes by constituency having been given by way of
reference and for reasons of classification
by the
electoral board and the returning officers.
167. The Comorian Government therefore prepared
itself to face with some confidence the transition period
provided by the Joint Declaration of 15 June 1973,
and it was then that the first French provocation took
place when those who defended a French presence at
all costs, instead of abiding strictly and honestly by
the officially announced results, sought in the pattern
of the returns by constituency, to which I just referred,
to justify once again calling into question the result
of the popular consultation of 22 December 1974 and
the fundamental principles of the Joint Declaration.

171. It is not surprising that on 29 June 1975, before
this law was promulgated,
the Chamber of Deputies
of the Comoros, in a vote of 30 to 2-seven deputies,
including five from the Mayotte constituency,
being
absent-rejected
the proposals of the French Government and adopted a resolution consisting of four points
dealing specifically
with the elaboration
of a draft
constitution
and its adoption after and not before
independence.
172. This enactment of the Chamber of Deputies was
completely ignored, although, according to article 28
of Law No. 68-04 of 3 January 1968 dealing with the
specific organization of the Territory, this act could not
be in any way suspected of jeopardizing
national
defence and maintaining external security, which areas
remained within the purview-but
not the exclusive
purview-of
the French State during the transitional
period. This was then the second overt provocation
on the part of France, since the law dealing with
independence
was to be promulgated
scarcely four
days after its formal rejection by the appropriate
Comorian authority.
173. It is therefore inaccurate to lead the Council to
believe that the law of 3 July 1975 was laying down a
procedure which had been accepted by both parties
and that the proclamation
of independence
of the
Territory on 6 July 1975 was contrary to that procedure,
which, by the way, had been unilaterally arrived at.
174. The third act of provocation
on the part of
France was the establishment
in the Mayotte constituency, an integral part of the independent State of
Comoros, of a representative of the French Govemment starting on 14 July 1975 and the fact that it
encouraged the authorities
in the constituency
to
expel 2,000 Comorians, a figure which is curiously
coincident with the 20 per cent of the votes which failed
to support the Mahorian movement during the consultation of 22 December 1974.

168. This provocation
took its final form in Law
No. 75-560 of 3 July 1975, in connexion with the
independence of the Comorian Territory.
In effect,
new conditions which did not exist at the time of the
Joint Declaration and even less during the promulgation of Law No. 74-965 of 23 November
1974 were
posited by the administering
Power if the Territory of
the Comoros was to accede to independence,
the
Territory at that time still being considered as a whole.

175. It has been stated that France-took note of the
proclamation
of independence of the Comoros with
great calm. But is it really true when we can see
that in the dubious and illegal acts of the French
authorities
part of the Territory
remains occupied,
when arrangements
for military security are being
taken in order to prevent the legitimate power from
being exercised there and when the special idiosyncrasies of the Mahorians have been encouraged and
exacerbated to such a degree that for France the only
valid solution was the dismemberment
o-f the Territory?

169. According to that law, the draft constitution
was to be adopted island by island, the preservation
and confirmation
of the rights and interests of the
regional entities became a constitutional
guarantee of
the political
and administrative
personality
of the
islands, which, furthermore, was imposed by a Parliament which was no longer in charge of the constituent
Assembly of the Comoros as should have been
envisaged for the transitional period.
170. In order to bring about a compromise,
the
Comorian authorities agreed to a constitutional
committee which would be organically or legally linked
with certain bodies of the French State, but they did
not wish to subscribe to a policy which had been
skilfully presented in the guise of respecting constitutional forms but which at the same time was aimed
purely and simply at politicizing a division which up to
that time. had remained administrative
and thus to
destroy the unity and territorial integrity of a country.

176. Independence was proclaimed, and the intemational community
recognized that it extended to the
four islands of the archipelago. That independence,
even if it had not been recognized by France, as far as
the international
scene is concerned has a juridical
impact which cannot be denied by any Member of the
United Nations, if only by virtue of moral obligation,
which remains the most valid form of obligation and
the most acceptable one required by the Charter.
19

177. Thus Mayotte, starting on 6 July 1975, is no
longer a territory of the French Republic. Were it a
territory of the French Republic, it would at best
then be governed by Law No. 68-04 of 3 January
1968, which is an untenable hypothesis because that
law can and should be considered as having become
obsolete since the signing of the Joint Declaration of
15 June 1973. France sought to justify, its position
by the action taken by five deputies out of 39 and the
indication
given by the electors, which scarcely
represented 5 per cent of the votes cast throughout
the entire archipelago. We cannot allow the international .community
to be persuaded to accept Law
No. 75-1337 of 31 December 1975, in connexion with
the consequences of the self-determination
of the
Comoro islands, as a possible substitute for the
expression of the sovereignty of the Comorian people
which they manifested
when proclaiming
independence.

order to determine
the future of any particular
constituency. It was only the’over-all result that was
taken into account, because self-determination,
unless
there is respect for the most elementary principles of
democracy, will only be empty words and a dangerous
weapon which can be easily.utilized
by irresponsible
adventurers.
181. By seeking at all costs to satisfy a minority,
France has gone so far as to disregard the legitimate
and validly expressed aspirations of a majority, which
by a peculiar twist of events has been reduced to
accepting that its rights should be neither recognized
nor respected. The French delegation has attempted
to question the homogeneity
of the Comoro Archipelago by dwelling on the special idiosyncrasies of the
islands and on the fact that the unity of the Territory
stems from arrangements
made for reasons of
administrative
convenience. The reply is quite clear;
it is the reply that was given by the President of the
French Republic on 24 October 1974, which has been
quoted by a number of delegations. I do. not think
that those words uttered by the highest authority in
French politics need to be ratified by the Parliament in
order to be fully relevant to the situation.

178. It is this contention which constitutes the fourth
deliberate act of provocation on the part of France
-deliberate
since two weeks after the suspension
of negotiations,
on 15 October 1975, the French
authorities were already making known their intention
to dismember the Comorian Territory by making it
possible for the Mahorians to be endowed with a
status which might even disregard the aims of domestic
autonomy.

i82. No one would attempt to deny that in Mayotte
there has been a French presence which goes back to
1841 and other presences before that, including that of
the Malagasies.
Their historical
and sentimental
value does not need to be demonstrated.
But it
should also be recognized honestly that there is such
a thing as Comorian national identity which, furthermore,’ has been frequently claimed by the Comorians,
even under the regimes of partial self-government
and
internal autonomy, and which has been taking shape
ever since the eighth century, thanks to the contributions of the Africans, Asians, and ,Arabs. I note in
passing the existence in Mayotte in .the mosque at
Chindini of a stele with an inscription dating back to
the year 834 of the hegira, in other words, 1455 of the
Christian era.

179. I have just gone into some detail about the four
acts of serious provocation
against the Comorian
people of which the French Government
is guilty.
One would have to have exemplary patience or be
somewhat’blind
not to see in those encroachments on
the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the
Comoros a form of aggression which is perhaps even
worse than armed aggression, because it is more
insidious and more easily adorned with pseudojuridical and pseudo-historical
arguments.
180. This is how France declares that it wishes to
respect the principle of self-determination
in Mayotte.
But the self-determination
of which France boasts is
not that which we understand,
either from the
Declaration
on the Granting of Independence
to
Colonial Countries and Peoples in resolution
1514
(XV) or from the practice and jurisprudence
of the
United Nations. Without wishing to recall the case of
certain regions which are on- the periphery of France,
I should like to refer to the experience of my country
in September 1958. At that time 78 per cent of Madagascar voted in favour of a referendum which had
been proposed
by the French Government
in
connexion with the future of the then colonial Territories. The number of negative votes and abstentions
represented 57 per cent of the total number of positive
votes. Entire electoral constituencies
voted against
it. However, despite the decentralization
of the provinces of Madagascar at that time, France did not take
into account those separate votes and did not use the
divergent results which had thus been received in

183. It has also been argued that in all those moves
France is not defending any particular
interests.
I regret that I cannot share this opinion. The Comoro
Archipelago
occupies a strategic position at the
entrance of the Mozambique Canal and in the western
part of the Indian Ocean.
184. We would be prepared to give France the
benefit of the doubt regarding the particular arrangements which could have subsequently been concluded
among three NATO [North Atlrrntic Treaty Orgcrnization] partners, namely, the United Kingdom,
the
United States and France, to exercise control over
that part of the world. But there are two facts which
cannot be denied: first, the Comoros are on oil-tanker
routes, the rerouting of which via the Mascarene
Islands and the eastern coast of Madagascar would
be hazardous and much more costly; furthermore,
the French Minister
of State of the Department
20

of Overseas Ten-it ties, on 18 October 1974, before
the French nati Bnal Assembly referred to the possibility of setting up a French naval base, not on the
mainland of Mayotte but on the islet of Dzaoudzi,
which is the chief town of that constituency.

190. Laws are undone more easily than a nation is
built, particularly
when they violate realities and are
aimed at serving particular interests whose permanence
and validity are extremely
dubious. The present
problem of Mayotte could have been avoided if we
had gone along with the opinion of the French
Minister of State for Overseas Departments and Territories who declared, as early as 1974, that this was an
internal problem of the Comoros. In all objectivity
we cannot say that the responsibility
for the contradictions, the lack of understanding and the tergiversations in the situation are the responsibility
of
the Comorian authorities, who reaffirmed, even after
6 July 1975, that they wished to respect the specific
characteristic
of the islands and to give them the
greatest possible autonomy.

185. That is only a possibility,
of course; nevertheless it does fait into line with the need which is
felt to secure the defence of the island of Reunion
and the sea and air communications
with that French
department, in which the lie of the land at Pointe des
Galets hardly lends itself to the setting up of a base.
186. As can be seen, the problem of Mayotte has
extremely complex ramifications and worsening of the
tension in that subregion would definitely have repercussions in the Indian Ocean region, which we have
already declared to be a zone of peace. It is quite
aptly that a Comorian leader has stated that: “If
France wished to preserve Mayotte, it would keep it
six months, and it would lose the friendship of the
Comoros and its African partners.”

191. The Comoros now turn to the Council and to
us, asking us to help them to preserve their independence, which is the authentic expression of that
very personality which colonialist and neo-colonialist
circles in France continue to deny them in the name of
falsely universal principles and because of a profound
disregard, to say the very least, of Comorian realities.
It is up to us to help them, and this will only be just.

187. The United Nations cannot depart from the
provisions which it has already drawn up with regard
to the Comoros. The Comorian State can invoke the
pertinent resolutions of the United Nations, in particular the Declaration in resolution 1514 (XV), resolu-.
tions 3161 (XXVIII),
3291 (XXIX) and 3385 (XXX).
The Comorian State demands that the principles of
sovereignty and territorial
integrity be strictly respected and that the commitments
undertaken to this
end by the highest authorities of the former administering Power be honoured
without any let or
hindrance.

192. The PRESIDENT:
I now invite the representative of Saudi Arabia to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
193. Mr. BAROODY
(Saudi Arabia): Mr. President,
I sincerely believe that we missed an opportunity,
since you joined.the United Nations, by not deviating
from the traditional practice of not having a President
of the General Assembly from amongst the major
Powers. I say this because since you assumed the
presidency of the Council we have all marvelled,
Sir, at your poise and dignity in the Chair. It seems
that you do exceptionally
well when you preside over’
the international
community-and
this is to your
honour-more
so than you would when, like any one
of us, you are defending the interests of your own
country. Because, after all, national interests are not
always saintly. They have to conform to the exigencies
of circumstances.

188. The Comorian State wishes the Security Council
to call upon the Members of the United Nations, in
particular France, a permanent member of the Security
Council, to act so as to ensure the maintenance of
peace and security in that area.
189. The Council has had.an opportunity to hear the
parties concerned. The arguments have been weighed,
refuted or accepted, and now it is up to members of
the Council to determine whether the complaint lodged
by the Comorian State has a reasonable foundation;
it is up to you to decide on the steps to be taken to
preserve the situation and to honour the Comorian
request. Obviously, you will have to proceed according
to what you think are the means most appropriate to
maintain peace and safeguard the sovereignty of a
Member State by applying principles which no one can
deny, namely, the inviolability
of the territory of a
State whether or not it is subject to military occupation
by another State, the inadmissibility
of resorting to
coercive measures in order to infringe upon the unity
of a State or peopie, and the incompatibility
with the
Charter ofthe United Nations of any attempt to destroy
in part or in whole the national unity and territorial
integrity of a country.

194. We shall miss your dynamism
amongst us,
Mr. President, in spite of the fact that the shrapnel
of your words, although it was not meant to hurt
anybody-and
I am talking figuratively-made
some of
us question the fact that it is good sometimes to be
unorthodox in the approach of the items with which
we deal in the United Nations.
195. May I add one more word, Sir. Indeed, we shall ”
miss you, but our loss will be the gain of Harvard.
I believe that, if you do go to Harvard, you will be
able to exceed your aptitude-which
was notable-in
teaching political science, not in theory but in practice,
having gained experience amongst us here. I lectured
once, years ago-and
I was not a professor-at
Princeton, for a year, when you were perhaps in the
21

navy, in 1943. But I was not pragmatic at that time.
I have learned many things since I joined the United
Nations, and I am still learning. We wish you success,
and if you feel nostalgic about the United Nations,
you only have to whisper to some of us and I will see
to it that we will change the tradition and make you
President of the General Assembly.

during my 53 years of activism against colonialist
Powers I never saw such a gentle, reasonable representative of a country, speaking without rancour,
without hatred, stretching out his hands to France,
saying that his country is willing to co-operate in
everything reasonable that France may demand-and
I shall come to that later. Really, I marvelled at the
tone, the style and the genuine attitude he manifested
amongst us here, and I am not saying this to flatter
him. Many have told me the same thing about him
that I found.

196. If I were to laud our colleague and my brother
-1 do not call him Ambassador Salim; Salim transcends his title-it
would be most embarrassing to
him because throughout the years he has become so
modest that a word of praise to his face makes him
feel abashed. But he did marvellously well, beyond the
expectations of many of us.

202. Therefore, what is here? Just think of it. Fifteen
of you, members of the Council, and non-members
who have spoken. They are unanimous that a solution
should be found, devised, created to dispose of this
question in an amicable way because, after all, who
does not love France for the liberty and freedom
whose flag it hoisted in Europe.

197. Now these words of mine are said not out of
decorum, but sincerely, from the heart.. Like you,
Mr. President, I may get angry, but I am sure that,
also like me, you have no rancour in your heart. It is
good to be angry sometimes;
you get it off your
chest.

203. It fell to me in 1954 to submit in the General
Assembly the complaint against France on the Algerian
question, and I found no opponent-if
I could call an
opponent the representative of France in those days,
none other than Mr. Georges Picot, who is still alivemore reasonable. A few years later when we were
talking-not
in public; I was later entrusted with him
to negotiate on the question of Cyprus by my Turkish
friends and Cypriot friend, none other than Mr. Rossides-and
I found him as reasonable as our friend,
Mr. de Guiringaud. He was a humanist. Then he told
me that he was fettered by his Parliament, or Chamber
of Deputies, whatever you want to call it, the legislature.

198. Now we have travelled far and wide as we
listened to the exchange of rights of reply among some
of our illustrious colleagues. None other than my good
friend Mr. Malik had to rebut certain things that my
good friend Mr. Murray of the United Kingdom had
said. We were travelling all around the world and
neglecting the question of the Comoros. We went to
Angola, we went to the northern hemisphere; we made
a trip here, through the rights of reply, without
grappling with the difficulty that besets us.
199. My brother from Madagascar explained the
whole question juridically,
as did my brother from
Pakistan and others, not to mention the President
of the Security Council for last month, Mr.. Salim,
who has worked hard on the draft resolution. I do not
have to repeat what they said on the juridical and legal
point. I think that this phase of the question has
been entirely exhausted.

204. If, Mr. President, in your own country, where
there is a Congress and a Senate, every time the
President wanted to do something Congress interfered
the machinery of Government
would be paralysed.
It would be stopped. So we should appreciate the
difficulty in which our colleagues here find themselves,
and try to help them. I am going to help them-in
public and also behind the scenes. In public I will
say, so that this may go to France, that the French
should not alienate the Africans, the Asians, the
Arabs and the Moslems.

200. What shall we do now? We have a draft resolution, and I am given to understand-and
I hope I am
wrong- that it will be negated, in other words, vetoed,
and reduced to nothing in so far as the Security
Council role is concerned at this juncture. This is not
the first veto. We have-had many vetoes. But I do not
think that the Comoros deserves a veto. I do not even
think that our cherished colleagues from FranceGnd
I am talking of our colleagues in the Council-would
really feel gratified to know that for such a small
Territory, an island, they seemed compelled to exercise
the veto. It is like a storm in a teacup, and they are
making a storm of it in the Indian Ocean: four islands,
hardly viable economically
speaking-I
wish we could
have five islands instead of four-and
all inhabited by
the same ethnic group.

205. I spoke Arabic with the gentleman from the
Comoros. He was in Jiddah. Did you go to Mecca
recently, Sir? You only have to make a speech there
and you will arouse the whole Moslem community.
Not of Saudi Arabia. We do not want this. We want
to help our French brothers to disengage themselves
from this Mayotte, and see to it that they will have
the best of relations with France and not have such
an impediment.
206. Now I never bluff. I am saying this bluntly.
We can rouse the Moslem world, but we do not wish
to arouse the Moslem world. We do not want this.
Islam is predicated on give and take, on mercy, on
love. But if someone is cornered, what can we do?

20 1. With regard to the statement of the representative of the Comoros,
I can vouch for the fact that
22

The Moslem Conference is in Jiddah, and I am receiving coinmuniqu&
all the time from Jiddah to help
our Moslem brothers who are in dist.ress, whether on a
personal or a national basis.

Basques? Some of them are in Spain. And some of
them, as you know, near the Pyrenees in France. Most
of the Basques, most of the Corsicans, most of the
Scats, most of the Welsh h,ave loyalty to their respective countries.

207. I am talking very frankly. We, like ydu, like
anybody, want the friendship of France. I am saying
this so that my words may go to the French, not to
the Government
but to the Parliament.
We consider
these peopie to be Arabs, too. Many of them speak
Arabic. But forget that they are Arabs and forget that
they are Moslems. They are human beings. They are
stretching out the hand of friendship to France, to
everyone in the United Nations. Should we frustrate
them? They are hardly economically
viable with
Mayotte. What does France want? Does the French
Chamber of Deputies, the legislature, want to reoccupy-if
they are not economically
viable-the
other three islands’? France should help them, push
them financially, morally, educationally.
It should be a
pleasure for such a great country as France to be
afforded this opportunity.

212. And now we have this.small Mayotte. If it is
a question of economic factors, they will tell you.
“Will you not do business with France?‘* Why should
they try people other than the French? The French
have been there for 130, 140 years or so. They are
willing to do business.
213. Is it a strategic question? I am not a military
man. In these days of ,intercontinental
missiles,
when the major Powers, or as our Chinese friends
would say, the super-Powers have an overkill of 15.
what do they want with an island like that‘? In these
days people can destroy each other from a distance
of 3,000 miles. But this Mayotte now becomes the
central piece of an international dispute and makes us
come here. And we have a situation where the major
Powers are wearing kid-gloves and talking about how
not to disturb the sensibilities of their friends and how
to avoid, for example, irritating our French friends.
I do not want to irritate our French friends. We join
this gentleman, the representative of the Comoros, in
appealing to France to find a solution and not to tamper
with the integrity of this State of the Comoros.

208. Therefore, Sir, without going into further details,
I would like to say something to our friend, Mr. Murray,
who is a good Scotsman although he is a member of
the delegation of the United Kingdom-and
is it
Northern Ireland, too? I do not know whether you.
sir, are hoisting the flag of Scotland. I think you are
a good member of the delegation of the United
Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
so-called Northern
Ireland.
Self-determination
by
fragmentation?
What about the Welsh? Between the
Scats and the Welsh, you occupy the seat of the
United Kingdom.
But there are murmurs here and
there that the Welsh want to be independent and
the Scats want to be independent. I have known this
since I was in your country 40 years ago. And that
stone, is it still in Westminster or have they taken it
to Scotland? This is pas&. This has gone. finished.

214. These are my remarks. I said that I would not
want to go into the juridical point. Let me say that in
this United Nations I embarked with a few of my
colleagues in 1948 and in the late 1950s on the elaboration of the International
Covenants on Human Rights.
The corner-stone of both the Covenants was the right
of self-determination.
We elaborated it from a simple
principle into a full-fledged right. And self-determina)
tion. let me repeat, transcends the. constitutional
considerations
or proce+ses df the metropolitan
countries. And here .:France’is at a distance of several
thousand miles from the Comoros;

209, Once someone told me. “I come from the
state of Texas”. I said, “What are the others?” He
said, “We are the biggest state. We should have
become. independent”.
This was a good American.
Does it mean that there is a separatist movement?
If we go by this yardstick, then no country will remain
whole.

215. The French are noted for their sagacity. We
cannot treat this question in a dialectical manner.
Therefore, may I. across the table, appeal-not
remonstrate, but to reason on our behalf-to
the French
Government
through our illustrious friend, Mr. de
Guiringaud,
and his aides. They should be our ambassadors to France, the ambassadors of the Council
to France, of the members of the Council who are all
unanimous in doing justice to the Comoros by not
hewing the main branch of the tree-if
I may use a
figure of speech-lest the whole tree wither and France
become the butt of unnecessary criticism by countries
and peoples all over the world.

210. Take our Belgian friends. They have the
Flemings, who do not speak French, and the Frenchspeaking Belgians. The J are one nation. Of course
there are certain Flemings who want to secede, but it is
the better part of wisdom for the Belgians to be one.
They do not go and hold referendums.
.
211. What about the Bretons? I visited northern
France, and I heard many who wanted it to be indeWhat about Corsica,
which provided
pendent.
France with Napoleon at one time? Are you giving
them their independence,
my good colleague and
friend, or having a referendum?
What about the

216. It is not a auestion of Ionic only, it is a question
of justice. If these people, the people of the Comoros
who number 300,000 or 400.000-I
do not know
how many, maybe less-are neglected by our international community,
then indeed shall we become the
23

laughing-stock of people all over the world. They will
say: “Look at the SecurityCouncil;
members and nonmembers pleaded their case and they got nowhere.”
We should not lose our credibility.

mentioned-in
which he handled the work
Council during the most turbulent
month
experienced for a long time.

224. My delegation is dismayed and, in fact, highiy
disappointed
to learn that the French Government
has resuscitated the idea of conducting
a second
referendum in the island of Mayotte, one of.the. four
islands of the State of Comoros, which became a
sovereign independent State in July 1935. It will be
recalled that in June 1973 agreement was reached in
the Joint Declaration on the Accession to Independence of the Comoro Archipelago, signed in Paris by
the. French Minister for Overseas Departments
and
Territories and the head of the Government
of the
Comoros, that a referendum would be held. In accord.ante with the provisions of the agreement, the French
Parliament passed a bill authorizing the holding of the
referendum. The French had initially intended that~
the Comoro islands should vote island by island in the
referendum. However, with, we befieve, pressure from.
OAU and all like-minded
international
bodies, the.
four islands of the Comoros-Mayotte,
Anjouan,
MohCli and Grande-Comore-participated
in the
referendum on 22 December 1974.

217. Peace. There can be the peace of the grave or
peace by coercion, but this is not the language of the
United Nations. What we need is peace, not only with
justice, for justice could be stem, but with justice,
brotherhood and humaneness.
218. The PRESIDENT:.
The next speaker is the
representative
of Nigeria. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
219. Mr. HARRIMAN
(Nigeria): Just before I came
here a few months ago another octogenarian gave .me
a good piece of advice. He said, “My young man,
please ensure that you do not speak after a gentleman
named Mr. Baroody. His debonair apIjroach
to
speaking, his flamboyance, his oratdry, will dwarf your
speech.” He said, “Moreover,
ensure that you do not
adopt his style because it is infectious. You might
wander iway from the subject and end up losing
your sense of time.” I do not mean that to be pejorative, but I do admire such oratory.

225. It is on record that the over-all voting at the
referendum was 95.6 per cent in favour of independence from France; thus; an‘insigr?ificant minority
of 4.4 per cent voted against independence. It is therefore assumed that the majority decision should. be
respected by France, and there should be no reversal
of the decision taken by the people of the Comoros
as, under normal circumstances, the French Govemment would have no option but to endorse the wishes
of the people of the Territory.

220. Secondly, it would be presumptuous on my part
to attempt to wade into the polemics which have
taken place here while we have been sitting for the
last three hours waiting for our turn to speak, since
we are not members of the Council. But very often
when I read in the Western press comments about
Angola I thought that this was slogan manipulation
that was beamed towards the Western anti-communist
btilldog-I
am sorry I did not say “John Bull”. I
was surprised to,find that these same comments were
being presented before the Security Council.

226. More important, I should like to read out once
more-1 know that you have already heard this statement a number of times-the
remarks made by the
President of France, Mr. Giscard d’Estaing, during a
press conference on 24 October 1974, to which
I listened concerning the unity of the Comoros:

221. I am a -Nigerian and know the position which
Nigeria takes on the question of Angola; this sets my
back up. I crave your patience to’state that if countries like mine, India and Brazil recognize the MPLA
[Movimento

Populcir

de

Libertaguo

de

Angolu]

“The population
of the Comoros is-a homageneous population.. . Would it be reasonable
to
imagine one part of the archipelago becoming independent while another part, regardless of the feelibgs
of its inhabitants,
retained a different
status?
I believe that we should face the realities of the
world today. The Comoros are indivisible; they have
always been so; it is normal that they should have
a common destiny, even if some of their inhabitants
wish for another solution. We do not have the
right, at the time of the granting independence to
a Territory,
to propose that the unity which has
always characterized the Comoro Archipelago
be:
terminated.”

Government of Angola, it is presumptuous on the part
of anybody to believe that we are clients of the Soviet
Union, a country that has been in the forefront of the
liberation movement in Africa and elsewhere for the
past two decades.
222. Mr. President, before I lose my style I should
like to thank you for the privilege of the invitation of
my delegation here today and also to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. We have had very limited contact, but I have
noted your straightforwardness,
your off-the-cuff
which, even though irritating occapronouncements,
sionally, are part and parcel of the politics which we
are used to in the Western democracies.
223. 1 also wish to thank Mr. Salim,
of mine, for the skilful way-which

of the
it has

227. It is witi great distress that I have listened to
the representative of France doing, an about-+c_e,
judging
by his statement. We also recall that two days

a good friend
everyone has
?4

their total independence-from
France. We all appeal
to France to change its mind in favour of the unity of
this State. The prevailing situation in the Comoros is
of great concern to us in Africa, and we believe that
it is not too late for France to revert to its original
good intentions, as underlined by its President. of
recognizing
the new State of the Comoros as a
sovereign and united State. Such a magnanimous
gesture will surely be in keeping with the friendship
and goodwill which France enjoys in Africa. It will
conform with the responsibilities
of leadership and
the leadership role which France plays today outside
the super-Power bracket.

ago 1188&h /~rcefirr~] the same representative
of
France stated in this Council chamber that the
Chamber of Deputies of the Comoros decided on
16 July i975 to. proclaim independence.
The Parliament of the Comoros, representative of the people
and properly constituted; there again confirmed the
majority position of the people .of the Comoros to
become independent.
They further reaffirmed their
commitment
to the independence of the Comoros as
one people with one destiny.
228. No attempt.should
be made-as was reflected
in certain pronouncements
before the Security Council-to
confuse the processes of self-determination
which preceded the independence of the Comoros
with the illegal and unilateral declaration of independence by the Ian Smith clique in Rhodesia. There
is a clear difference here which any honest person in
the Council will understand.

233. France has always been well known for having
a humanistic approach to decolonization.
France has
played an enviable role in the post-independence
life
of the currently independent States, their development
and their welfare. Their almost missionary approach
to aiding some of their ex-colonies is well documented.
We in Africa thank them for this.

229. I shiver at the thought that in this dav and age
any colonial Government:
in order to satisfy some
limited (I/~oI/~’ prclprr-for,
obviously,
one could
not believe that it is for the purpose of hanging on
to colonial power-could
attempt to go so far as to
sacrifice, in the dawn of independence, the long-term
interests of a people which has been ruled together for
over 60 years. But colonialism
dies hard, and I do
recall that in 1961-if I am not mistaken-there
was
in what was then Dahomey, a Portuguese enclave
which, I think, consisted of four acres. For almost
three centuries the Portuguese representative raised
the flag in the morning, lowered it at night and drew
his cheque from the local bank. When in 1961 he was
called upon to leave, he burned down the castle,
burned up the archives and, unfortunately,
drove
out of West Africa through Nigeria.

234. However,
we recall their vindictiveness
in
Guinea when that great African nation opted in 1958
to break away from the French community.
We hope
that in the case of the Comoros they will continue to
co-operate,
as they have done so far, with the
Comorian Government
in seeking a just solution in
the long-term interests of the people of that State.
235. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
iFrance) (inferpretation
from Fwnch): I have listened most carefully with great
interest to everything that has been said today around
this table regarding the Comoros. Mayotte and France.
There is very little that is new that has been added
to what was said yesterday and the day before yesterday on the same subject.

230. My Government
appeals to France not to
promote Balkanization
of the archipelago. This is in
nobody’s interest-short-term
or long-term. Present
French policies will only create chaos in the area
against the long-term interests of the people.

236. On the intentions, the good faith of the French
Government,
the constitutional
limitations
which are
imposed on the executive in my country, the ulterior
motives regarding Mayotte, whether they be economic,
political or military, and the alleged measures taken in
Mayotte against certain inhabitants of that island,
I said yesterday what was to be said and thought.
This is in the record. France’s position is well known.
I will therefore not take the time of the Council in
attempting again to refute those allegations.

231. Paradoxically,
France has departed from its
declared good intentions, as reflected both by French
Government statements and the statement by President
Giscard d’Estaing which I stressed once more. If
France presses on with this policy, it will be doing a
r*olte-f&e, to put it mildly. One can rightly interpret
France’s continuous interference in the affairs of the
independent State of Comoros as a provocative act
against the defenceless people of that newly independent State. I wish to reiterate that the State of
the Comoros is an independent State, a member of
OAU, also a member of the non-aligned States and,
most recently, a Member of the United Nations.

237. However, with regard to the statement made
by President Giscard d’Estaing on 24 October 1974,
which very justly has been repeatedly quoted here,
I deem it necessary to repeat that that statement is
truly the best proof of the good faith and the intentions
of the French Government.
It so happened that the ’
Parliament did not wish to follow the course indicated
by the President of the Republic. Some will be surprised at this; some will be surprised that in France
the President of the Republic can be contradicted by
his Parliament.
I know that in some countries this
would result in a crisis in which the parliamentarians
themselves would suffer. This is not the case in France.

232. In passing, I wish to emphasize that my country
in particular,
and the whole of Africa in general,
will always support the struggles of the people of the
Comoros to consolidate
their independence-and
25

238. In this gre t country, the United States of
America, wher t? we have the privilege of residing
we learn almost monthly, through the press, of similar
circumstances
in which the President of the United
States is unable to get Congress to pass a law which he
has initiated
and that the President of the United
States, that man who is so powerful, bows to the will
of the Congress. That is democracy as we practise it
in Western democracies.

245. At the same time, my delegation wishes to
express, as it did in its explanation of vote in the
Security Council on 17 October 1975 [/84&h ~?re&rg],
Sweden’s sincere hope and expectation that it will be
possible to find, by way of negotiations, a solution
.that will be fully acceptable to all parties .and that
will bridge the present differences between France
and the Comoros.
246. Mr. KANAZAWA
(Japan): My delegation will
vote for draft resolution S/11967. My delegation had
some doubts about its paragraph 1, which in our view
may create obstacles to the resumption of negotiations
between the Governments of France and the Comoros.
It is our view that the position of the Government of
France should be given due respect in this regard.
However, we feel that it is very important for the
Council at this stage to formulate principles with a
view to facilitating
the solution of the problem. For
that reason, my delegation supports the draft resolution. Our support, however, should not be construed
as implying an act of recognition of the State of the
Comoros by my Government.

239. The PRESIDENT:
I take it that the Council
has now concluded its examination
of the question
before it. Before we proceed to the process of voting
on the draft resolution before the Council, I shall call
on those representatives
who have asked to explain
their vote before the voting.
240. Mr. HAMMARSKJGLD
(Sweden): Mr. President, allow me first, on behalf of my delegation, to
extend to you our most sincere congratulations
and
good wishes on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of February. Permit
me also to thank most warmly the representative of
the United Republic of Tanzania, Mr. Salim, for the
skilful way in which he guided the long and difftcult
discussions of the Security Council during last month.

247. The PRESIDENT:
As no other representative
wishes to speak at this stage, I take it that the Council
is ready to proceed to vote on draft resolution S/1-1967.
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
sponsored by Benin, Guyana, the Libyan Arab ‘Republic, Panama and the United Republic of Tanzania.

241. My delegation also wishes to join with all those
who have expressed sympathy with the people of
Guatemala after the disaster which has struck them.
242. Sweden will vote in favour of the draft resolution submitted by non-aligned countries members of
the Council-Benin,
Guyana, the Libyan Arab Republic, Panama and the United Republic of Tanzaniaregarding the proposed referendum in the island of
Mayotte on 8 February. Our vote today is a direct
consequence of our joining the consensus on General
Assembly resolution 3385 (XXX) that the Comoros be
admitted to the United Nations. That resolution emphasizes the necessity of respecting the unity and
territorial integrity of the Comoro Archipelago. It also
clearly specifies that the archipelago is composed of
the islands of Anjouan, Grande-Comore,
Mayotte
and Moheli.

111~NYOIII.: Benin, China, Guyana, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Republic
of Tanzania.
Agninst:

France.

Abstaining:

and Northern

NF?~

243. The General Assembly vote was preceded by a
recommendation
from the Security Council, expressed
in its resolution 376 (1975), to the Assembly that the
Comoros be admitted to membership
in the United
Nations. Sweden voted in favour of that resolution in
the Council. In doing so, Sweden at the same time
recognized the Comoros as a sovereign and independent State and has informed the Comorian Government accordingly.

Italy, United Kingdom of Great Britain
Ireland, United States of America.

The r’esrrlt of the vote uws
3 nbstentions.

II in fa~~~rrr,

I agnirzst,

The draft resolution
NWS Fwt odoptrd,
the negative
that of n per-rnoF~eFzt Fnelnber of the Cound.

\*ote being

248. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call on those
representatives who have expressed the wish to explain
their vote after the vote.
249.

Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation
The French delegation, to its regret,
was forced to vote against draft resolution S/11967.
The French delegation would like to explain both the
reasons for and the meaning of its vote. The reasons
will come first, and I shall be brief on this score since
I have repeatedly had the occasion during the debate
to set forth the position of France on the political
and legal aspects of the questions of the Comoros.

from French):

244. In our opinion, it is essential that the decoionization process be brought about in such a manner
that the newly created States will be viable entities
as far as possible and that their unity and territorial
integrity be respected in accordance with resolution
1514 (XV). This applies also to the situation of*the
Comoros.
26

250. I have, at length and candidly, explained that
there is a problemin one of the four islands comprising
the archipelago. This island is Mayotte. During the
free referendum of 22 December 1974, it pronounced
itself against the independence
proposed to the
Comoros, and for remaining a ..part of the French
Republic. The French Parliament decided to take into
account the desires expressed by the inhabitants of
Mayotte in accordance with the principle of selfdetermination
calling for populations
to determine
their own destiny.

the draft resolution before us, in particular with the
representative
of the United Republic of Tanzania,
who repeatedly and kindly acted as the spokesman of
his colleagues. In all good faith, together, we tried to
find a formula on which we could agree in a spirit
of synthesis and co-operation.
256. I also spoke regarding this subject with the
representative
of the Republic
of the Comoros,
Mr. Omar Abdallah himself. I thank them both,
Mr. Salim and Mr. Omar Abdallah, for the understanding they manifested during the talks. I had hoped
that it would have been possible to find formulae
which would have been sufficiently vague for each
of the parties to the dispute to maintain its claims in
awaiting, maybe, that one day these positions which
are now opposed could be reconciled, as I myself had
said I hoped from the rostrum of the General Assembly, as Mr. Akhund, the representative of Pakistan,
so justly recalled.

251. It did not seem to us possible to disregard the
discrepancy in the desires expressed at the critical
moment of the founding of a new State. Since the draft
resolution
explicitly
stated that the archipelago
is
composed of Anjouan, Grande-Comore,
Mayotte and
MohCli, and asked France to disregard the problem
posed by Mayotte, it was not possible for France
to let an international
decision go through, thus prejudging the solution of the difficulty before us.
252. During the debate many speakers mentioned
resolutions 3291 (XXIX) and 3385 (XXX) regarding
the admission of the Comoros to the United Nations,
and have advanced argument after argument. I must
again explain here. why France at the time chose not
to participate in the vote in the Security Council and
in the General Assembly regarding the admission of
the Comoros to the Organization.

257. Unfortunately,
as Mr. Salim said, it appeared
that our differences of opinion are differences of principle which proved unbridgeable
for -both parties.
It also appeared that my interlocutors wished to make
their position explicit. In these conditions there was
no common ground for us. But I am certain that these
talks have been useful because they have surely
enabled us to arrive at a better mutual understanding
of our positions.

253. I should like to repeat that at that time we did not
wish to prevent a young country, whose desire for
independence we had ourselves fostered, from having
the benefit .of the attributes of a free and sovereign
State that could be its own. France recognized and
continues to recognize the existence of a Comorian
State with which, for its part, it would like to entertain
the relations of friendship and co-operation which it
has with all other States in Africa and with all other
parts of the world. It has no objection-quite
the
contrary-to
the Comorian State enjoying the sovereignty freely chosen by the majority of the population
of Grande-Comore,
Anjouan and Moheli. It will not
place any obstacle to Mayotte’s joining the three
islands. Actually in a few days, there will be a
referendum in which the inhabitants of Mayotte will
once again be able to express their will in the presence
of any international
observers who may wish to travel
there.

258. I shall now turn to the meaning of our vote.
I should first like to express here our profound esteem
for the sincere efforts made by various sides which
might have enabled the Security Council to arrive at a
unanimous decision. My delegation is also pleased
with the quality of the debate that took place under
your presidency, Mr. President, over the last few days.
We have not remained indifferent to the appeals
addressed to us by some Members of the Organization,
whether these be the representatives of the United
Republic of Tanzania,
Pakistan, the Libyan Arab
Republic and Benin, members of the Council, or other
speakers such as my colleague, the representative of
Algeria. These appeals met the views of my own
country half-way in that they encouraged talks and
negotiations between the Republic of the Comoros and
France.
259. I should like to say here that we remain sincerely
ready to undertake negotiations,
taking into account
the situation in the archipelago and the problems that
arise therein. We are willing to welcome any con- /
structive ideas enabling us to settle this problem
calmly and fairly.

254. What we could not accept today and what we
already refused to accept in another form last
autumn-and
this was the meaning of our nonparticipation in the vote at that time-was that a legally
binding decision be imposed on us regarding the
.composition
of the Comoros, thus settling without
further trial a problem which is part of the facts of
life of populations for which history has given us a
heavy responsibility.

260. The veto cast by France today is not the brutal
end to .hope that pessimists would have wanted to
impute to us. It simply shows that France, confronted
with a real problem, cannot bypass it, particularly
on the eve of the consultation
that France has
organized. This does not at all mean that my country

255. During the last two days I have held talks with
several of the members of the Council who sponsored
27

is not ready to undertake negotiations with the Republic of the Comor
on the differences of opinion
between our two r tates.
261. The representative
of the Comoros to the
Council will not be surprised if I turn to him at the
end of my statement. Despite the unfortunate failure
to find agreement on our common problems today,
may he know that France not only wishes to settle
all the questions opposing it to the Comoros, but also
to maintain with the State he represents links of
friendship
and good-neighbourliness.
I would be
grateful to Mr. Omar Abdallah if he would be good
enough to convey these assurances to
. his Government.
262. I would not wish to conclude this statement
without discharging two duties. First, I would like to
associate my delegation with the condolences addressed here to the delegation
of Guatemala
in
connexion with the earthquake which has just sown
devastation in that unfortunate country. I should like
to ask the delegation of Guatemala to find here the
expression of my sympathy and to be good enough
to convey this to their authorities.
263. Secondly, Mr. President, may I say here, after
other speakers, how much the French delegation, and
I particularly, regret the decision that you have seen fit
to take to leave the Organization soon. I will doubtless
have other occasions to express to you all the esteem,
admiration
and friendship that I feel for you. May
I, this evening, simply assure you that I consider it a
privilege that this important debate in which my delegation was directly involved has taken place under your
distinguished presidency and your high authority.
264.

Mr.

PAQUI
(Benin)
(interpretution
from
First of all, Mr. President, since you represent the great American State I should like you to give
me some clarification about the question of democracy.
It has been said that there is a process of democracy
here. Does the American President have the right of
veto or not? If he does, then I should like to know in
what sense this is applied.

French):

265. Having said this, we would add that we sincerely
regret that the draft resolution which we have just
considered could not be adopted because of the veto
cast by France. However, there is nothing really harmful in this text. Can we conclude that the attitude
of France and the reasons justifying its position are
other than those which we have heard in the Council
today and yesterday? There is a great temptation to
wonder, at least, in view of what we heard yesterday,
whether the veto of France is truly the expression of
the will of the French Parliament
or of the French
Government.
266. At any rate, for its part my delegation wonders
whether, in this particular case, France, as a party to
the dispute, was entitled to participate in the vote.
This is a situation which deserves to be carefully

weighed because, in fact, on the one hand we have here
a State which is not ‘a member of. the Council and,
on the other hand, we have a State which is a member
of the Council and, furthermore;a
permanent member
enjoying the right of veto. This is.a rather disquieting
fact, which cannot but be stressed.
267. Finally, it is deplorable that certain members of
the Council have seen fit to take this opportunity
to
indulge in discussions which were completely
and
totally irrelevant to the subject under discussion. I do
not think that I am betraying my African brothers who
are members of the Security Council if I make the
statement that as.long as the Council is not considering
the question of Angola we deny anyone the right to
bring up this matter and to discuss it for us. If this
question does come before the Council. for .its consideration, then all delegations will have an opportunity to say what is on their minds.
268. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libvan
Arab Renublic): Mr: Pres.
.
ident, first of all I should like to join you and our
other colleagues in the Council in expressing our
heartfelt sympathies to the delegation of Guatemala.
269. My delegation would like to register its strong
doubts as well as its most explicit reservations in
connexion with the result of the voting of the Council
on draft resolution S/l 1967. I do’not want at this late
hour to raise any problems or provoke any discussions
of a juridical
or procedural nature. However, my
delegation would like, to place on record, as our colleague from Benin has also done, that in our humble
view, in accordance with Article 27;paragraph 3,,of the
Charter, if our understanding
and interpretation
pf
that Article is correct, France is not entitled to cast
a positive or negative vote since France is a party. to
the dispute under discussion, and the subject of the
draft resolution
sponsored by Benin, Guyana; the
Libyan Arab Republic,
Panama and the United
Republic of Tanzania. The aforementioned
paragraph 3
reads as follows:
“Decisions of the Security Council on all other
matters shall be made by an affirmative
vote of
nine members including the concurring votes of the
permanent members; provided that, in decisions
under Chapter VI, and under paragraph 3 of Article 52, a party to a dispute shall abstain from voting.”
270. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpret&m
from French):
I am surprised at the comment made by
the representative of the Libyan Arab Republic, and
equally I must say by what was said by the representative of Benin in somewhat vaguer terms. I am
particularly surprised since the draft resolution we have
just voted on has the delegation of Panama among
its sponsors. Now, the representative of Panama, my
good friend and colleague Mr. Boyd, yesterday dre_w
a very eloquent comparison
between the problem
which at present subsists between France and the
Comoros and the problem which on another occasion

in the Council arose between Panama
permanent member of the Council.

particular Article of the Charter. We read the Article
of the Charter, in fact, without asking this question.
We simply threw this out as food for thought for the
Council.

and another

271. The representative of the Libyan Arab Republic
was not with us in Panama in March 1973; the representative of Benin was not there either. But those
who were with us there in Panama in March 1973
will recall that, in a matter which brought Panama into
direct conflict with the United States, no one found it
ex.ceptional that Panama, which held the presidency,
should have voted and that the United States also
voted and exercised its right of veto [see 1794th
meeting
of 21 March 19731.

276.

Mr. BOYD (Panama)(interpretationfrorn
SpanIt was not my intention to repeat anything which
we had heard previously during this discussion, nor
was it my intention to make a Statement because, as
a sponsor of the draft resolution, I did not feel that
I was entitled to explain my vote. But, in view of
what was said by the representative of France, Mr. de
Guiringaud, in connexion with the series of meetings
of the Security Council held in Panama, I should like
to say that I lis’tened very closely to his words. He
attempted in effect to draw a comparison between the
matter which we dealt with today in the Security
CounCil in connexion with the Comoros and the situation which prevailed in Panama in March 1973, when
the United States cast a veto on a draft resolution
which, however, received 13 votes in favour, with one
abstention, that of the United Kingdom [ihid.].

ish):

272. I hard@ think I need to dwell on this point.
Other members of the Council whp are with us here
today were also with us in Panama. Mr. Malik was
there himself as well. And I think I should remind you
that for 25 years now the Council has always felt
that situations of the sort on which we had to take a
decision today should, not prevent States members of
the Council or States directly or indirectly concerned
in the matter from casting their vote as they would
undoubtedly
exercise their. vote if this matter was
considered in the context of Chapter VII of the Charter.
To act in any other way would be tantamount
to
encouraging these States members of the Council to
take measures of force as’ provided for in Article 39
to ensure that their right to vote was not challenged.
I hardly need to stress the degree of absurdity we
would reach if we were to apply that interpretation.

277. On this point, I must make it clear that I am
beginning to have some misgivings about what the
representatives of Benin and the Libyan Arab Republic said just now. I am also wondering in my turn
whether in this case the representative of France was
in fact entitled to resort to his right of veto as a
permanent member’of the Security Council. Let us be
quite clear. When the Council visited Panama, it did
so to hold a series of special meetings in order to
consider matters relating to the maintenance and the
strengthening of peace in Latin America. In contrast
to the particular case we are now considering,
the
Council did not -visit. Panama to consider-a -dispute+
In Panama no representative claimed that the United
States was not entitled to cast a veto. And so I do not
think we can conclude from this that there is a precedent which can be resorted to by the representative
of France under the pretext that this is a similar
situation.

273. I shall not expatiate on this, but if the Council
needed I could give a rather impressive list of precedents where delegations seated around this table,
and others that were members of the Council at.the time
and are not today, in cases completely analogous and
similar to the one with which we have had to deal
today, did not hesitate to use their right of veto, and
cases where this right has never been challenged by
anyone.
PAQUI
(Benin)
(interpretdon
from
I want to make one thing perfectly clear.
When I put the question to the Council, I said that we
were sorry; in other words, we had already noted this
veto which had been cast. We are not challenging this
veto. We simply raised a question so that members of
the Council could give some thought to a particular
category of cases in the future. I am particularly
justified in raising this issue since, when addressing the
representative of the Comoros, the representative of
France. said, inter r&a, that France was prepared to
entertain
relations
of co-operation
and goodneighbourliness.
274.

Mr.

278. In fact, Article 27, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations reads as follows:

French):

“Decisions of the Security Council on all other
matters shall be made by an affirmative
vote of
nine members including the concurring votes of
the permanent members; provided that, in decisions
under Chapter VI, *and under paragraph 3 of Article 52, a party to a dispute shall abstain, from
voting.”
279. I believe that today we have been considering
a matter relating to the peaceful settlement of disputes,
and I really wonder whether the representative
of
France in this case was entitled to use his veto. In
the case where the Security Council visited Panama,
the Council essentially was dealing with a situation
which affected the entire region and the Council,
furthermore, adopted a number of resolutions. Hence,

275. Now, what does that mean? “Relations of goodneighbourtiness”
means obviously
that we are
prejudging the results of the vote to be taken in the
Comoros and that France intends to dismember that
State. That is one of the main reasons why we saw
fit to ask this (question without referring to any
29

Panama was bringing no complaint before the Security
Council; it did not level any accusations against the
United States and the Council was not in fact dealing
with a dispute between Panama and the United
States. The Security Council was dealing with matters
relating to the strengthening of peace in Latin America.
I think it would be an excellent thing if in future we
were all to carry out a detailed and conscientious
legal study of this matter; thus, when cases similar to
today’s come up again, we would be in a position
to have a detailed legal debate.

that there was no difference of opinion between’ the
Government of Panama and the Government .of the
United States.
283.

Mr. BOYD (Panama) (inferpr@tatiunfiom
SpanThe representative of France, with his .characteristic eloquence, has attempted to refute the arguments advanced a moment ago regarding the difference
between the situation in Panama and the situationtoday
regarding the Comoros. I do recognize that there are
very serious differences indeed between the Government of the United States and the Government
of
Panama on matters relating to questions vita1 to
Panama, such as that of a new Canal treaty which
should once and for al1 eradicate the colonial enclave
which cuts my country in two and which prevents us
from achieving our unity and territorial integrity. But
I should like to repeat to Mr. de Guiringaud that. we
were very grateful to him on that occasion for France’s
support in defending this position of principle, and that
on that occasion the whole question regarding the
maintenance
and strengthening
of peace in Latin
America was being reviewed and considered. At the
time that was not one of the questions under Article 27,
paragraph 3, .of the Charter. Therefore,
today’s
records should reflect the serious doubts that many of
us here harbour regarding France’s right to cast a veto
in the matter of the Comoros today.

ish):

280. In conclusion, having concluded my remarks on
the purely procedural matter which was brought up at
the last minute, I should like to reiterate to Mr. de
Guiringaud how grateful my Government and people
are for the support which he gave to the Panamian
draft resolution [S/1093//&v./]
at that time, a draft
resolution which urged both .Governments-that
of
the United States and Panama-to
negotiate a new
treaty on the Panama Canal in which due account
would be taken of the legitimate aspirations of my
people regarding effective sovereignty over the entire
national territory. This was precisely one of the topics
which I dwelt on in my substantive statement yesterday, when I sought the Council’s support for the
Comoro Archipelago, when I appealed for respect for
the territorial integrity and unity of the State of the
Comoros, since the Security Council and the General
Assembly had already taken a decision along those
lines in previous meetings. I must say that the support given by France to Panama during that memorable
series of meetings in March 1973 was regarded by us
as bearing witness to the respect which France has for
the territorial unity, for the territorial integrity and for
the effective sovereignty which Panama is entitled
to exercise over its entire territory, including the Canal
Zone.

284. Mr. President, at this time we are not asking you
for any clarification because, in any case, that should
have been provided before the vote. But I think it is
appropriate to invite all the members of the Council
and the United Nations jurists to study this case very
carefully, because the day when a Power which is a
permanent member of the Security Council becomes a
party to a dispute or an accusation by another Member
State then I shall have serious doubts. about whether
or not that right of veto can be exercised.

281. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (inferpretation
fro/tr French): At this late hour, and since no one has
challenged the vote that has been cast, it is hardly
necessary to enter into a lengthy juridical discussion.
If the Council wants to, of course, I am prepared to do
so, but I do not have the impression that that is in
fact the Council’s desire, so I shall confine myself to
thanking warmly the representative of Panama for the
words of satisfaction he has addressed to me regarding
the position of the French delegation during the series
of meetings held in Panama in March 1973, a series
of meetings which, as all those who took part will
recall, was marked by the most pleasant and generous
hospitality of the Government of Panama.

285.

Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation
Since my friend Mr. Boyd of Panama is
speaking for the record, so shall I. And I shall remind
him that when on 21 March 1973 we voted in Panama
we did not vote on the whole question of Latin
America and the problems pertaining thereto. We voted
on a very precise situation. I have the draft resolution
before me.

from French):

286. In one of the preambular
says explicitly:

paragraphs, the Council

“Rrcwlling
that it is a purpose of the United
Nations to bring about, in conformity with the principles of justice and international
law, adjustment
or settlement of international
disputes or situations
which might lead to a breach of the peace”. [Ihid.]

282. I’would simply point out that the agenda of those
meetings
concerned
over-all
problems
of Latin
America, but the vote which was taken on 21 March
was on a draft resolution which dealt solely with the
problem which at that time existed, as I understand
it, between the United States Government
and the
Government of Panama. I shall leave it to the representative of the United States to take note of the fact

In paragraph 3, the Council urged
“the Governments of the United States of America
and the Republic of Panama... to conclude without
30

between our friendly relations with France on the one
hand, and on the other, our extremely close relations
with the people of the Comoros and our commitment
to combat imperialism
and colonialism
everywhere.
We expressed our reservations and our doubts, particularly since we are newcomers here in the Security
Council, and we have to proceed with caution and
circumspection
on this rather dangerous and slippery
terrain in the Council, and in this tortuous process of
juridical procedure. For that reason, I hope that this
evening we can now put an end to these discussions.
I think that what I can now say is that these preliminary discussions have greatly encouraged us to
feel that this question can be reverted to in the future.

delay a new treaty aimed at the prompt elimination
of the causes of conflict between them.” [Ibid.]
That was a very precise situation
a vote.

on which we took

287. It was not I who began to draw a parallel between
the situation in Panama and that in the Comoros.
I think I know that in both cases sovereignty is being
questioned. In neither of the two cases is there armed
aggression.
288. Mr. BOYD (Panama) (interpretation from Spanish): To conclude this debate, I should like to say to
our friend the representative
of France that at the
meetings of the Security Council held in Panama in
March 1973 at no time did any member of the Council
request the President to take a stand on this point in
Article 27. At this time, the representatives of Benin
and the Libyan Arab Republic and I are drawing
attention to this fact, so that in future whenever
someone seeks clarification from the Chair the Council
should be able, after a deep legal analysis, to take a
stand on this point which today has involved us in a
debate which indicates clearly that there are very
serious doubts on the matter.

.

292. The PRESIDENT:
In view of the fact that this
issue has been raised, and obviously in no way
establishing a precedent by this statement, I think
the Council would wish to know that it had entered the
mind of the President before the vote that there might
indeed be a challenge to the right of France to vote.
Accordingly,
the Secretariat tias consulted and a
position was developed. The position of the Secretariat is contained in the Reperroire of the Practice of
the Security Council and was made available to the
President; obviously, it is available to any member of
the -Council who might wish to see it, in view of the
thoughtful remarks of the representative of Panama.

289. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation
from French): I do not think it is necessary to pursue
this debate endlessly. I simply wish to state in friendly
terms, to my friend the representative of Panama, that
if no one raised this question in Panama, it was because
there is an impressive list of precedents which entirely
bears out the procedure that was followed today.
It is not my intention now to go into those precedents,
but if some day this discussion needs to be resumed,
those precedents can be found. I think that those precedents will demonstrate
that the representative
of
Panama was quite entitled to vote in Panama, as I was
myself perfectly entitled to cast a vote today.

293. It is perhaps sufficient for me simply to say that,
had the question of the right of France to vote been
raised in a timely way, which is to say before the vote,
the President of the Council believes that the right of
France to participate in the voting would have been
sustained.
294. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic) (biter:
pretntion from French): As I said, my colleagues
from Benin and Panama and I myself registered our
reservations, our doubts, on this question. We did not
ask for a statement or a ruling by the President. In
any case, it is not a question of discussing this problem
here in the Council. We simply wished to register
our reservations. This is a question of principle, and
that is all. That is why we do not think that your last
statement, Mr. President, is a ruling on the problem. ’

290. Mr. BOYD (Panama) (interpretationfiom
Spnnish): I shall not reply at length to the representative
of France since he was not able to refute my last
argument regarding the occasion when the Council
met in Panama, when no one complained or expressed
any doubt as to the validity of the veto of the United
States of America. He has noti stated that he has a
long list of precedents supporting his views. I shall
tell him that this afternoon, one of the most distinguished and eminent jurists of the United Nations
told me that there are also precedents to the contrary;
and to mention a specific one, that of Argentina when
it did not participate in the voting in the Eichmann
case.

295. The PRESIDENT:
May I assure the representative of the Libyan Arab Republic that he is, of course,
completely correct. It was not a ruling. It was a point
of information that I felt the Council members might
wish, if they wanted to know in what way the Secretariat advises the presidency in this matter as of this
day. Presumably, there is some permanence in those
views, but not necessarily, as those of us who have
followed the law have learned.

291. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic) (interpretation from French): When I made my statement,
I did in fact say that it was not my intention to
provoke a legal or procedural discussion here. We did
have misgivings. We had some hesitations. And the
reason for our hesitations was, first, that we were tom

296. Mr. BOYD (Panama) (it?terpretcrtion from Spanish): Mr. President, we are grateful for your civility
iti wishing to express to us a point of view that we
had not sought from you. We would like to express
our firmest conviction that in future we should all
31

come duly prepared, marshalling arguments and precedents on this important matter, because maybe under
a different President there will be statements that differ
from the one you have just made.

said that you believe that the position of France would
have been sustained. Frankly, I take it more as your
personal belief, as the representative of the United
States, than as the belief of the President, because if
it had been the belief of the President we would
have had to ask you, first, to give us a ruling, and,
secondly, I believe that the Secretariat could not and
should not give legal advice unless specifically aske~d
on this matter by the Security Council, particularly if
the matter is of such vital importance. I do, however,
commend you for the homework you have done.

297. The PRESIDENT:
I assume that the representative of Panama refers to whatever might be
idiosyncratic
in my speech and such that it would
never be perfectly replicated, and thus another person
would say the same thing in a somewhat different
manner. I only informed the Council, as a matter of
information, of what was the essence of the judgement
of the Secretariat, prepared for me. It would have been
prepared for any other President in the same way.
With regard to the question of coming to the Council
prepared in these matters, I respectfully suggest that
the President came prepared, as is his responsibility to
the Council.

302. Now, in order to avoid further hijacking of the
debate from the purpose before us, which is, of course,
the vote just taken by the Council with respect to the
Comoros, I should like to say a few words not in
explanation
of vote, since we sponsored the draft
resolution, but in view of the many statements which
have been made.

298.

Mr. BOYD (Panama) (interpretation
from Spanwhich is so important and vital
for the Security Council, for the Charter of the United
Nations and for all those of us who may have a future
interest in decisions to be taken by this crucial body in
the United Nations that, as the representative
of
Panama, I should simply like to conclude by stating
that we should all study the subject conscientiously
and that we should be prepared for future occasions.

ish): This is a question

303. First, I should like, on behalf-of the sponsors,
to express our warm appreciation to all the delegations which voted for this draft resolution,
and; to
express our slight disappointment
with those who. did
not vote for it, although we are, I think, entitled to
interpret even their abstention, judging by what has
happened in the Assembly, as a non-opposition
and,
if I may be so presumptuous,
of a support for the
draft resolution, though, for reasons beyond our own
understanding,
they did not perhaps consider it
necessary to vote for it. If my interpretation
is wrong,
I do not want to solicit the exercise of rightsofreply,
but I think it is always better to err on the side of
optimism than of pessimism.

299. Mr. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania):
The hour is late and I had not anticipated that we would
have a long discussion on whether or not our colleague
from France had the right to vote. But for the purpose
of the records, before I state what I had intended to
say, since the nature of the debate is such, it is perhaps
important that I begin by making very brief remarks on
the iiiost fascinating debate that has gone on regarding
the propriety or non-propriety
of the French delegation’s having a vote on these proceedings.

304. On a more important point, despite what has
happened here and despite the veto that our coheague
from France has exercised, I do believe in allsincerity
that the responsible authorities in France will not fail
to draw the necessary conclusions from the proceedings of the Security Council and from the voting
in it, for it is quite obvious. to me, as it must be
obvious also to our French colleague, that there has
been an overwhelming
expression of support for and
solidarity with what the Comorians stand for in thi-s
case. That also, but for the veto, the- Security t%mcil
would have overwhelmingly
adopted a resolution
which expects the Government of France to maintain
certain positions which are in conformity
with the
United Nations position.

300. To begin with, I should like to say that my
delegation takes a very serious view of the observations made by our colleagues from Benin, from the
Libyan
Arab Republic
and now from Panama.
Obviously
these are issues which deal with an
extremely
important
facet of the Organization’s
performance,
involving juridical considerations,
and
since I am myself not a lawyer-though
there are
lawyers in my delegation-I
would like to study this
problem with all the seriousness it deserves and solicit
the most expert advice that I can, get. Obviously, as
a layman also I would only like to observe that the
mere fact that there had been precedents before does
not oblige the Council to follow those precedents,
particularly if those precedents have been wrong. But
this is a layman’s observation.

305. In all frankness and in all sincerity, therefore,
I do hope that the French Government,
and in this
case-if I may be permitted to interfere in the internal
affairs of France-the
French Parliament
will .aIso
pay heed to the overwhelming
desire and support of
the Security Council. I should aIso like to take note of
one .of the positive aspects of the statement made by
our coheague from France when. he said that bis
Government remaine-d ready to enter into negc@%tlons
with the Government of the Comoros. I do sincerely
hope that the framework of those negotiations will

301. Furthermore
I should like to say that if I have
not raised any objection or reservations regarding the
statement which you have just made, Mr. President,
it is only because I have listened to you very carefully,
and you have not said that it was a ruling. You simply
32

take into account the decisions of the United Nations
and the decision which the Council would have taken
but for the veto cast by France.

it was proper, and no shadow of impropriety
fails
on the specific action. But this was only a question
of perhaps the usage of terms .and no issue is joined
on the matter at all.

306. I should also like, on.a personal note, to reciprocate the sentiments of appreciation
to the representative of France for the courtesies that he has
shown to me and to the other sponsors in the efforts
that both of us have made-unfortunately,
in vainover the last 48 hours to try to come up with a draft
resolution that would be acceptable to the Council
as a whole, and in this particular case, if I may be
frank, a draft resolution
which would have been
acceptable to him, because we have a draft resolution which is acceptable to us. I do hope that our signs
of good will and our sincerity of purpose will be
properly understood by his Government: that they are
motivated by a desire not to provoke a confrontation,
not to sow the seeds of discord, but by our desire
to see justice triumph, and we firmly believe that justice
can triumph in the Comoros only if the territorial
integrity and unity of the Comoros as defined by the
United Nations are preserved.

311. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republies) (interpretation
jhm
Russian):
Mr. President,
I should like to touch on a somewhat different question.
I have just read the hastily prepared press.release of
the United States Mission reproducing your hostile
statement in response to my statement. In the history
of the work of the United Nations this is an unworthy
act on the part of the President. Underlying this Statement there are words which I have never spoken. You
impute to me the words “Take care”, “beware”.
I never said that, Sir. This is your fabrication. I said,
“Take heed, gentlemen, you are a laughing-stock
for
your fabrications to the effect that the Soviet Union
is colonizing Africa.”
312. I do not know how the interpreter interpreted
my words “Take heed, gentlemen.”
But, even with
my faulty knowiedge of English, I should like to
assert’that the Russian word “opomnites”
cannot be
interpreted as “Take care” or “Beware”.
It means
“Take’heed”.
And on the basis of this distortion of the’
meaning of my words you made a statement which
smacks of the times of the cold war. Pursuing your
own personal goals you have hastened to publish this
as a press release. I really do not think that this is a
proper manner in which to discuss problems in the
Security Council.

307. Last but’not least, I should like to pay a tribute
to the Comorian delegation and its distinguished leader,
Sherif Sayyid Omar Abdallah Mwinyi Baraka, not only
for the important contribution
they have made in the
Council but also for the degree of wisdom, consideration and ‘statesmanship
that they have projected
throughout the negotiations, because, after all, in the
final analysis it is the Comoros which has submitted
the complaint and it is the Comoros which has shown
exemplary moderation in all the negotiations.

313. The PRESIDENT:
Now, speaking as the representative of the UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA
and not as President, I would simply say, Sir, that it
was not an act of the President; it was a staement by
me as representative of the United States. I sincerely
regret if there has been a wrong interpretation
from the
Russian into English, even as I regret that I do not
know the Russian language, but it is the fact, Sir,
that the interpreter used the term “Take care”; We
were given a written transcript of the interpretation,
and it too says “Take care.” If that is a mistake, Sir,
it was not our mistake in the sense it was not intended
to be a mistake. I ask forgiveness for what was a
wholly unintended mistake.

308. I cannot conclude my statement without taking
this opportunity to express, in my own name and iu the
name of all members of my delegation, -our sincere
thanks to all the members of the Security Council
and to those outside the Council who paid a tribute to
me as President of the Council for the month of
January. The tributes have been so overflowing, the
remarks so generous and, in all humility,
I must say
that in many cases they were exaggerated. But we
receive these tributes with humility in the knowledge,
also, that they have been made with the utmost
sincerity.

314. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretntionfr-c),n
Russian):
I should like the
interpreter to interpret correctly the Russian words
4’Opoimiites,
gospod~“,
which is “Take heed, gentlemen”. It has nothing to do with “Take care”; a more
correct translation
would be: “Think
it over,
gentlemen”.

309. I should also like to ‘take this opportunity
to
ask our colleagues from Guatemala to convey to their
Government
our profound sense of sadness and
distress at the shocking disaster which has befallen
their country.
310. The PRESIDENT:
Merely as a comment from
the presidency, ,I should like to say that the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania spoke
of- the question of the propriety or impropriety
of
France’s participating
in the vote. I believe it is the
case that, the event having been such that no question
in advance of that propriety was raised, the overwhelming presumption of our proceedingsmust
be that

315. The PRESIDENT:
Without any fear of contradiction, I would ask that the term in the official
transcript be as the representative of the Soviet Union
would desire it. He knows exactly what he wished to
say. And that being the case, my statement will also
be amended to reflect the interpretation
as he desires
it.
33

316. Mr. MALI
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics): The co 2rect translation could be, “Think it
over, gentlemen”.
Because if someone made a statement which was intended not to show the policy of
my country in the right way, a statement that the
Soviet Union intends to colonize Africa, I would
recommend
that he not do this because he would
become a laughing-stock.

it is empowered as a permanent member of-the Security
Council. We regret this because, as I said in my statement before the Council yesterday, our people and 0~ur
Government desire nothing but friendship and understanding with the people and the Government
of
France. The only thing that we have sought is that our
sovereignty
and territorial
integrity
be respected.
France’s veto can only be taken as yet another in a
series of unfortunate
measures undertaken by the
Government of France, which can only do harm to the
image and position of France.

317. The PRESIDENT:
I take some satisfaction at
this late hour that I have added to the merriment of
nations. I recall the representative’s
felicitations
to
Mr. Salim, who had presided over the Security Council through a difficult month without ever having us
meet on weekends, and I would draw the attention of
the Council to the fact that the weekend is approaching.

322. Above all, we regret that this unreasonable
position adopted by the Government
of France can
only create further misunderstanding
between France
and the Comoros and between France and free Africa.
For it can only be interpreted as implying France’s
determination
to proceed with measures designed to
violate the unity and territorial integrity of the Comoros
in contravention of the aspirations of the overwhelming
majority of the people of the Comoros as clearly
evidenced in the popular referendum which was held
in December 1974 and in contravention
of decisions
and resolutions of the United Nations and OAU.

318. As I have no further requests to speak from
members of the Council, I shall now call on the
representative of the Comoros, whose conduct in this
debate has occasioned
unanimous
expressions of
appreciation and admiration.
319. Mr. OMAR ABDALLAH
(Comoros): First of
all, my delegation must join other delegations in their
expression of sympathy towards the people of Guatemala for the great catastrophe that has befallen them.
We are all distressed.

323. Yet, while we regret the fact that the Security
Council has, owing to the French veto, been prevented
from adopting a decision which would have met the
requirements
of the situation, we leave the Council
encouraged by the fact that, but for the french veto,
the Council would have adopted a resolution confirming,
reaffirming
and reinforcing
the legitimate
position of my Government.
We interpret the results
of this meeting of the Council therefore, as a vindication of the known position of the United Nations on
the question of the Comoros. That position, which is
fully applauded and hailed by the people and the
Government
of the Comoros, has been repeatedly
emphasized by many eminent speakers in the Council,
namely, the demand for faithful respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the Comoros. For the French veto has not changed
the position of the United Nations, which has already
overwhelmingly
been reaffirmed
by the General
Assembly in its resolution 3385 (XXX) of 12 November
1975, when my country was admitted as a Member
of the United Nations. That decision of the Assembly,
which was supported by every Member of the Organization, except France, emphatically
reaffirmed the
necessity of respecting the unity and territorial integrity
of the Comoros, comprising the islands of Anjouan,
Grande-Comore,
Mayotte and Moheli.

320. Now that the Security Council is about to
conclude its present phase of the consideration of the
complaint brought by my Government against France,
I should like to avail myself of the opportunity to make
a few remarks. To begin with, allow me Mr. President
to reiterate the thanks and appreciation of the Government and people of the Comoros to this Council for
responding to my Government’s
request to consider
our complaint. It has been for my delegation a source
of great satisfaction to follow the serious way in which
members of the Council have tackled our problem.
I wish to express our most profound thanks and
gratitude to all those delegations in the Council which
have spoken so firmly and unequivocally in defence of
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Comoros. Our particular thanks go to our
African and non-aligned brothers-the
delegations of
Benin, Guyana, the Libyan Arab Republic, Panama
and the United Republic of Tanzania-sponsors
of
draft resolution S/l 1967. And, with no less enthusiasm,
we utter our thanks to all the other delegations which
have voted for the draft resolution before us, namely,
China, Japan, Pakistan, Romania, the Soviet Union
and Sweden.

324. The position adopted by France in the Security
Council is therefore an extension of the position it
adopted in the General Assembly. It is our hope and
indeed our confidence that, taki.ng into account the
overwhelming
support and recognition that our just
cause enjoys in the international
community,
and.also
taking into account the position previously adopted by
the French Government,
which, in fact, coincides
with the position adopted by the United Nations,

321. The vote they have cast and the expression of
solidarity with our cause that has been exhibited in the
Security Council is. an important political and moral
victory for our Government and people. It is a matter
of deep regret to my delegation and my Government
that the Government
of France, through its representative in the Council, has thought fit to block the
draft resolution by misusing the right of veto with which
34

the responsible authorities in ‘France will reconsider
their current course of action and, rather than pursue
a policy which is detrimental to the stability, peace
zhd freedom of our country, will abandon such a
fallacious cause and pursue a policy df rehon, logic
and legality, thereby contributing to French-Comoiian
understanding and friendship-I repeat: thereby contributing to French-Comorian understanding and
friendship-as well as to French-African co-operation
and unity. We know there are many‘gobd and responsible people in France who favour the .latter course
of action, and we therefore remain confident that
justice will ultimately triumph.

of that frustration, we leave the Council even more
reinforced in our confidence in the Organization arid
what it stands for, particularly in its defence of the
rights of all States, big and small, to live in peace,
harmony and ‘freedom. Ours is a small country. Our
people and our ‘Government desire only the ,friendship’
and understanding of all nations and peoples of the
world. This is an unswerving desire of the Comoros.
But no less unequivocal is our desire and our determination that our country’s freedom, independence
and territorial- integrity should be preserved and
consolidated and that all States in their policies and
actions towards us should recognize and respect this.
We expect no less from France. Happily, we know that
the United Nations itself expects no less -from us.

32% We came to .the Security ‘Council with great
expectations; we came convinCed ihat the Council
would assume its,responsibilities; we came convinced
that once again the international community would
pledge its support to our country. It would ,not be
honest ‘to say that we ‘are not disappointed that the
Security Comicil has been frustrated in taking ap,propriate action. .But, since we understand ‘the nature

The meeting

rose at 9.30 p.m.
Notes

’ See Oflcial ‘Recokds of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, SuppLment No. 23, chap. XI, annex, appendix 11.
2 Ibid.. Thirtieth Session, Plenary Meetings, 2402nd meeting.

35

. . ..,._

.-__, _

.._

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may
be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.

or

from
bookstores
and distributors
write
to: United
Nations.
Sales

CO~MMENTSEPROCURERLESPUBLICATIONSDESNATlOSSUNlES
Les publications
des Nstions
Unies sent en vents darts les libmiries
d&ositaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire
a : Nations
Unies. Section des venter.
New York ou Cen@e.
KAZi
~iJnllHHIl
JHHBX
muue~
Hauv~I.

RO.-I.v’JlITb
thraHH3KUWSl

H3JAHHSI

OPI-bHH3AUHH

06~KHMlHbIX

OC%E.!!HHEHHIB~X

YOXWO
K)‘llHTh
ti
H arenvcvaax‘so
sccx panonax
uxpa.
HBBO~HT~
enpasrn
KHH~HOW
M~~XJHH~
MH
nmume
no anpecy
: Op,-SLHH3XUHII
C‘?KUHR
no “poaaxiie
Ui~aHMR.
HbW-ROpK
H.TP x):eH.?XX.

COMOCONSECUIRPCBLICACIOh'ESDE

et ies sgences
ou admssex-vow

HRUHn

HAUHR
KHWI*HbIX

Yafa-

06 usnannnx
Ob,.tZ‘MHeHHblX

LAS NACIONES CNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de lar Neciones
Unidns
es&in en vcnta en librerhs
y casas distribuidoms
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Cons&e
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas. Seccidn de Ventrs.
Nuevs York o Ginehm.

Litho in United Nations, New York

aosoo

’

e
