S/PV.8726

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8726

th meeting
Tuesday, 18 February 2020, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Van Vlierberge/Mr. Bogaert . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Ms. Tshabalala
Mr. Ladeb
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Norman-Chalet
Mr. Dinh

Agenda
Letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/264)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-04231 (E)
*2004231*

Ukraine

S/PV.8726

I last briefed the Council on Ukraine on 16 July (see
S/PV.8575). A number of important developments have
since then given rise to hope for long-elusive progress in
the implementation of the Minsk provisions, including
its key security and political aspects.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/264)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Sergiy Kyslytsya, Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Ukraine.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; Her Excellency Ms. Heidi Grau,
Special Representative of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Chairperson-in-Office; and
His Excellency Mr. Halit Çevik, Chief Monitor of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission.
Ms. Grau and Mr. Çevik are joining via videoteleconference from Kyiv.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: On 17 February, five years ago,
the Security Council adopted resolution 2202 (2015),
which endorsed the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements. Today that
package of measures, together with the Minsk protocol
and the Minsk memorandum, remains the only agreed
framework for a negotiated, peaceful settlement of the
conflict in eastern Ukraine.
The Secretary-General has consistently expressed
the strong backing of the United Nations for the lead
role of the Normandy Four, the Trilateral Contact Group
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) in finding a peaceful settlement of
the conflict in eastern Ukraine and has called for a
revitalization of those efforts.
2/24

18/02/2020

Most notably, on 9 December, after a three-year
hiatus, the leaders of France, Germany, Russia and
Ukraine met in Paris under the so-called Normandy
format. The Normandy Four meeting called for
immediate measures to stabilize the situation in the
conflict area, measures to implement the political
provisions of the Minsk agreements and follow-up steps.
The leaders committed to a full and comprehensive
implementation of the ceasefire, strengthened by
the implementation of all the necessary ceasefire
support measures.
They also committed to supporting the development
and implementation of an updated demining plan, as
well as to supporting an agreement within the Trilateral
Contact Group on three additional disengagement areas,
with the aim of disengaging forces and equipment. They
encouraged the Trilateral Contact Group to facilitate
the release and exchange of conflict-related detainees
and committed to supporting an agreement within the
Group on new crossing points along the line of contact,
based primarily on humanitarian criteria. Critically, the
participants recalled that the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission should have safe and secure access throughout
Ukraine in order to fully implement its mandate.
The leaders in Paris further referred to the socalled special status for certain areas of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions, as well as the so-called Steinmeier
formula, which was accepted by the sides earlier. The
Secretary-General publicly welcomed the outcomes of
the meeting and called on all concerned to redouble their
efforts to build on recent progress towards a resolution
of the conflict. He also reiterated his full support for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine, within its internationally recognized borders.
I used the opportunity of my first visit to Ukraine,
from 12 to 13 December 2019, to reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s support for the ongoing peace efforts and
critical reforms in Ukraine. My interlocutors were
clear in their desire to see tangible progress in the
negotiations. Many of those I met stressed the need
for greater involvement by women in the ongoing
peace efforts. I also heard about the need to improve
the humanitarian situation for ordinary people living
20-04231

18/02/2020

Ukraine

along the contact line and to invest greater attention
and political will in enabling and strengthening various
dialogue initiatives that could contribute to ensuring
sustainable peace.
We are pleased that the Normandy Four summit
held in Paris was followed by a large-scale exchange
of prisoners and progress on discussions of additional
disengagement
areas.
However,
those
initial
encouraging signs remain limited and easily reversible.
Today’s disturbing reports of major ceasefire violations
across the contact line near Zolote, including the
alleged use of heavy weapons, are deeply disturbing
and a stark reminder that, in the absence of sustained
political will, there is a very real risk of backsliding and
further violence.
Members will hear shortly from the newly appointed
Special Representative of the OSCE Chairperson-inOffice in Ukraine, Ambassador Heidi Grau, on the
most recent discussions in the Trilateral Contact Group,
and from the Chief Monitor of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission, Ambassador Halit Çevik, on the
overall security situation on the ground. It is critical
that we support their important efforts.
At this pivotal time, I hope the Council will
encourage all stakeholders to do their utmost to ensure
a sustained positive momentum in the negotiations,
display the political will and flexibility to reach
agreement on key steps forward and focus on the
implementation of agreed commitments, including, first
and foremost, the commitment to a durable ceasefire.
Despite some steps taken to mitigate its impact
on civilians, the armed conflict in eastern Ukraine
continues to claim lives, cause injuries, severely restrict
the freedom of movement and negatively impact basic
human rights, including the rights to housing, health,
education and an adequate standard of living. The United
Nations Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine
has regularly reported on the human rights situation; its
most recent report is dated 12 December 2019.
In 2019, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights recorded 167 civilian
casualties — 27 killed and 140 injured — of which 63 per
cent were caused by shelling and small arms and light
weapons fire and 35 per cent by mines and explosive
remnants of war. That represents a 40 per cent decrease
from 2018 figures and the lowest annual figures for
the entire conflict period. While that decrease is a
welcome development, we note that a permanent and

S/PV. 8726

comprehensive silencing of weapons — the best way to
eliminate civilian casualties — is still not within reach.
The United Nations is particularly concerned about
people living along the contact line, who remain the most
vulnerable. Civilians pay the highest price in the crisis.
A total of 3.4 million people, including the elderly, the
disabled and children, require humanitarian assistance
and protection services. The conflict has transformed
many families into single-headed households.
As reported by United Nations agencies,
women — who lead nearly 70 per cent of households
on both sides of the contact line — face particularly
daunting challenges as a result of continued hostilities
and volatility along the line. Many of them lack a social
network, income, access to housing and opportunities
for employment and professional development.
Female-headed households often have no access to
social benefits or psychological support.
Humanitarian access and the protection of
civilians and civilian assets are everyday challenges.
Water, education and health infrastructure continue
to be severely impacted by the conflict, reducing
access to those facilities for civilians living there. In
2019, there were 50 incidents that damaged education
facilities, a 200 per cent increase over 2018, while 88
incidents targeted water infrastructure located near or
on the contact line. Attacks on civilian infrastructure
must stop.
The United Nations and its partners provide
assistance in accordance with the universally
recognized principles of humanity, impartiality,
neutrality and independence. As they seek to reach the
most vulnerable civilians, humanitarian organizations
require unimpeded and sustained access. Since 2014,
the United Nations and its partners have been able
to reach an estimated 1 million people per year with
life-saving aid, thanks to the generous contributions of
donors. However, that constitutes less than one third
of the total number of people in need. Since the 2019
humanitarian response plan was severely underfunded,
the 2020 plan will require $158 million in order to reach
2 million people.
As I heard at first hand during my December
visit to Ukraine, the conflict continues to exact an
unacceptable humanitarian toll on the Ukrainian
population. It destabilizes overall peace and security
in Ukraine, but also potentially in the region as a
whole. The recent positive momentum and the stated

20-042313/24

S/PV.8726

Ukraine

18/02/2020

commitment of the Normandy Four and the Trilateral
Contact Group participants to address the conflict
with renewed impetus and a sense of urgency need our
encouragement and full support.

regard, I would like to draw the Council’s attention to
the contamination of land by mines and unexploded
ordnance, which remains an acute problem that
continues to cause civilian victims.

That must be followed by action in order to
restore trust and enable tangible improvements in the
precarious humanitarian situation along the contact
line. The much-needed and long-awaited peace in
eastern Ukraine can be achieved if there is sufficient
political will, good-faith negotiations and concrete
support for efforts to silence the guns.

Since July 2019, disengagement of forces and
hardware has finally taken place in three areas: Stanytsia
Luhanska, Zolote and Petrivske. That is an important
step. In Stanytsia Luhanska, the only crossing point
in the Luhansk region, disengagement has allowed
the reconstruction of a pedestrian bridge across the
Siverskiy Donets River. Before, rain or shine, the
upwards of 11,000 mostly elderly people who crossed
the line per day had to walk down and up steep and
slippery wooden ramps. Moreover, ambulances can now
use the bridge. Ambassador Çevik will provide further
details on the ceasefire and disengagement areas.

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Grau.
Ms. Grau: I thank the Security Council for the
invitation to brief it on our efforts to resolve the conflict
in eastern Ukraine.
The work of the Trilateral Contact Group has
intensified in recent months. The summit of the
Normandy Four leaders held in Paris on 9 December
acknowledged that new dynamism. The common
agreed conclusions of the summit presented a list of
follow-up measures and injected additional energy into
the process. The Normandy Four leaders have agreed to
meet again within four months.
Let me first speak about the security situation.
Council members may have seen the joint statement
issued today by the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), Mr. Edi Rama, and OSCE Secretary General
Thomas Greminger, in which they express their deep
concern about the surge in heavy fighting and urge
all sides to exercise maximum restraint and honour
their commitments. More generally, with regard to
the security situation, the sides recommitted to the
ceasefire on 17 July 2019 in Minsk and confirmed that
decision on 18 December 2019.
The number of ceasefire violations in 2019
remained below the 2018 average. That represents
relative calm, not complete silence, but it has led to
fewer civilian victims.
There were about 40 per cent fewer civilian
casualties in 2019 than there were the year before, and
70 per cent fewer than in 2017. This is an important
positive development, but, at the same time, I have to
stress that every single victim is one too many. In that
4/24

The opening of additional crossing points, as
promoted by the four leaders in Paris, would be of great
importance to the civilian population. Discussions on
several options are now ongoing. For the people living in
the Luhansk region in particular, it would be important
to have additional crossing points opened, since, so far,
Stanytsia Luhanska is the only open crossing point in
the region.
On 29 December, an exchange of approximately
200 detainees took place. It was the first such exchange
in two years. It gave new impetus to the humanitarian
working group. Additional exchanges of detainees are
under discussion. Looking ahead to completing the
exchange of all for all, the sides are aware of the need
to put in a place a mechanism to search for and identify
missing persons.
Let me now present a brief look at the political
dimension. On 1 October, the sides accepted the socalled Steinmeier formula, which details the sequence
of steps to be taken with regard to local elections in the
non-Government-controlled territories and the entry
into force of the special status for those territories. On
12 December, Ukraine extended the law on special status
for another year. The political working group continues
to have substantial discussions on the incorporation of
the Steinmeier formula into Ukrainian legislation.
The economic working group addresses issues
related to the delivery of public goods vital for the
population in the conflict-affected area: pensions,
water, electricity and telecommunication services.
Among other things, the sides have agreed on measures
to maintain water supply on both sides of the contact
20-04231

18/02/2020

Ukraine

line. In that context, I would like to reinforce what
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo said
before: attacks on civilian infrastructure are by no
means acceptable and must stop.
The Trilateral Contact Group and its working
groups will continue in their efforts to reach a
sustainable solution to the conflict in eastern Ukraine.
I am convinced that, with trust and political will from
the sides, this is possible.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Grau
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Çevik.
Mr. Çevik: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council for
the first time in my capacity as Chief Monitor of
the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine (SMM)
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe. I will provide Council members with an
update on the security situation in eastern Ukraine,
recent developments concerning the implementation of
the Minsk agreements, and the impact of the conflict
on civilians.
A comprehensive ceasefire, which is the first point
of the Minsk protocol, the Minsk memorandum and the
package of measures, remains an essential element for
progress. After the latest recommitment to the ceasefire,
which the sides agreed to on 21 July 2019, the SMM
recorded a significant drop in the level of violence.
It lasted for 40 days, before the number of ceasefire
violations reached the pre-recommitment level.
Since 1 January, the SMM has recorded another
significant decrease in the average number of ceasefire
violations. However, isolated spikes in violence have
continued to occur. Today the SMM recorded a very
serious incident in the western part of the Luhansk
region, in the broader area to the east and west of
Zolote, where there was a spike in the number of
ceasefire violations, including over 2,300 explosions.
The Mission is further analysing information gathered
today, which we will include in our public reports.
As in the past, these flare ups can lead to an erosion
of the earlier positive trends and increase the risk of
escalation. During the summit of 9 December, the
Normandy Four agreed that a full and comprehensive
ceasefire needed to be implemented. The political
commitment to a ceasefire, expressed at the highest level,

S/PV. 8726

has yet to be translated into concrete implementation
on the ground.
Since 1 January, the daily average number of
ceasefire violations recorded by the SMM is around
520, which is still far too high to ensure a ceasefire
regime that is manageable. Additional measures, if
implemented in good faith, can help transform the
situation where violations of the ceasefire become the
exception. At the same time, weapons that should have
been withdrawn according to the Minsk agreements
continue to be used. They were also used today, during
the incident I mentioned earlier.
Since the beginning of the year, the SMM has
observed 647 ceasefire violations attributable to the
use of artillery, including multiple-launch rocket
systems, tanks and mortars. Since 1 January, the SMM
has observed weapons in violation of withdrawal lines
on approximately 200 occasions. The SMM reported
the presence of artillery greater than 100 millimetres
in calibre on 91 occasions, and multiple-launch rocket
systems on 72 occasions. Not only do weapons located
close to populated areas draw fire, but they — together
with ammunition left in the area — pose a significant
threat to the safety of civilians.
Against the backdrop that I have just laid out, we
have seen in recent months a renewed momentum,
engagement and important steps for the implementation
of some of the commitments undertaken. The sides
have disengaged forces and hardware in all three pilot
areas of Stanytsia Luhanska, Zolote and Petrivske, as
foreseen in the framework decision of the Trilateral
Contact Group relating to disengagement of forces and
hardware of September 2016.
The disengagement process has had an important
positive impact in Stanytsia Luhanska, enabling muchneeded repairs of the bridge. The broken pedestrian
bridge was a symbol of the conflict; we all remember
pictures of the elderly struggling to cross. The new
bridge is now an example of what can be achieved
with political will. It is also a powerful reminder that,
once again, with political will, progress is possible and
that this progress can have a tangible positive impact
on civilians.
In the other two pilot disengagement areas of
Zolote and Petrivske, forces and hardware have been
withdrawn. Other important activities, including mine
clearance, are ongoing. In Petrivske, an area in which
SMM’s access is significantly restricted, ceasefire

20-042315/24

S/PV.8726

Ukraine

violations are still taking place. The situation will
continue to require attention.
The summit of the Normandy Four in December
agreed on a number of measures on the security track.
In the working group on security issues of the Trilateral
Contact Group, participants are engaging on the
implementation of these measures, focusing in
particular on disengagement, as a precursor to a more
durable cessation of fire and demining. Discussions on
the identification of three new disengagement areas are
progressing, with a preliminary, overlapping interest on
one specific area.

18/02/2020

The key elements to address the security situation
are set out in the Minsk agreements. The Normandy
Four, in December, defined a number of steps that
can pave the way to the full implementation of
the agreements.
Time is of the essence for the resolution of the
conflict, which has now entered its sixth year. The active
interest and support of the Council will remain crucial.
In closing, I wish to express my appreciation for
the close cooperation with United Nations agencies in
Ukraine, both in Kyiv and in the field.

Participants
also
outlined
proposals
for
disengagement in a number of other areas, with a view
to completing the process by the end of March, as
agreed by the Normandy Four.

The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Çevik
for his briefing.

On demining, one of the other commitments
undertaken in the Paris Summit, proposals for an
updated plan still need to be discussed in detail.
Similarly, detailed discussions are still needed on the
possible opening of additional entry-exit checkpoints
for civilians travelling across the contact line

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful for the support for our initiative
to convene today’s meeting on an issue that is highly
relevant to European security, and we thank the briefers
for their assessments. We welcome to today’s meeting
the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine,
Mr. Kyslytsya. As far as we understand, we will soon
be meeting here in New York more frequently, and we
look forward to constructive cooperation with him.

What lies ahead in the coming months is crucial.
There is an urgency to maintaining the momentum and
to meeting the deadlines set by the Normandy Four
leaders. The Special Monitoring Mission is continuing
to work to follow up on information concerning
casualties among the civilian population.

I now give the floor to those Council members
wishing to make statements.

The Mission’s presence, monitoring and reporting
are crucial to provide objective and impartial information
on the situation on the ground. That presence is also
important to support the sides in the implementation
of their commitments. Freedom of movement, which
is enshrined in the Mission’s mandate and the Minsk
agreements, is therefore essential.

Yesterday marked exactly five years since the
adoption of resolution 2202 (2015), approving a set
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements. The document has therefore become
a mandatory component of international law.
Unfortunately, few remember that. Thus, during a
Security Council meeting on cooperation with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) that took place on 6 February (see S/PV.8715),
it came to light that members of the Council with
significant influence on the settlement process in
Ukraine, including the parties to the Normandy
Format, prefer not to recall what has been explicitly set
out both in the resolution and the package of measures.
They have attempted to conceal their forgetfulness by
resorting to the mantra, so to speak, that the Russian
Federation is failing to comply with its obligations.

Yet the Mission is often limited by obstacles to its
freedom of movement, overwhelmingly in areas outside
Government control, in particular in the southern part
of the Donetsk region. These daily restrictions are
unacceptable and need to cease.

We deeply regret the fact that for five years, our
Western partners, which at the time supported the
anti-constitutional Maidan coup d’état, with its rabid
Russophobia and nationalism, did not deign to absorb
the fact that the parties to the Minsk agreements are

In 2019, according to the information gathered by
the Mission, shelling with heavy weapons was the major
cause of civilian casualties, with 75 people injured as
a result of such incidents. However, mines and other
explosive objects have been the cause of the majority
of the fatalities; 11 people were killed by mines or
unexploded ordnance in 2019.

6/24

20-04231

18/02/2020

Ukraine

not Russia and Ukraine but, rather, Ukraine and the
Republic of Donbas.
What is even more alarming is the fact that Kyiv
has of late egregiously ratcheted up its rhetoric, which
casts doubt on the Minsk agreements. For example, our
initiative to convene today’s Security Council meeting
has been called by the Ukrainian Foreign Ministry
a ploy on the part of Russian diplomacy aimed at
generating a parallel political reality.
Let us recall that just a year ago, on 12 February,
during a similar Security Council meeting (see
S/PV.8461), the permanent representative of Ukraine,
Mr. Yelchenko, expressed his gratitude to the
presidency of the Security Council for the opportunity
to participate in a meeting on “an issue of the utmost
concern to us”.
Many eminent Ukrainian politicians have also
joined the campaign to sabotage the Minsk agreements.
They are blatantly contradicting the political will that
was announced by President Zelenskyy in Paris towards
a settlement. Will alone indeed is insufficient; what is
necessary are concrete measures. Only in recent days
we have heard from Mr. Kryvonos, Deputy Secretary
of the National Security and Defence Council, that the
Ukrainian forces “need to stand ready to use force to
liberate the territory of Donbas”.
The Defence Minister, Mr. Zagorodniuk, objected
to disengagement along the entire line of contact
because, allegedly, “this runs counter to the very
essence of the Minsk agreements”. Yet this is actually
the very essence of the first paragraph of the Minsk
package of measures.
The representative of Ukraine to the subgroup
on political issues of the Trilateral Contact Group,
Mr. Resnikov, said that Minsk agreements are at
the very minimum subject to partial revision. Just
yesterday, the Minister of Internal Affairs of Ukraine,
Mr. Avakov, said, “We are considering a step-by-step
approach; on one day we will take up one area, and the
next day, another one”.
At the same time, the Ukrainian security forces
persist in their attempts to take up the positions of
militiamen in the so-called grey zones, where there
should be no military personnel at all.
We proposed today’s meeting specifically because
for millions of residents in eastern Ukraine, whom Kyiv
and its partners in this Chamber prefer not to remember,

S/PV. 8726

the Minsk agreements are neither a ploy nor a parallel
reality but the sole real hope for peace. Only after their
implementation will Ukraine have an opportunity to
rebuild the eroded trust of the people of Donbas, whom
the Ukrainian authorities have demoted in an instant
to second-class citizens, labelling them separatists and
aliens in their own land.
We cannot but be troubled by the attempts to
deliberately or unwittingly supplant the Minsk basis
for a settlement with other formats, for example, the
Normandy format, which, let us recall, was created
specifically to support the implementation of the
Minsk agreements. Therefore, we deem it important to
reiterate that the efforts made under this format will
be effective only if they are rooted in unconditional
implementation of the package of measures and
agreements reached under the Normandy format.
This specific approach was endorsed in the agreed
conclusions of the quartet summit held in Paris on
9 December. It is the implementation of this approach
by all parties, primarily Ukraine, that will become for
us a decisive factor for us in assessing the viability of a
new meeting in the Normandy format.
So far as we can see, hostilities are ongoing,
including today in the area near Luhansk. There is
no progress on the issues of disengagement of forces
and equipment, interaction on demining, permanent
introduction of the Steinmeyer formula in the Ukrainian
legislation; there is no willingness to agree on the
disengagement of forces in new areas, and no readiness
for direct dialogue with the self-proclaimed Donetsk
People’s Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic.
Before our meeting, we circulated the text of the
package of measures as an official document of the
Security Council so that all those here present could have
an opportunity to refresh their memory as to the fact
that not only is Russia not mentioned there, but also that
the 13 points contained therein set out a clear sequence
for implementation: ceasefire, amnesty, constitutional
reform, with the provision of special status to Donbas
and the right to linguistic self-determination, then the
holding of elections and only after that the restoration
of Government control throughout the conflict zone.
Unfortunately, of the 13 points to date perhaps
only two have been implemented, that is, those on the
proceedings of the Contact Group in Minsk and the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission. Many of those
present have themselves spoken of the devastating

20-042317/24

S/PV.8726

Ukraine

plight of the residents of Donbas yet have refused to
acknowledge the responsibility of Kyiv, which, in
waging war against its own population, has imposed a
transport, food and economic blockade against Donbas.
Every day for the past five years, people have died as
a result of the shelling. Are they shooting themselves?
Were they the ones who started the war and marched
on Kyiv?
A scenario whereby in Kyiv they propose first
allowing Ukrainian soldiers into Donbas, which
former civilian militias have been protecting for all
these years, risking their lives every day, and then
giving the Ukrainian armed forces control over the
border is absolutely unacceptable to eastern Ukraine.
That position must be respected, since no settlement is
possible without taking the views of the residents of
Donetsk and Luhansk into account.
I believe that it is time to finally understand
that elections in Donbas can take place only in a
climate of public trust in the electoral process. That
requires specific conditions in which Kyiv cannot
oppress politically those who enjoy genuine popular
support — those whom all Ukrainian politicians call
separatists and whose punishment they call for and
those whom the residents of Donbas, in turn, consider
to be their protectors, who uphold their right to life and
their identity. We need guarantees of a truly inclusive
political process.
We know the points that some representatives are
about to make. We therefore wish to warn Council
members in advance that every time they say that
Russia is failing to comply with the Minsk agreements,
they should remember that they are deliberately
misleading their own people and the international
community. Every time that they refuse to acknowledge
Kyiv’s responsibility and urge Kyiv to comply with its
obligations towards its own people and instead wait
for someone else to step in and do it, they prolong
the suffering of the residents of Donbas, who, unlike
them, know the truth and defend it at the cost of their
own blood.
The longer they play along with Kyiv, the less the
opportunity for a mutually respectful dialogue between
Ukrainian citizens on both sides of the demarcation line.
Yet it is precisely dialogue between belligerent parties
that we all call for in all other conflicts, be it in Syria,
Yemen or Libya. Only Donbas is denied that right.
8/24

18/02/2020

We therefore hope to hear our colleagues’
commitment to the Council’s unanimous adoption
of resolution 2202 (2015) and presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/12 of 6 June 2018 in support of the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements. That document is part of international law
and should be implemented unconditionally.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
I thank the briefers for their presentations. In 2014,
Russia occupied Crimea and fuelled the conflict in
eastern Ukraine that has killed more than 13,000
people, displaced millions and precipitated an alarming
humanitarian crisis. Russia’s ongoing aggressive
actions are an affront to international norms and a
threat to our common security.
The position of the United States is clear: we
continue to support the Minsk agreements as the way
forward in eastern Ukraine. We fully back the Normandy
format process. The resolution to this conflict must be
a diplomatic one, and we will continue to engage with
allies and partners to support Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity. Through its actions, Ukraine
has made clear its commitment to achieving a peaceful
resolution of the conflict. President Zelenskyy has
energized conflict diplomacy through outreach
to Ukrainian citizens in eastern Ukraine, enabled
improvements to humanitarian conditions on both sides
of the line of contact, negotiated two prisoner exchanges
and established a dialogue with President Putin that
yielded the first Normandy summit since 2016.
Unfortunately, Russia has not shown a similar
willingness to fulfil its commitments under the Minsk
agreements. It continues to arm, train, lead and fight
alongside its proxy forces in eastern Ukraine. That
stands in direct contravention of Russia’s commitments
under the Minsk agreements, including to establish an
immediate and comprehensive ceasefire. In that regard,
today’s attack by Russian-led forces near Zolote,
which resulted in Ukrainian casualties, took place on
the five-year anniversary of Russian-led forces taking
the key rail hub of Debaltseve in direct contravention
of the terms of the Minsk agreements reached only a
week earlier. Now, as then, Russian-led forces continue
to contravene commitments made by President Putin
and Russian officials and to kill Ukrainians on
Ukrainian territory. Instead of engaging constructively,
Russia stalls and disseminates disinformation to
distract attention from its central, unmistakable and
unjustifiable role in fomenting this conflict. Russia
20-04231

18/02/2020

Ukraine

also continues its hybrid activities against Ukraine,
wielding economic and political leverage.
Russia must end this conflict by withdrawing
its forces from eastern Ukraine and Crimea. We call
on Russia to immediately implement its security
commitments under the Minsk agreements, as the
parties can move forward with the Minsk political
measures only once there is security on the ground. We
also call on Russia to follow through with the measures
outlined at the recent Normandy summit in Paris to
immediately stabilize the situation in the conflict area,
which include the opening of new civilian crossing
points, disengaging military forces in areas of the
greatest humanitarian significance and implementing
ceasefire support measures.
The United States underscores its unequivocal
position on Ukraine. We do not, and will not, recognize
the Kremlin’s purported annexation of Crimea. Our
sanctions against Russia will remain in place until
Ukraine regains control over its territory. In the name
of international peace and security, we call on Russia to
respect Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
within its internationally recognized borders, extending
to its territorial waters. We condemn the abuses taking
place under Russia’s repressive occupation and call on
Russia to release the more than 80 Ukrainian political
prisoners it is holding and to end its campaign of
intimidation against Crimean Tatars and opponents of
the occupation. We will never accept anything less than
the full restoration of Ukraine’s control over its own
territory, whether in eastern Ukraine, Crimea or its
territorial waters.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Germany would like to
welcome to the Council all the briefers, in particular
Ms. Heidi Grau and Mr. Halit Çevik, who follow their
Swiss and Turkish predecessors, Heidi Tagliavini and
Ambassador Apakan, to whom I would also like to pay
tribute today. I welcome the fact that Russia requested
a meeting under this agenda item today, since today
marks the five-year anniversary of Debaltseve. I will
come back to that.
Today is a sad day for international law and for
Ukraine and its people. I must briefly go back in history
to recall the Memorandum on Security Assurances in
Connection with Ukraine’s Accession to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, concluded
between Russia, Ukraine and others in 1994, whereby
Ukraine gave up its nuclear weapons in exchange for

S/PV. 8726

a guarantee by Russia of its national sovereignty and
territorial integrity. Six years ago, when the Ukrainian
President fled Kyiv after he refused to agree to a
European Union Association Agreement and there was
public unrest, there was volatility in the country. Russia
took advantage of the situation. It invaded Ukraine and
occupied and annexed a part of it. Among other things,
a Russian Buk anti-aircraft missile was responsible for
the downing of Malaysian Airlines Flight MH-17 and
the death of 283 civilians.
Five years ago, the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements was adopted
in Minsk and, as my Russian colleague underlined,
were then put into resolution 2202 (2015) as an annex.
The Normandy format has been active since then and
met again at the highest level only a few weeks ago to
make sure that the situation improves. Since the Minsk
agreements five years ago, the situation has stabilized
to a certain degree. There has been no further Russian
occupation. However, the situation is still bad, although
there have been fewer civilian casualties. I agree with
what Heidi Grau said earlier with regard to each and
every victim of this conflict being one too many.
A couple of weeks ago (see S/PV.8714), the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation (OSCE) in Europe said that Ukraine
remains the most pressing security challenge on
the European continent. As highlighted in previous
briefings by Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo, there has been some progress since President
Zelenskyy took office and the last Normandy Four
summit. The prolongation of the special status law, the
repair of the Stanytsia Luhanska bridge, the exchange
of detainees, the written agreement on the Steinmeier
formula and additional disengagement areas and new
crossing points have been agreed but still need to
be implemented.
However, I want to come back to the main point
made by my Russian colleague. He accused Ukraine,
saying that it had not implemented the Minsk package
of measures. In that connection, I would like to repeat
what our American colleague just said and what I have
said before, but has not sunken in — the first paragraph
of the package of measures asks for an immediate and
comprehensive ceasefire effective 15 February at 12
a.m. On 15 February at 12 a.m., Russian forces were
still actively bombarding and attacking the village of
Debaltseve, which is of strategic importance. So, from
the very beginning, Russia has not implemented the

20-042319/24

S/PV.8726

Ukraine

Minsk agreements, and all of the challenges that the
Ukrainian Government has had to face in the Rada to
get all the laws implemented were related to the fact
that Russia could not be trusted because it violated the
first paragraph of the Minsk package of measures.
The second point of the Minsk package is the
withdrawal of all heavy weapons by both sides by equal
distances. What we heard today and what happened
today is very regrettable. The deaths were a result of
the weapons that were not withdrawn in accordance to
what is set forth in the Minsk package.
The third paragraph of the Minsk package calls
for ensuring effective monitoring and verification of
the ceasefire regime by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We regularly look
at the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine
(SMM) reports, and there it is clear that the restrictions
of movement for the SMM are due mainly to what
the separatists are doing. Donetsk and Luhansk are
responsible for 90 per cent of the documented incidents
where Mission monitors cannot do their job. Paragraph
seven specifies the need to “ensure safe access, delivery,
storage, and distribution of humanitarian assistance”
and also sets forth the agreement that the last Normandy
Four format that the International Committee of the Red
Cross should have full and unconditional access to all
areas of Ukraine. To this day, there has been no access
beyond the line of contact. Here too, it is the separatists
that have not implemented that provision. In addition,
the provision concerning the withdrawal of all foreign
armed formations has also not been implemented.
Let me finish by touching upon one key point
in the remarks of my Russian colleague, where he
differentiates between Russia, on the one hand, and
Donetsk and Luhansk, on the other. I do not agree with
my colleague on this point. By way of example, 10 days
ago the head of the Donetsk People’s Republic, Denis
Pushilin, said on his website that Mr. Pashkov would
be the acting Prime Minister of Donetsk. Previously,
Mr. Pashkov was the Vice-Governor of Irkutsk, which,
to my knowledge, is in Russia. As to the second
incident with regard to Russia’s role, according to
the Acting Head of the General Administration for
Migration Issues of the Ministry of Internal Affairs
of Russia, Ms. Valentina Kazakova, Russia has issued
Russian passports to the 227,000 inhabitants of the
separatists territories.
10/24

18/02/2020

Finally, let me explain to my colleagues Russia’s
influence on the separatists. I was in Minsk, where the
agreements were negotiated all night and the Minsk
package was concluded. Someone then said that it was
between the Normandy Four, and someone else said
that the separatists had to sign, after which Mr. Surkov,
the negotiator at the time, said that he would secure
their signature. It took him about 10 minutes to get the
separatists to sign off on the package. So much for the
independence of the separatists from Russia.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We would like to start by
thanking Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Ms. Heidi Grau
and Mr. Halit Çevik for their outstanding briefings. I
would also like to take this opportunity to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Sergiy Kyslytsya here today.
The Dominican Republic believes that achieving
peace must be a collective responsibility. We therefore
appreciate the political and diplomatic efforts made
on the ground to create the conditions to restore peace
and stability to the Ukrainian people. Following the
signing of the Minsk agreements and the subsequent
adoption of resolution 2202 (2015), we note continuing
violations of the ceasefire, as indicated in the reports
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine. It is
concerning that these are so numerous. Worse still,
the continuing high death toll is compounded by the
alarming number of people affected by poverty and
internal displacement.
During the conflict, cracks have emerged in the
system of public services for civilians, including the
limitation of crossing points used daily by thousands of
people, the inability to provide timely quality services
to meet the needs of the inhabitants in the affected
areas, including poor or non-existent mental health care,
care for victims of gender violence and other, no less
important matters. In that connection, we welcome the
efforts and solidarity of the international community to
help the most vulnerable population in this area.
The Dominican Republic welcomes the meeting of
the quartet in the Normandy format, held in Paris in
December. We especially thank France and Germany
for their efforts in this quest for peace. That important
relaunching of the peace negotiations gave birth to the
necessary decision to respect the ceasefire regime, to
clear mines and to open new border crossings and three
new areas for the withdrawal of forces and equipment
20-04231

18/02/2020

Ukraine

within the framework of the Trilateral Contact Group at
the end of March.
We also welcome an additional result of the Paris
meeting — the recent exchange of 200 prisoners, a
positive step towards progress in the peace process.
These actions show the political will of the parties to
move towards a definitive solution. We urge the parties
to focus on the objectives of the Minsk agreements,
with the necessary determination to overcome
difficulties and to reach a consensus on differences in
order to fully implement the agreements. That is why
we believe that it is appropriate to convene a future
Normandy format meeting in order to ensure that local
elections are held in the best conditions and guarantee
the continuity of the negotiations within the framework
of the implementation of the peace agreements. We
reiterate our commitment to defending the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of Ukraine,
within the internationally recognized borders, while
continuing to urge respect for the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes.
In conclusion, on the fifth anniversary of the
Minsk agreements, we continue to insist that those
agreements constitute the legal basis for resolving
the conflict in eastern Ukraine and the instrument for
achieving the political solution that the country and the
region long for. We call for the continuation of dialogue
between the parties under the auspices of the current
Normandy format and the Trilateral Contact Group.
Furthermore, we express our support for the package
of measures endorsed through the Council’s adoption
of resolution 2202 (2015), which seek the effective
implementation of those peace agreements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank our briefers
who are joining us via video-teleconference from Kyiv
and the Under Secretary-General.
The Minsk agreements provide a road map to a
peaceful resolution of the conflict in eastern Ukraine.
The United Kingdom reiterates its firm support for
those agreements and Ukrainian sovereignty and
territorial integrity. I welcome the Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs here today and thank him for joining us.
The United Kingdom underlines its support for French
and German efforts to facilitate a negotiated end to the
conflict through the Normandy process.
We welcome President Zelenskyy’s clear
commitment to ending the conflict and the important
steps that he has taken towards achieving peace through

S/PV. 8726

diplomatic means, including prisoner exchanges, his
acceptance of the Steinmeier formula and progress
on disengagement.
The Russian Ambassador spoke at length about the
failure of others in fulfilling their obligations under the
Minsk agreements. His account was largely a falsehood
wrapped in a fiction inside a fairy tale. Rather than
elaborate on where we believe the Russian account is
misleading, I will say simply that I endorse what the
German representative said in laying out all the areas
of the agreements that Russia has violated. Rather than
reining in its proxies in the non-Government-controlled
areas of eastern Ukraine, Russia has furnished them
with arms and personnel. Russia claims to act only in
the interest of the Ukrainians living in those areas but
does nothing to ensure the safe delivery of international
humanitarian aid so desperately needed by many of the
communities there. Russia’s only objective in Ukraine is
to undermine that country’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. It wants Moscow rather than the Ukrainians
themselves to define Ukraine’s future.
We agree with Russia that local elections should
pave the way for special status to be granted in parts
of the Donbas region, but the local elections can take
place only in proper conditions, and these conditions
include a comprehensive ceasefire, unfettered access
for the Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the withdrawal of foreign troops. As we
heard, that is a far cry from the reality we face today.
Two months since the previous Normandy Four
summit, ceasefire violations continue along the line of
contact, including the use of heavy artillery. Ukrainian
troops continue to die at the hands of separatists
armed and sponsored by Russia. As recently as this
morning, as other speakers noted, there was a sharp
increase in violations of the ceasefire near the Zolote
disengagement area.
Despite the efforts of international demining
organizations like the HALO Trust — an organization
that my Government is proud to support — Russia’s
proxies are planting yet more mines near the Petrivske
disengagement area. We heard how the Special
Monitoring Mission’s freedom of movement is severely
limited, and we constantly see the Monitoring Mission’s
reporting of sophisticated Russian equipment, such as
the Zhitel jamming device. In 2018 and 2019, Special
Monitoring Mission long-range unmanned aerial

20-0423111/24

S/PV.8726

Ukraine

vehicles observed military-type tracks on dirt-track
roads between the border and a holding site in the
non-Government controlled areas on no fewer than
seven occasions.
The culmination of those Russian actions has had a
devastating impact on the lives of Ukrainian civilians. In
the six years since the conflict began, more than 13,000
people, including approximately 3,500 civilians, have
lost their lives and almost 30,000 have been injured.
Some 3.5 million people are in need of humanitarian
assistance. Russia bears a heavy responsibility for the
ongoing suffering.

18/02/2020

the foundational truths upon which our international
community is built and within which small States like
ours are able to exist. To deviate from these principles
would be an assault on the rights and privileges of all
States, and we deplore any action to this effect.
We express our concern about the current situation
in the Donbas region. International law cannot be
sporadically applied or set aside in the pursuit of
convenient or expedient solutions. Its application
must be equal. To that end, we underscore the relevant
international principles as the guiding tools in the
resolution of the crisis, including the Minsk agreements.

We therefore invite Russia to immediately cease
the practice of sending uninspected “humanitarian
convoys” across the border and to focus instead on
facilitating the safe delivery of international aid, based
on an agreed international mechanism, as foreseen
under the Minsk agreements. We also look to Russia
to ensure that the International Committee of the Red
Cross has full and unconditional access to the detainees
held in the non-Government controlled areas — access
that, the OSCE has said, was denied as recently
as January.

Recently, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
emphasized its support for the Minsk agreements, as
we expressed our hope for the full implementation
under the auspices of the Normandy format and the
Trilateral Contact Group. The tenets outlined in the
Minsk agreements are necessary for lasting peace. We
highlight the importance of the ceasefire in achieving
that and deplore all violations of this measure. The
ceasefire remains an indispensable component of
the agreements.

Russia claims that it is not party to the conflict.
In reality, Russia started the conflict in Ukraine.
Russia continues to fuel the conflict in Ukraine, and
people suffer because of it. I for one welcome the
Russian Ambassador’s enthusiasm for Security Council
meetings on Ukraine, and we look forward to other
future opportunities to ask Russia what Russia is doing
to ensure that the agreements are implemented.

We take this opportunity to recognize recent
efforts that have been made, particularly as they relate
to confidence-building measures. Trust between and
among relevant parties is crucial to strengthening
our dialogue and achieving a sustainable solution.
Continued prisoner exchanges must be encouraged,
as should efforts towards identifying further areas
of disengagement.

I would like to conclude by reiterating the
United Kingdom’s enduring support for Ukraine’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
within its internationally recognized borders and
territorial waters. The Ukrainian people deserve peace,
and we will continue to hold Russia to account to
that end.

We are also encouraged by the fact that the
Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine (SMM) of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) has recorded fewer ceasefire violations in
some areas. We welcome the work of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission, which continues to observe
security across the region and report on the situation.
In order to facilitate the Mission in the discharge of its
mandate, we emphasize the need for safe and secure
access for its staff on the ground, including unrestricted
movement of SMM personnel.

Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
We begin by joining the members of the Council
in welcoming all our briefers today and extend our
gratitude to them for their informative briefings. We
note the presence of the Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Ukraine.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines continues to
stand steadfast in its advocacy of and adherence to the
immutable principles of international law. These are
12/24

In conclusion, we emphasize our support for
the Special Monitoring Mission and the framework
established by the Minsk agreements, and stress the
need for the unconditional implementation by both
parties of the provisions therein.
20-04231

18/02/2020

Ukraine

Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo,
Ms. Heidi Grau and Mr. Halit Çevik for their briefings.
On the occasion of the fifth anniversary of the Minsk
agreements, Indonesia would like to highlight the
following three points.
First, we must uphold respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States. Indonesia reaffirms its
principled and consistent position that the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States are fundamental
principles of relations among nations, including in
Ukraine. Indonesia is therefore against any actions of
annexation of any sovereign country or territory. That
is a clear violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law.
Secondly, there must be full adherence to, and
implementation of, the Minsk agreements, which
constitute the legal basis for achieving a political
solution and provide a road map for settling the conflict
in Ukraine. Indonesia supports the full implementation
of the agreements, in line with the purposes and
principles of the Charter. We encourage the relevant
stakeholders to uphold those commitments fully. That
will be a crucial confidence-booster to ultimately pave
the way for a political solution and restore peace and
stability in the affected areas.
Indonesia also takes note of the work carried out
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and the Trilateral Contact Group in
the implementation of the agreements. We call on all
parties to immediately cease hostilities and commit
to fully respecting the ceasefire and refraining from
provocations that could lead to more tension. In line
with the Minsk agreements, the parties should refrain
from actions that could be viewed as provocative and
further impede a peaceful resolution.
Thirdly, conflicts must be peacefully settled.
Indonesia reiterates its call on all the parties concerned
to exercise the utmost restraint, manage the crisis
responsibly, promote a peaceful settlement and uphold
respect for international law. We call on them to
achieve a comprehensive and balanced solution through
dialogue, as stipulated in Article 33 of the Charter. In
doing so, Indonesia encourages the States concerned to
take necessary measures to de-escalate tensions. We
are against any actions that exacerbate hostilities and
deteriorate the already fragile situation on the ground.

S/PV. 8726

Let me end by reiterating that Indonesia will fully
support all constructive efforts aimed at resolving the
conflict in Ukraine peacefully, in accordance with
international law and Charter principles. We once
again urge a peaceful solution to the crisis in Ukraine
according to the relevant Security Council resolutions
and the agreements signed by the parties involved.
Ms. Tshabalala (South Africa): I thank Belgium
for facilitating today’s discussion on the letter from the
Russian Federation dated 13 April 2014 (S/2014/264).
We would also like to thank the briefers for their
informative briefings.
Five years have passed since the signing of the
Minsk agreements. While there have recently been
some encouraging developments, such as the meetings
of the Normandy Four, the full implementation of
all the provisions of the agreements has yet to be
realized. My delegation commends the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for its
efforts in Ukraine as it diligently executes its mandate
in monitoring the implementation of the 2015 Minsk
agreements, endorsed by the Security Council in
resolution 2202 (2015).
The OSCE has also been successful in facilitating
dialogue between the parties in seeking a resolution
to the situation. In that regard, it is important that
the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
be allowed unhindered access to monitor and verify
compliance with the Minsk agreements, in line with its
mandate. It remains necessary for all parties to fully
implement all their respective commitments under
the Minsk agreements. We must stress that the Minsk
agreements, including the package of measures, provide
the most promising road map for peace in the long term.
It is clear from the briefings that we heard this
afternoon that there remains an urgent need for the
immediate cessation of hostilities in eastern Ukraine.
The continued violations of the ceasefire and the
increased tensions due to the presence of heavy weapons
and their use, in violation of the Minsk agreements, are
of serious concern. The ongoing tensions and conflict
have negatively impacted the humanitarian situation on
the ground.
We call for the urgent de-escalation of tensions to
allow for a situation that is conducive to the alleviation
of the humanitarian crisis and the delivery of aid to
those most in need. We also encourage the parties to
refrain from actions that could be viewed as provocative

20-0423113/24

S/PV.8726

Ukraine

and aimed at exacerbating tensions. Such actions place
obstacles in the path of meaningful dialogue and may
further impede a peaceful resolution of the situation in
line with the Minsk agreements.
Let me conclude by reiterating my country’s
position on the need for compromise and dialogue.
South Africa will continue to encourage the parties
to strengthen all diplomatic efforts to produce a
sustainable and peaceful solution. In that regard, we
wish to re-emphasize the importance and welcome
the recent and upcoming meetings of the Normandy
Four countries. We encourage all efforts, including
the increased role of the Normandy Four, to facilitate
ongoing initiatives to build trust in seeking a longterm, peaceful and sustainable solution to the situation
in Ukraine.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the Under-Secretary-General, Ms. DiCarlo; the
Special Representative of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Chairperson-inOffice, Ambassador Grau; and the ОSCE Special
Monitoring Mission Chief Monitor, Ambassador Çevik,
for their briefings.

18/02/2020

China has always adopted an objective and
impartial position on the Ukrainian crisis and respects
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries,
including Ukraine. It also opposes interference in
Ukraine’s internal affairs by any foreign forces. We
have always believed that there is no military solution
to the crisis and that dialogue and negotiation are
the only way forward. China will continue to play a
constructive role in reaching a political settlement to
the Ukrainian crisis.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, my delegation would like to thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Ms. Heidi Grau and Ambassador Halit Çevik
for their valuable briefings. I would like to take this
opportunity to welcome His Excellency Mr. Sergiy
Kyslytsya, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Ukraine. We hope that this meeting, which coincides
with the fifth anniversary of the signing of the Minsk
agreements, will contribute to more efforts to advance
a peaceful settlement in eastern Ukraine and to end the
crisis through negotiations.

We note that in December last year, the Normandy
Four summit was successfully relaunched and the
parties reached an important consensus on the
implementation of the Minsk agreements, which is a
clear indication that the Normandy format retains the
full support of all the parties and remains the key to the
political mediation of the Ukrainian crisis.

In his briefing to the Security Council two weeks
ago (see S/PV.8714), the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) addressed the crisis in eastern Ukraine. At
that meeting, Tunisia expressed its commitment to all
efforts aimed at strengthening international peace and
security. Given our adherence to the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, Tunisia
today stresses once again our steadfast position based
on respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States and non-interference in their internal affairs.
Those are fundamental elements of peaceful relations
among States. In that context, my delegation asserts
its support for the efforts of all parties concerned
to reach a comprehensive solution to the crisis in
eastern Ukraine through dialogue and negotiations,
in accordance with Article 33 of the Charter and the
Minsk agreements, particularly within the Normandy
Four and the Trilateral Contact Group, and based on
resolution 2202 (2015).

China calls on the parties to fully implement the
agreements, remain committed to achieving a political
settlement and seek a comprehensive solution to the
crisis through dialogue and consultation in order
to facilitate the realization of peace, stability and
development in Ukraine, promote harmony among all
ethnic groups in Ukraine and foster Ukraine’s peaceful
coexistence with the other countries of the region.

My country’s delegation wishes to commend the
positive developments registered throughout 2019,
including the meeting of the Normandy Four in Paris in
December, the prisoner exchange process in September,
progress made in the negotiations, the establishment
of new disengagement areas and the opening of new
crossing points along the line of contact. Those positive
steps contribute to paving the way towards a peaceful

In February 2015, the Minsk agreements were
signed and subsequently endorsed by the Security
Council in resolution 2202 (2015). China believes that
the agreements have played a vital role in the political
mediation of the Ukrainian crisis. Over five years, their
authority has been fully recognized by all parties. The
various mechanisms related to the implementation of
the agreements have generally functioned smoothly.

14/24

20-04231

18/02/2020

Ukraine

settlement of the crisis and to alleviating the suffering
of the population concerned. We call for those positive
developments to be built upon in order to ensure that
conditions do not regress into a cycle of violence,
especially given the concerns expressed in the briefings
about violence and the number of casualties.
My country’s delegation reiterates the important role
of the OSCE in advancing efforts to resolve the crisis.
We express our appreciation and support for the efforts
of the Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine, within
the framework of its mandate, to monitor and report
on the security situation, facilitate dialogue to reduce
tension and enhance confidence-building measures.
My delegation also appreciates the continued work of
the Trilateral Contact Group and its various working
teams, and reiterates its call for a comprehensive and
lasting ceasefire while fully implementing the Minsk
agreements, as well as respect of all parties for their
commitments under those agreements.
Amid the continued momentum in the ongoing
peace efforts, my delegation hopes to see improvement
in the humanitarian situation through the concerted
efforts of all parties to provide assistance and protection
to the population in the areas concerned, including such
basic needs as health care and services, food security
and education in the areas close to the line of contact
and elsewhere, based on the report issued by the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, especially in light of the shortage of financing
for the humanitarian response plan.
In conclusion, in the context of the growing
challenges to international peace and security, I
emphasize once again my delegation’s hope to see
acceleration in the implementation of all concluded
agreements and the outcomes of follow-up meetings
with a view to reach a comprehensive peace settlement
to the crisis in eastern Ukraine. That will contribute
to restoring stability and strengthening the elements
of regional security and prosperity for the peoples of
the region.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I welcome Deputy
Foreign Minister Kyslytsya to our meeting today.
I wish to begin by thanking the Russian
representative for calling for this briefing today, after
having witnessed yet another attack in Luhansk oblast
by Russian-supported armed formations. Weapons that
were prohibited by the Minsk agreements were used,
leading to casualties. It is a grave violation of the Minsk

S/PV. 8726

agreements and an unfortunate display of Russia’s
disregard for its recommitment to the ceasefire during
the Paris meeting. However, let us not forget that this
is only one chapter in the ongoing Russian aggression
against Ukraine that has continued for the past six years.
I am grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for her important and comprehensive
briefing, as well as to the Special Representative of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Chairperson-in-Office, Ms. Heidi Grau, and
the Chief Monitor of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission in Ukraine (SMM), Mr. Halit Çevik, for their
updates on activities on the ground.
Six years since Russia’s military aggression
against Ukraine began, we regret that Russia has
not acknowledged and reversed its actions. Estonia
reaffirms its strong support for Ukraine’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity within its
internationally
recognized
borders,
including
territorial waters. We condemn the illegal annexation
of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol and the occupation of certain territories of
the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine. The use
of force against the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Ukraine by the Russian Federation clearly violates
the fundamental principles of international law. It
violates paragraph 4 of Article 2 of the Charter of the
United Nations, as well as the Helsinki Final Act.
The Minsk agreements remain the basis for a
political resolution to the conflict in Donbas. The
Russian Federation, however, has continued to breach
the Minsk agreements on a regular basis since they
were adopted, as we have also witnessed today. It has
breached, in particular, the first point of the Minsk
agreements — to end the interference and ensure a
comprehensive ceasefire. Its actions have left more
than 27,000 people wounded and over 14,000 dead,
including the 298 passengers on Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17, which was shot down by a Russian BUK
missile system.
Moreover, Russia’s initiatives — such as
conducting illegal elections, conscripting Ukrainian
citizens into the Russian army and pursuing the illegal
passportization of Ukrainian citizens — all run counter
to the spirit of the Minsk agreements and further
obstruct the settlement in Donbas. Let me recall that
there is a 400-kilometre uncontrolled border between
Ukraine and Russia. That uncontrolled section is a

20-0423115/24

S/PV.8726

Ukraine

gateway for the free flow of weaponry and military
personnel. Russia’s actions in Ukraine pose numerous
threats to international peace and security.
We therefore call on Russia, as a party to the
conflict, to fully implement its commitments under the
Minsk agreements, including those undertaken at the
Normandy Four summit in Paris on 9 December. We
also call on Russia to immediately withdraw its armed
forces from Ukraine and stop its political, financial and
military support to the self-proclaimed Donetsk and
Luhansk People’s Republics — that is, Russia’s proxies
in Donbas.
We commend President Zelenskyy for his strong
efforts towards resolving and de-escalating the conflict
in Donbas, including initiatives and bold actions
that have brought positive developments, such as the
exchange of prisoners, the proposal to disengage forces
in three areas and the reconstruction of the bridge
at Stanytsia Luhanska. We would like to thank the
OSCE, including the Special Representative of the
OSCE Chairman-in-Office and the Special Monitoring
Mission, for all their indispensable work in Ukraine.
The SMM remains the most reliable source of
information on the situation on the ground in Ukraine.
It is therefore regrettable that the restrictions posed
on the SMM’s freedom of movement have persisted
in non-Government-controlled areas, hindering the
Mission from fully implementing its mandate. The
SMM’s full, secure and unimpeded access to the entire
territory of Ukraine should be guaranteed. Recently,
we heard about OSCE efforts and restrictions on the
work of the SMM directly from OSCE Chairperson-inOffice, Albanian Prime Minister Edi Rama, right here
in the Security Council (see S/PV.8714). He mentioned
the idea of a United Nations peacekeeping mission to
Ukraine that would monitor the Russian-Ukrainian
border and provide a safe environment and for the
restoration of the sovereignty of Ukraine. However,
in March 2015, Ukraine’s request for the Security
Council to deploy a peacekeeping operation under
the auspices of the United Nations was blocked by the
Russian Federation — yet another example of the sheer
reluctance to take any steps to resolve the conflict.
We remain deeply concerned about the
grave humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine.
Approximately 3.4 million Ukrainians still need
humanitarian assistance and protection. In addition to
psychological trauma and the lack of access to basic
16/24

18/02/2020

services, about 2 million people live in areas that are
heavily contaminated with landmines. Despite aid
efforts, the 2019 humanitarian appeal remained only
50 per cent funded. I call on the international community
to intensify its financial support for Ukraine.
International human rights law also continues to be
violated in the civil, political, economic, social, cultural
and religious domains in the occupied areas. Violations
are targeted towards persons belonging to any minority
group or organization that dissents from the views of
the Government of the Russian Federation — mostly
Ukrainian activists, Crimean Tatars and lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and intersex persons. According
to the recent report of the Secretary-General on the
human rights situation in Crimea (A/74/276), arbitrary
arrests, house raids, groundless detentions, harassment,
intimidation, unfair trials, degrading treatment of
detainees, torture, sexual violence and other violations
remain systematic and unpunished. Those violations
must stop immediately. All persons detained illegally
must be released. And international human rights
monitoring mechanisms, including the International
Committee of the Red Cross and non-governmental
organizations, must be given access to the annexed and
occupied territories.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): Allow me,
through you, Madam President, to sincerely thank
Ms. DiCarlo as well as the other two briefers, who
joined our meeting today via video-teleconference. I
would also like to welcome the Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ukraine to today’s meeting.
The Security Council was briefed on 6 February on
the current priorities of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) (see S/PV.8714),
including achieving tangible results in conflict and
post-conflict environments. To that end, special
attention was paid to the crisis in Ukraine, which
remains the most pressing security issue in Europe.
Although the conflict threatens peace and security, it
also has an impact on the daily lives of civilians, in
particular as it pertains to the freedom of movement
and the humanitarian situation.
As in other crisis-affected areas, the humanitarian
situation, including the plight of women and children,
deserves special attention. Financial resources must
therefore be mobilized in order to meet the needs of the
most vulnerable segments of the population. Allow me
to commend the efforts of the OSCE Special Monitoring
20-04231

18/02/2020

Ukraine

Mission to Ukraine, the International Committee of the
Red Cross, the European External Action Service and
the United Nations Development Programme to bring
about tangible improvements on the ground in an effort
to assist those in need.
The 2015 Minsk agreements marked a turning
point in the crisis in Ukraine, as they reflected the
willingness of the parties to reach a consensus-based
solution. It is for that reason that the Niger supports
all measures to implement the agreements, which were
endorsed by the Security Council in resolution 2202
(2015), of 17 February 2015. We call on the parties to
fully implement those agreements and demonstrate
political will in order to create the right conditions for
peace. We also welcome the resumption of the dialogue
within the framework of the Normandy format,
following the summit held in Paris on 9 December 2019,
whose conclusions should be welcomed. The efforts
made by the Trilateral Contact Group should also be
supported. We encourage the OSCE to intensify its
efforts to effectively monitor and verify the ceasefire
and the withdrawal of heavy weapons, in accordance
with the agreements I just mentioned.
In conclusion, as in other hotspots, the parties must
work to find not a military solution, but a political
one — the only kind of any value.
Mr. Dinh (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo,
Her Excellency Ms. Heidi Grau and His Excellency
Mr. Halit Çevik for their insightful briefings on the
implementation of resolution 2202 (2015), the Minsk
agreements and the humanitarian situation in eastern
Ukraine. I would also like to welcome His Excellency
the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine to
today’s meeting.
Over the past few months, we have seen encouraging
signs of progress on issues related to the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions of Ukraine. A number of detained
persons associated with the conflict were released
in prisoner exchanges. After a long standstill, the
Normandy format meeting held on 9 December 2019
enabled the successful resumption of communication
processes at the highest level. We would like to
commend the great efforts of the Normandy Four
leaders, as well as their commitment to a sustainable
and inclusive architecture of trust and security in
Europe. I look forward to forthcoming meetings.

S/PV. 8726

Meanwhile, the situation on the ground in the
region is still of serious concern. Incidents, including
armed hostilities, occur every day in that part of
Europe. The conflict continues to cause death, injuries,
displacement, shelter destruction and the lack of basic
living conditions for millions of civilians — many of
whom are elderly, women and children.
We hope that the momentum for stabilization and
de-escalation will continue, with the aim of moving
further towards a peaceful settlement to the situation,
in accordance with international law, the Charter of
the United Nations and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. In that regard, we call for greater efforts
to fully implement the Minsk agreements. We also
look forward to the concrete implementation of a
comprehensive ceasefire regime, the development and
implementation of additional disengagement areas and
an updated mine clearance plan, among other measures.
We urge the parties to explore further trust-building
steps by promoting dialogue and negotiations.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, the Special Representative of
the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
Chief Monitor of the ОSCE Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine for their briefings.
Six years following the start of hostilities, the
conflict in Ukraine remains the deadliest on the
European continent. We cannot accept the fact that
the conflict, which has led to the deaths of more than
13,000 persons, rages on, while millions of men and
women continue to suffer as a result of the war. It is
for that reason that, over the past few months, France,
along with Germany, has worked to give new impetus
to efforts to resolve the conflict. The Heads of State
of the four countries of the Normandy format met in
Paris on 9 December last year and reaffirmed their
commitment to a set of principles. First and foremost,
they reaffirmed their commitment to the Minsk
agreements as a framework for the settlement of the
conflict. Then, during the summit, we also set out
tangible specific measures to make headway towards
the implementation of the Minsk agreements. Those are
the measures that now need to be implemented, and the
Trilateral Contact Group is working towards that end.
A first positive step was taken with the release and
exchange of 200 prisoners on 29 December. Discussions

20-0423117/24

S/PV.8726

Ukraine

are ongoing in order to facilitate the exchange of all
conflict-related prisoners. France recalls the vital
nature of access for international organizations and
the International Committee of the Red Cross to all
detained persons on either side of the contact line and
of the identification of the approximately 1,500 persons
who have disappeared since 2014.
Progress is necessary in a number of other
areas. Violations of the ceasefire continue on a daily
basis, notwithstanding the commitment reiterated
on 9 December to ensure full respect for it along the
contact line. In that regard, I deplore today’s fighting,
which has caused at least one death and several injuries.
I call on the parties, in particular the separatist armed
groups, to refrain from any provocation, in order to
avoid any military escalation on the ground.
The OSCE’s Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine is contributing every day to ensuring accurate
monitoring of the security situation, thanks to the
courage of the women and men engaged on the ground.
We condemn in the strongest possible terms all actions
that undermine their security or aim at obstructing their
mission. The mandate of the Special Mission must be
able to be fully implemented throughout the territory of
Ukraine, including near the Russian-Ukrainian border.
The identification of new disengagement zones and
the question of identifying and opening new crossing
points are very concrete issues. Progress is expected in
that context as well, just as it is expected in the area of
mine clearance.
Beyond those measures, the objective remains the
implementation of the political clauses of the Minsk
agreements. That is the most difficult part, but the
current momentum should enable progress to be made
in defining local self-government arrangements for
certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions and
in incorporating the Steinmeier formula into Ukrainian
legislation. In that context, civilian populations
are the first victims. Ukraine is facing one of the
biggest humanitarian crises of the last 10 years. Some
3.4 million people continue to depend on humanitarian
assistance. Every effort must be made to facilitate
access for humanitarian organizations and United
Nations agencies, especially in the territories controlled
by the separatist entities.
We call on all parties to implement their obligations
and on Russia to use its influence on the separatists
for the full implementation of the Minsk agreements,
18/24

18/02/2020

in the interests of a civilian population now caught
between heavy weapons and mines. Pending the return
to a lasting peace, to which we are endeavouring to
contribute by continuing negotiations and the prospect
of a forthcoming summit in Normandy format, Ukraine
can count on the full and complete support of France.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Belgium.
Five years after the signing of the Minsk agreements,
the implementation of their key provisions remains
a dead letter, which is reflected in a deterioration of
the humanitarian and human rights situation on the
ground. We therefore call on the parties to implement
the Minsk agreements rapidly and fully and to honour
their commitments.
We support the efforts made both in the Normandy
format and in the framework of the Trilateral Contact
Group. We welcome the conclusions of the meeting
in the Normandy format held in Paris on 9 December
2019 and look forward to a continued and deepened
dialogue. In order for those efforts to fully bear fruit,
it is essential that a lasting ceasefire be put in place.
In that regard, we are particularly concerned about
the most recent escalation of violence and call for the
utmost restraint.
We regret that the parties, in particular Russia,
continue to obstruct the Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine in its monitoring and reporting tasks. We
strongly encourage both sides to respect the mandate of
the Mission and to allow it safe and unhindered access
to all Ukrainian territory, including the territories
bordering Ukraine and Russia, as well as the Crimea.
We are deeply concerned about the impact of the
conflict on human rights, including the right to life, the
right to liberty and non-discrimination, in particular
with regard to internally displaced persons. We call for
free and confidential access for the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
other international observers to all places of detention
in the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic and
the Luhansk People’s Republic.
The statistic of the 3.5 million people in need
of humanitarian assistance reminds us that the
humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine requires
our attention. We urge all parties to allow full access
in accordance with humanitarian principles. We are
20-04231

18/02/2020

Ukraine

deeply concerned about the targeting of critical civilian
infrastructure, such as water and sanitation facilities,
as well as schools. In that regard, we welcome the
endorsement by the Government of Ukraine of the
Safe Schools Declaration, which demonstrates its
commitment to protecting education in times of
armed conflict.
We remain deeply concerned about reports of
the presence of Russian military equipment and
personnel in areas controlled by armed formations.
The presence of heavy weapons, which is contrary
to the Minsk agreements, continues to be a threat to
the civilian population on both sides of the line of
contact. We call for a complete withdrawal of those
weapons as well as the disengagement of troops from
the designated areas. As eastern Ukraine is one of the
most mine-contaminated areas in the world, we call for
further efforts to demarcate and mark contaminated
areas, as well as for mine clearance, especially in the
vicinity of schools and entry and exit points. We are
concerned about the underfunding of the humanitarian
response plan and call on the international community
to engage more actively in this area.
In conclusion, we call on all parties to work
towards a lasting solution to this conflict, based on
respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): First of all, I thank those
members of the Security Council who have expressed
their strong solidarity with Ukraine in the face of
the ongoing Russian aggression. I also express our
appreciation for the informative briefings today.
When the Russian Federation called for a Council
meeting on the occasion of the fifth anniversary of the
package of measures, the third component of the Minsk
agreements, one might have believed that Russia finally
planned to report to the Council that it was going to
honour the agreements made in this very Chamber
in 2015.
Although not adopted under Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter, resolution 2202 (2015) has
been a very important message from the Council to all
parties to implement the agreements, most important

S/PV. 8726

to respect a comprehensive ceasefire. Would it make
any difference if the Council then, in 2015, had legal
grounds to adopt a mandatory document under Chapter
VII? If the document had been endowed with a different
legal nature, would that be a compelling enough reason
for the Russian Federation to implement it?
I have no time to dwell hereon the recent
constitutional amendments, as proposed in Moscow,
that effectively nullify the mandatory nature of
international law and international treaties in the
Russian Federation. We continue to believe that the
Minsk agreements should be implemented, including
by the Russian Federation, which so persistently
dissociates itself from the agreements.
Where do we find ourselves today? It looks as if the
answer was given at 6 a.m. local time, when our positions
were attacked. The attack carried out today, on the fifth
anniversary of the Debaltseve tragedy, is particularly
cynical. The Ukrainian armed forces provided an
adequate response to that offensive — carried out by
the Russian occupation forces with the use of Minskproscribed weapons — in the exercise of Ukraine’s
inherent right to self-defence.
It is clear that the Kremlin continues to pursue a
strategy of escalation in Donbas, in flagrant violation
of Russia’s obligations, which they have undertaken as
a party to the Minsk agreements.
As Ukraine’s President, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, said
earlier today, “This is an attempt to disrupt the peace
process in Donbas, which has started to move forward
by small yet incessant steps”. The Ukrainian leadership
has confirmed that our commitment to ending this war
and to adhering to the agreements reached remains
unshaken, as does our resolve to repel any acts of armed
aggression against Ukraine.
In total disregard of the agreements reached in
Paris in December last year by the leaders of Ukraine,
Russia, France and Germany, over the past two
months our positions have been shelled more than 400
times. Since the beginning of the year, 13 Ukrainian
servicemen have been killed and almost 60 wounded.
Can anyone call this a frozen conflict? Or, perhaps,
a low-intensity conflict? It is a war — the only ongoing
war in Europe. It is a full-scale war waged by Russian
troops and Russia’s mercenaries, with weapons and
ammunition supplied by the Russian Federation. That
is exactly why the Organization for Security and

20-0423119/24

S/PV.8726

Ukraine

Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission, as we have learned from Mission reports,
is still restricted in terms of freedom of movement
and deprived of proper access to the RussianUkrainian border.
Whenever reminded of its own Minsk commitments,
Russia immediately points a finger at Ukraine,
saying that it is we who should hold a so-called direct
dialogue with the representatives of two so-called local
authorities in the temporarily occupied part of Donbas.
But what are they?
How local is the recently appointed so-called acting
head of government of Donetsk, Vladimir Pashkov?
This citizen of Russia, born in Siberia, graduated from
the Russian Military Pacific Navy School and, until
recently, was the Vice-Governor of the Irkutsk region of
Russia. Would members like to know how close Irkutsk
is to Donetsk? An insignificant 6,000 kilometres. Still,
he is local enough, in the opinion of Moscow, to rule
in Donbas and to be involved in talks about Donbas’s
future. There is no justification for someone from
Siberia to be telling us Ukrainians what to do on our
own territory.
The unfortunate experience of Georgia and Moldova
with direct dialogue with the Kremlin’s puppets proves
that in the best-case scenario this is a road to nowhere;
most probably it is a highway leading directly to a trap.
As has happened before, Russia is trying to present
the victim of its aggression as the perpetrator thereof.
That is one of the hallmarks of its information war
against Ukraine. Such vain attempts to twist the truth
could have been viewed as pathetic and even laughable
were it not a cynical insult to the memory of the
thousands of my compatriots who have lost their lives
defending their land.
I pay tribute here to the memory of those protesters
who were gunned down in cold blood in Maidan exactly
six years ago, on the night of 18 February, which is now
often called the Night of the Apocalypse; to the memory
of heroes such as Sergiy Kokurin — ethnically Russian,
by the way, a father of two, the first Ukrainian citizen
killed in Crimea by a Russian sniper on 18 March 2014,
during the military phase of the attempted annexation
of the peninsula; to the memory of Klavdia Sytnyk, a
young single mother, a paramedic who lost her life on
the first day of this month under a barrage of Russian
mortars while delivering medications to the wounded;
and to the memory of 22-year-old Maxim, who was
20/24

18/02/2020

killed today by bullets supplied by the Russians. My
son is about the same age.
We should not lose sight of the broader context of the
Russian armed aggression against Ukraine. Six years of
Russia’s military invasion in Donbas have killed more
than 13,000 people and wounded more than 27,000. More
than 1.4 million residents of Donbas are now internally
displaced persons. The areas seized have turned into a
land of fear and terror, with local economies destroyed
and equipment belonging to enterprises wrecked or
moved to Russia. More than 3.4 million people are in
need of humanitarian assistance this year. In addition,
this territory, according to the United Nations, has
already become one of the most mine-contaminated in
the world, as has been repeatedly mentioned today.
The Russian Federation continues to supply its
occupation forces with weapons, regular troops and
mercenaries, to the extent that now they dwarf many
European armies, with approximately 500 tanks,
around 1,000 armoured combat vehicles and almost 800
artillery systems. Just last year, the Russian Federation
sent more than 4,000 tons of weapons and munitions
into the occupied territories of Donbas.
As if that were not enough, Russia is also pursuing
illegal passportization in the temporarily occupied
territories of Donbas, which has now reached an
industrial level — more than 125,000 persons were
issued Russian passports there.
The east is not the only front line in Ukraine. In
the south, as a result of Russia’s attempted annexation
of Crimea, the peninsula has been turned into a human
rights ghetto and a huge military base, upending
regional security, as Russia uses it also for its Syria
interventions. The number of political hostages has
skyrocketed, and Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars have
been repressed. A wall of silence has been built around
the peninsula, repelling any international scrutiny, in
violation of General Assembly resolutions. According
to the Secretary-General’s report on Crimea and
regular reports by the United Nations Human Rights
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine, Russia is pursuing
covert demographic change, bringing in more than
130,000 military and civil servants in and pushing the
local population out. The militarization of occupied
Crimea is in full gear as Russia is bringing in additional
troops and sophisticated weapons.
By launching the so-called Crimean bridge, Russia
has not only grossly violated international law and its
20-04231

18/02/2020

S/PV. 8726

Ukraine

bilateral treaty obligations; it has created huge economic
losses for Ukraine and an exponential environmental
threat to the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov.
Against all odds, Ukraine is working for peace.
Achieving peace was a major motivator for Ukrainians
who cast their votes in last year’s presidential and
parliamentary elections.
Another demand of the voters continues to be the
return of those who have been illegally detained in the
occupied territories of Ukraine and in Russia, who
have been held in inhumane conditions and frequently
tortured for many years. There are still more than 200
Ukrainians held in uncontrolled parts of Donbas, as
well as more than 100 Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars
in Crimea and Russia.
The Ukrainian side successfully initiated two major
mutual releases of detainees with Russia and work is
ongoing to ensure their “all for all” release. I take this
opportunity to call on colleagues to join me in our
appeal to the Russian side to stop preventing unhindered
access to detainees by the International Committee of
the Red Cross and its search for missing persons.
We believe that the agreements reached in Paris in
December should expedite the resolution of the conflict.
A full and comprehensive ceasefire and unhindered
access 24/7 for the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
throughout the entire occupied territory would facilitate
the process. While the Russian Foreign Minister gives
an endless list as to why the next Normandy summit is
not feasible, we are working hard and doing our best
to make it possible, as agreed by the leaders of the
four countries.
As President Zelenskyy stressed only a few days ago,
we are fully committed to that endeavour, as evidenced
by the new initiative on sectoral disengagement, where
the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission will play a key
verification role to ensure that a given sector is free
from illegally armed groups, foreign armed formations
and military equipment.
We look forward to holding local elections
throughout the territory of Ukraine, including its
temporarily occupied parts, once the security and
political conditions allow it in accordance with
Ukrainian legislation and the Copenhagen document of
OSCE and under Ukraine’s control of its internationally
recognized borders.

We are working hard to finally bring this RussianUkrainian war, which was not started by us, to an end
no matter how hard the other side tries to prolong it
in order to bleed Ukraine dry. We will continue to
achieve sustainable peace exclusively through peaceful
diplomatic means in accordance with international
law. This can be done only together with the Council,
including those members present here who are genuinely
interested in bringing about peace in Europe as we are
about to celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
end of the Second World War and of the creation of the
United Nations. Otherwise, our anniversary gathering
in New York this autumn will be a gruesome memorial
service rather than a celebration of global peace
and security.
Today’s discussion does not cover all the essential
elements for putting an end to Russia’s war against
Ukraine and, in particular, Russia’s temporary
occupation of parts of our territory, including
Crimea. It was therefore decided that the day after
tomorrow the General Assembly will consider the
agenda item “Situation in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine”, namely, Donbas and Crimea,
as it is fundamentally important that the liberation
of Ukrainian territory cannot be said to be complete
until the last Russian soldier has left the peninsula. I
ask members to join us on Thursday in the General
Assembly Hall.
(spoke in Russian)
To conclude my statement, I will speak in Russian
so that the Russian people who are not indifferent to
the present and the future of their country can hear
me. Given that today there was a discussion of a new
leader of Donetsk — who is from Irkutsk and who was
mentioned by Ambassador Heusgen, among others — I
wish to recall the fact that some 90 years ago in a small
Siberian town in Irkutsk Oblast with the romantic name
Zima a son was born to the family of the Baltic German
Alexander Gangnus, son of Rudolph Gangnus. In the
context of today’s discussion, it is worth noting that he
was the poet who, returning from a trip to the West
at the height of the Cold War, wrote the well-known
poem “Do the Russians Want War?”. I think that many
have already guessed that I am talking about Yevgeny
Yevtushenko, also known as Yevgeny Gangnus.
“O, do the Russians long for war?
Ask of the soldiers who now lie
Beneath the birch trees

20-0423121/24

Ukraine

S/PV.8726

And let their sons tell you
Whether the Russians long for war.”
I say to the Russian representative that I think that
the answer to the question as to whether the Russians
want war in the context of today’s Russia will be the
parade in Red Square on 9 May, when we will see
whether parade participants will carry portraits of
Stalin — that same Stalin who has been taken out of
the mausoleum and seems is not out of people’s minds.
“But how to root out Stalin’s heirs, said Yevtushenko in
1962. He continued:
“Let some repeat
‘Compose yourself!’

over

and

over

again:

I shall never find rest.
As long as Stalin’s heirs exist on earth,
It will seem to me
That Stalin is still in the mausoleum.”
Today, when the glorification of Stalin, whose
name is being whitewashed, is gaining traction in the
Russian Federation, the memorials to that murderer,
dictator and perpetrator of the 1930s genocide of the
Ukrainian people are burgeoning.
I wish to conclude my statement with a question
to the Russian representative: Indeed, do the Russians
long for war?
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I would like to say to the Ukrainian
representative that I am glad he is interested in Russian
poetry. But that is not surprising — we all come from
the same country and were probably taught the same
lessons at school. I want to correct him.
“O, do the Russians long for war?
Ask of the stillness evermore
Ask of the soldiers who now lie
Beneath the birch trees ...”
He missed one line.
I do not know whose portraits will be carried on
9 May. I do not think that it will be those of Stalin.
I doubt that. However, I wonder what portraits will
22/24

18/02/2020

be carried in Kyiv on 9 May and whether there will
even be a parade in Kyiv commemorating our — by the
way — shared victory in the Great Patriotic War.
Today we heard many things. It is impossible to
respond to all of it and, in fact, that is not the task
before me. Unfortunately, we have not heard anything
new. Everything is as before — the same old tune. The
representative of Ukraine calls on Moscow to comply
with the Minsk agreements but, for some reason, he
does not appeal to Kyiv. There is the same tinkering
with the Minsk agreements and the issues of cause and
effect. It seems that it was Russia that started the war in
Ukraine, not Kyiv that came to Donbas.
We again heard that Russia must withdraw its
troops. But last year, we asked Mr. Apakan and
Mr. Sajdik to tell us about the presence of Russian
troops in Donbas (see S/PV.8461). They were unable to
say anything precise or satisfactory to those who posed
the question. Perhaps Ms. Grau and Mr. Çevik have
more information. We can ask them where they saw
Russian troops in Donbas.
We are told that with a wave of the hand Moscow
can end this conflict as soon as we tell the Donbas
representatives. I have a question. My question is this:
are they really that naive to think that the Kremlin is
puppet master to those individuals in Donbas? Do they
actually think those individuals do not have their own
opinions, that they are nothing more than puppets of
the Kremlin? I do not believe they are so naive as to
think so.
My friend Ambassador Heusgen never ceases to
amaze me. His country is one of the authors of the Minsk
agreements. I personally do not know Mr. Pashkov,
who was the Vice-Governor of the Irkutsk region. But I
want to ask Mr. Heusgen and Mr. Kyslytsya a question:
does the fact that United States citizen Natalie Jaresko
was once Finance Minister of Ukraine, that Lithuanian
citizen Aivaras Abromavičius was Economy Minister
and that United States citizen Ulana Suprun was
Minister of Health — incidentally, she is from Chicago,
which is 8,000 kilometres from Kyiv, greater than the
distance from Kyiv to Irkutsk — lead us to think that
the United States and Lithuania are direct parties to
the conflict in Ukraine? I will not even mention the
example of United States Army Lieutenant Colonel
Alexander Vindman, who found himself entangled in
the impeachment affair and who claimed that he was
three times offered to be made Minister of Defence of
20-04231

18/02/2020

Ukraine

Ukraine — something he himself acknowledged was
a joke.
Mr. Heusgen noted that today was a sad day for
international law and for Ukraine. Was he referring
to the anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2202
(2015), which endorsed the Minsk package of measures?
Does it mean that for him the day of the adoption of that
resolution is a tragic day? He referred to how Vladislav
Surkov deftly persuaded the representatives of Donbas
to sign on to the Minsk agreements. Mr. Heusgen
perhaps should know that the Donbas representatives
who signed the Minsk agreements in 2015 saw it as an
enormous concession and defeat. Today the Ukrainian
authorities do not even want to engage in dialogue with
them, labelling them not just separatists but terrorists.
There was much said about today’s hostilities in
the area of Holubivske. According to the information
available to us, on 18 February a division from the
Ukrainian armed forces attempted to destabilize
the situation along the line of contact in Donbas. At
approximately 6 a.m., a 10-person sabotage group
from the armed forces of Ukraine moved towards the
positions of the Luhansk forces near Holubivske. That
operation by the Ukrainian armed forces was revealed
at an early stage. As they approached the contact line,
the group tripped a landmine, which killed at least two
people and injured three more. In order to evacuate
the dead and wounded from the area, the armed forces
of Ukraine carried out a large-scale artillery attack
targeting residential areas in the Luhansk People’s
Republic. That offensive strike was carried out using
medium-calibre mortars and large-calibre artillery
in vicinity of Holubivske, Sokilnyky, Donetskyi and
Smeloye. Ukrainian military forces fired more than
50 mortar shells into the territory of the Luhansk
People’s Republic.
Mr. Kyslytsya showed us a photograph of an
unfortunate 22-year-old young man, Maksim Khitailov,
who died today, apparently in the same area. He was a
grenade-launcher operator with the 72nd Mechanized
Brigade of the Ukrainian armed forces. That is a tragic
event, but why are they deploying young men to die
there? We remember how Mr. Kyslytsya’s former
Minister, Mr. Klimkin, seating in that very chair,
showed us a photograph of an unfortunate girl who
had died on their line of contact. I asked him, the next
time he visited the Security Council, to please bring
photographs of civilians who had died as a result of the
actions of Ukrainian security forces in Donbas. Many

S/PV. 8726

such photographs could be provided. I will do so myself
the next time, because most likely I will not wait for
the Ukrainian side to do it. This is an ongoing tragedy.
And this tragedy must end. The way to end it is by
implementing the Minsk agreements.
Mr. Heusgen also told us today about violations at
the line of contact. In that regard, let me turn to statistics
from the Special Monitoring Mission. Ukrainian forces
were responsible for 60 per cent of firing incidents
between 9 December 2019 and 12 February 2020. Kyiv
committed 3,737 ceasefire violations, as opposed to
2,809 coming from Donbas territory — and that is just
the cases in which the violator could be identified. The
overall number of violations stands at 45,244 explosions
on one side and 12,114 on the other side. There are 304
pieces of equipment west of the line of demarcation — a
violation — as opposed to none on the east side. During
the same period, Ukrainian security forces targeted
three residential areas in Donbas, while there was not
a single attack against territory under Kyiv’s control.
Unfortunately, he does not want to see what could
not be clearer. I do not know what type of eyeglasses
could help him see that. I continue to be surprised at
where he gets his information about “unfortunate
people who have been coping with that tremendous
oppression in Russian-occupied Crimea”. I have called
on him many times to go to Crimea and have a look for
himself how the “unfortunate Crimeans” are suffering
there.
Two speakers today mentioned the Malaysian
Airlines Flight MH-17 disaster. Of course, that is not the
subject of today’s meeting. I do not think they should
present that information pretending to be a prosecutor.
And I myself am not a prosecutor. Moreover, I want
to share with the Council some surprising information
published by Western media outlets today, namely,
that Dutch military intelligence and security services
did not detect a single Buk anti-aircraft missile system
in the area where the aircraft was downed. We have
repeatedly said that the investigation is shockingly
closed and opaque. That information, which needs to
be verified and corroborated, of course, only serves as
proof.
Lastly, I would like once again to recall the fact
that it is important for us to understand that there are
two sides, not three, in this conflict — and not two,
Ukraine and Russia, in the view of our Ukrainian
colleagues — namely, it is Donbas and Kyiv. As

20-0423123/24

S/PV.8726

Ukraine

long as there is no direct dialogue between Kyiv and
Donbas, there can be no settlement in Ukraine, just
as there can be no settlement without direct dialog
between the parties to the conflicts in Afghanistan,
Syria, Cyprus, Colombia or anywhere else in the world.
Only an inclusive dialogue can generate opportunities
and guarantees for lasting peace. For that reason, the
Normandy format is meaningful only if it is geared
towards the implementation of the Minsk package
of measures, which need to be implemented without
any preconditions.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of Ukraine has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): The Russian delegation
has just presented its account of the nature of the
escalation in Donbas today. It was said that is due a
provocation led by the armed forces of Ukraine. I
want to draw the attention of the Security Council
to a statement made today by the Spokesperson of
the President of the Russian Federation, Mr. Dmitry
Peskov, in relation to what happened.
(spoke in Russian)
“We do not have the details of this confrontation.
We do not know what provoked it. Our hope is that,
in the near future, it will be possible to shed light
on the details of what occurred, before drawing
any conclusions”.

24/24

18/02/2020

(spoke in English)
I now address a question to the Russian delegation:
Should we listen the Spokesperson of the Russian
President, or should we listen to the talking points
written at Sixty-seventh Street in New York?
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of Germany has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Since my Russian
colleague mentioned my intervention, I would like
to give a very quick answer to one of the questions,
namely, whether I believed that the separatists in charge
in Donetsk and Luhansk were puppets of the Kremlin.
Yes, I do believe that.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I say to Mr. Kyslytsya not to try to drive a
wedge between me and Spokesperson Peskov. I saw
his statement this morning. The information I referred
to was not written at Sixty-seventh Street — where
the Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to
the United Nations is located — it is information we
received today after the situation had been clarified.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

20-04231
