S/PV.8069

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8069th meeting

Thursday, 12 October 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skau
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-32168 (E)
*1732168*

S/PV.8069

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
I warmly welcome the Secretary-General and give
him the floor.
The Secretary-General: Nine months ago,
approximately 20 million people were at severe risk
of famine in South Sudan, Somalia, Yemen and northeastern Nigeria. In South Sudan, almost 100,000
people were on the verge of starvation. At that time,
I expressed my deep concern to Member States in
two letters calling for urgent action and support for
humanitarian and development agencies. I also held a
media briefing here in New York on the crisis with the
principals of the World Food Programme, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the United
Nations Development Programme and representatives
of from the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations and UNICEF. In March, I visited
Somalia, where I saw at first hand the need for a massive
scale-up in international support in order to avert a
famine. I heard heartbreaking stories from people who
had been forced from their homes by drought, and last
month the high-level event on famine during the General
Assembly highlighted our continued grave concerns.
The international community responded quickly
to the warnings. Donors came forward. Nearly 70 per
cent of the funds requested have now been received.
Aid operations were scaled up. Humanitarian agencies
and their partners are now reaching close to 13 million
people each month with life-saving food, nutrition
assistance, health care and other support. Development
partners have also stepped up by working with
humanitarian agencies to link emergency relief with
long-term programmes aimed at breaking the cycle of
risk and vulnerability. Although we have succeeded in
keeping famine at bay, we have not kept suffering at
bay. Hunger continues for millions of people. Children
under 5 will suffer the mental and physical scars of
stunting throughout their whole lives. In fact, in the
past nine months, the need for humanitarian aid has
increased in those four areas.
2/17

12/10/2017

The number of people at risk has increased. In
South Sudan, approximately 6 million people are
severely food-insecure — an increase of 5 million since
the beginning of the year. Humanitarian aid is saving
lives, but we have not dealt with the one major root
cause of those food crises: conflict. Some 80 per cent
of the World Food Programme’s funding is going to
areas affected by armed conflict. Approximately 60 per
cent of the 815 million people suffering from hunger
today live in the shadow of conflict. Three quarters
of the children whose growth has been stunted live in
countries affected by conflict. Until those conflicts are
resolved and development takes root, communities and
entire regions will continue to be ravaged by hunger
and suffering.
Let us talk about each of those food crises
individually. In north-east Nigeria, some 8.5 million
people are now in need of humanitarian aid. There
have been tangible improvements in food security in
some areas, thanks to the efforts of the Government and
humanitarian organizations. However, aid agencies face
obstacles because of ongoing attacks by Boko Haram,
while operations by the Nigerian military also affect
access. We believe that up to 700,000 people in parts of
Borno and Yobe states are completely inaccessible and
may require urgent support. Two thirds of the healthcare facilities in those states have been damaged.
Those that are functioning are short of staff and lack
safe water, basic drugs and equipment. That poses very
serious challenges in dealing with outbreaks of cholera,
malaria and measles.
In Somalia, more than 6 million people depend on
humanitarian aid for their survival. Aid agencies and
their partners face armed conflict, insecurity, blocked
roads and unnecessary bureaucracy. Four aid workers
were killed in the first eight months of this year, and
there were more than 100 violent incidents affecting
aid organizations. Large parts of southern and central
Somalia remain under the control or influence of
Al-Shabaab. Almost 1.9 million people who need help
are beyond the reach of aid agencies. Road access is
severely limited by illegal checkpoints and blockades.
Al-Shabaab and other non-State armed groups have been
targeting humanitarians and confiscating or destroying
aid supplies. Meanwhile, the Government frequently
imposes bureaucratic obstacles, which include
arbitrary taxation and interference in recruitment and
the awarding of contracts.
17-32168

12/10/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

In South Sudan, localized famine has been
averted, but severe food insecurity has risen to
unprecedented levels. Government and opposition
groups are preventing agencies from accessing areas
in urgent need, including parts of the Equatorias and
the Greater Upper Nile region, and areas to the south
and west of Wau. Nineteen aid workers have been
killed since January, and more than 440 have had to
be relocated. Humanitarian supplies are being regularly
looted from convoys and compounds. More than 830
incidents relating to access have been reported this
year, more than half of which involved violence against
humanitarian agencies. That amounts to more than
one such incident against humanitarians per day. Both
Government and opposition forces are implicated. The
collapse of the economy has led to widespread violence
and increased criminality, thereby making the delivery
of food aid even more dangerous.
In Yemen, the World Food Programme and its
partners helped avert famine by reaching 7 million
people in August — an increase of more than 60 per
cent since the first half of this year, but many millions
of people continue to suffer. Approximately 700,000
people in areas of the Sa’ada, Hajjah, Al Hudaydah
and Taizz governorates are hard to reach because
of bureaucratic obstacles, air strikes, shelling and
ground clashes. Both the alliance of those loyal to
Abdulmalik al-Houthi and Ali Abdullah Saleh, which
controls the capital, Sana’a, and the Government of
Yemen have imposed restrictions on the movement and
transportation of humanitarian personnel and aid. An
economic blockade has led to an increase in fuel costs
of more than 50 per cent and in food costs by 30 per
cent over pre-crisis levels. Meanwhile, the world’s
largest cholera epidemic has resulted in some 800,000
suspected cases and more than 2,000 deaths.
The parties to conflict in all four of those countries
have stated their commitment to humanitarian law and
human rights law, but most of them have not followed
through. I call on them and those with influence over
them to translate that commitment into practical
measures and to address impunity immediately.
That means allowing and facilitating the rapid and
unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief, imposing
constraints only in good faith, and respecting and
protecting humanitarian personnel and supplies.
I also call for urgent measures to address the root
causes of conflict, improve access and mitigate human
suffering. Specifically, I ask the Council to continue to

S/PV. 8069

engage in and support the political process in Somalia,
and encourage the Federal Government of Somalia and
the federal member states to stabilize their relationship.
Worryingly, we can see that that process is not going
as smoothly as we would like. Without progress in the
political and security areas, any improvements in the
humanitarian situation will be only temporary.
It is critical to clarify key issues defining the
federal states, including the division of powers and
agreements on revenue and resource-sharing between
the federal and state Governments. I welcome the
efforts by the Government and several federal states
to improve access by unblocking routes and removing
illegal checkpoints, and I call for continued progress
on that issue. In Nigeria, I encourage the Government
and its counterparts in the Lake Chad Basin region to
develop a regional strategy to address the root causes
of the crisis there.
I urge all partners to step up efforts to provide
humanitarian aid, as well as long-term solutions
for sustainable development. It is critical that a
greater civilian presence be established in the newly
accessible areas, and I welcome the Government’s
efforts to achieve that. In Yemen, we face increasing
constraints and interference by the alliance of Houthis
and Ali Abdullah Saleh, which controls Sana’a, as the
Government of Yemen and its partners from the coalition
led by Saudi Arabia attempt to restore legitimacy. I call
on all parties to ensure unhindered access to people in
need. I repeat the call for the payment of civil servants’
salaries and the effective and continued operation of the
port of Al Hudaydah. What is needed most is for the
parties to return to the negotiation table and focus on
reaching agreement. Member States with influence on
them must also play their role.
Finally, I urge the parties to the conflict in South
Sudan to come to terms urgently, so as to prevent
increased food insecurity and refugee movements,
which threaten to destabilize the region, and continued
human suffering and misery. I encourage all Member
States to support the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development’s high-level revitalization forum, which
has gained momentum in recent weeks. I urge the
Government to facilitate access to people in need, to
ensure the safety of humanitarian workers and supplies,
and to remove bureaucratic impediments to aid.
Last month, the United Nations food and nutrition
agencies released a report entitled The State of Food

17-321683/17

S/PV.8069

Maintenance of international peace and security

Security and Nutrition in the World. The report
underlined that we are now seeing a reversal in the
long-term decline in hunger. Conflict and violations
of international humanitarian law inevitably increase
vulnerability to all kinds of threats, including food
insecurity, which in turn causes people to flee. The
World Food Programme estimates that a 1 per cent
increase in food insecurity leads to a 2 per cent increase
in refugees.
Conflict in one country places demands on
its neighbours to provide food and basic services
to refugees. That can lead to further instability,
affecting the security of an entire region and beyond.
Prevention must, as always, be our watchword. Early
famine-warning mechanisms have worked well in
north-eastern Nigeria, Yemen, Somalia and South
Sudan. We will continue to support famine prevention
and humanitarian assistance. Humanitarian aid and
strengthened respect for international law must be
complemented by investment in sustainable peace and
comprehensive long-term solutions.
Those countries are dealing with violent extremism
at the same time as they are being hit by economic
recession and low oil prices. They present powerful
examples of the complex and multidimensional
challenges that we face. They require a system-wide
approach that addresses the humanitarian-development
nexus and its link to peace. Development agencies
must engage early on with innovative solutions. The
World Bank has shown that it is possible to scale up
development-oriented programmes, complementing the
humanitarian response, even in fragile countries like
Yemen. I welcome those efforts, which must include
the involvement of regional neighbours and frontline States.
In the long term, we must focus on what communities
and countries need in order to emerge from protracted
conflict and instability. We must help people not only to
survive, but also to thrive. Right now, we must urgently
commit to increasing humanitarian aid and funding the
programmes that we have in place. Wherever we have
not prevented or resolved conflict, we must support
its victims and survivors. It is unconscionable that aid
agencies must make life-or-death decisions about who
should receive aid, owing to a shortage of resources. I
am grateful for the solidarity shown and urge continued
commitment and support.
4/17

12/10/2017

Mr. Skau (Sweden): I would like to join you,
Mr. President, in welcoming the Secretary-General to
the Security Council today for this important briefing,
and thank him for his sobering and comprehensive
briefing. The Secretary-General’s call for action in
February should not have been necessary. However, by
giving his voice to some of the most vulnerable people
in our world, he may have made it possible to avoid
a humanitarian disaster of massive proportions. His
early warning to the Council, asking for our support in
addressing an acute risk of famine in Yemen, Somalia,
South Sudan and north-eastern Nigeria, triggered the
early action needed to prevent a catastrophe.
That type of interaction between the Council
and the Secretary-General, with prevention at its
heart, presents a model for the future, particularly
as humanitarian crises are increasingly being driven
by conflict. The Council’s presidential statement,
proposed by Sweden and others, makes it clear that
ongoing conflicts and violence are having devastating
humanitarian
consequences.
Moreover,
those
conflicts are, at the same time, hindering an effective
humanitarian response, leading to shocking levels of
human suffering, including famine, in those situations.
That is a worrying trend.
The Secretary-General’s consistent leadership
and advocacy for the humanitarian and longer-term
response to the threat of famine has been invaluable.
Since his call to action, the international community
has mobilized, and humanitarian efforts have been
scaled up in all four countries. Yet, as was pointed out
today, much is still needed. I would like to make three
points this afternoon on the response so far and what
more can be done.
First, I pay tribute to the women and men of
local communities who have been at the forefront of
the response to those crises. I also pay tribute to the
humanitarian workers, who risk their lives to save others.
They must receive our full support. We are appalled by
the lack of humanitarian access and continuing attacks
on humanitarians, as well as on hospitals, clinics and
medical personnel. That is unacceptable and endangers
the lives of humanitarians, as well as undermining their
ability to save the lives of others. As has been stressed
by the Council before, the full respect by all parties for
international humanitarian law is essential.
We welcome the generous response from
international donors to the Secretary-General’s
17-32168

12/10/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

call to action. Ambitious commitments have been
made by donors at successive donor conferences in
Oslo, London and Geneva. Sweden, for its part, has
supported the response in the four countries with more
than $131 million in bilateral humanitarian assistance.
The flexible and time-critical humanitarian funding
available from the Central Emergency Response
Fund, which has so far allocated $118 million, has
also been particularly important in kick-starting the
humanitarian response.
As the Secretary-General said last month, keeping
famine at bay does not mean keeping suffering at
bay. For that reason, we welcome the strengthened
engagement by development actors as part of a more
comprehensive response that seeks to build long-term
resilience. We also welcome the renewed, deepening
and active partnership between the United Nations
and the World Bank, which is an essential part of the
work to break the cycle of vulnerability, need and
humanitarian response.
Secondly, while we can rightly welcome the
response to the Secretary-General’s call to action, we
must also recognize that we have failed collectively by
allowing those crises to develop to their current level on
our watch. Widespread food insecurity, as well as the
risk of famine, remains in those four countries, as well
as in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central
African Republic and, sadly, in an unacceptable number
of other places. What those crises have in common is
that they are not accidents or natural disasters but manmade catastrophes, driven by conflicts and violence.
Yes, we need more funding; yes, we need more access;
but that will not end those crises or stop new ones
from emerging. There must be political solutions to
the conflicts that are driving those entirely preventable
humanitarian crises, exponentially increasing the
needs and suffering that make a robust humanitarian
and longer-term response so much harder. Ending such
conflicts also means tackling the root causes that are
driving them, including underdevelopment, inequality
and exclusion, which are, in turn, exacerbated by the
effects of climate change. We need to make, build and
sustain peace. We all have a role to play in such longerterm response strategies — as host communities,
Governments, regional partners, humanitarian donors
and members of the Council.
Lastly, Sweden took the initiative of proposing a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/14) on the risk
of famine in those four contexts and the humanitarian

S/PV. 8069

response. We did so because we believed that it
was important to ensure that the full weight of the
Security Council was behind the Secretary-General’s
call to action. The issue of how conflicts are driving
humanitarian crises and preventing the humanitarian
community from responding is not unique to the four
countries addressed in the presidential statement.
Delivering essential humanitarian assistance to those
most in need is a challenge that humanitarian agencies
are increasingly faced with as they seek to carry out
their lifesaving work.
The Security Council has a role to play in ensuring
that those agencies can do their job when a conflict with
devastating humanitarian consequences, a conflict that
hinders an effective humanitarian response, creates the
risk of an outbreak of famine. We are ready to continue
to lead on humanitarian issues in complex emergencies
during the remainder of our term on the Council and
to work with present and future members to explore
further Council action. In that regard, and as a first
step, we will welcome an update from the SecretaryGeneral in early 2018 on where we stand in relation to
the challenges that have been outlined today, on any
lessons learned that could be applied more broadly and
on what further support is needed from the Council to
address those challenges and prevent further suffering.
We are committed to standing with the SecretaryGeneral in those efforts.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing. Eight months
ago he issued an urgent wake-up call to the world as
the threat of famine and the threat of millions starving
to death loomed large over the people of Somalia,
South Sudan, north-eastern Nigeria and Yemen. Today,
thanks to his call to action and the global efforts that
followed, famine has been kept at bay. And yet that is
no cause for celebration. As the Secretary-General said
in his briefing, the absence of famine is not the absence
of need. Hunger by any other name is still hunger. In
each of the countries I just mentioned, the need remains
colossal — overwhelming, in fact — and even greater
than it was in February.
In Somalia, more than 3 million people are going
to bed hungry. The same can be said for more than
5 million in north-eastern Nigeria. In South Sudan,
there are literally more people without food than with.
More than half of the population — more than 6 million
people — are severely food insecure. And in Yemen, as
we heard earlier this week, more than 17 million people

17-321685/17

S/PV.8069

Maintenance of international peace and security

12/10/2017

are now food insecure, nearly 7 million of whom are
just one step away from famine.

and state levels, as well as hefty, illicit fees that limit
reach and increase delivery costs.

If only to deepen the tragedy further, in all four
of those countries the impact falls most acutely on
women, girls and children. As the Council well knows,
the long-term solution to all those crises is ending and
preventing conflict, but long-term fixes alone are no
good when hunger kills in the short-term. We need aid
to reach people in need quickly, and as the Council, we
need to find the political will necessary to overcome
the barriers that too often prevent that from happening.
We need only look to South Sudan, where fighters from
each side accuse civilians of feeding or being fed by the
enemy. Access restrictions, bureaucratic impediments
and attacks on humanitarian workers continue to
delay the delivery of lifesaving assistance, with more
than 1,600 access incidents reported since the start
of 2016 — that is, the delivery of food being denied
to those most in need, at least twice a day, for nearly
two years.

In conclusion, what we are witnessing in all of
those countries is the return of hunger as a weapon
of war. The destruction of farms, livestock herds and
markets, the blocks on humanitarian aid and access for
commercial goods are all deliberate tactics to decrease
people’s access to adequate nutrition and health care.
We need to recognize that it is happening as a result of
political decisions. So in turn, the Council must bring
its own political pressure to bear on those responsible
and hold them to account. We have the power and duty
to influence their behaviour in the right direction. It is
time to say that enough is enough.

In north-east Nigeria it is a similar story, with
aid agencies unable to access many of those in need
due to continuing fighting between Boko Haram and
Government forces. As a priority, the Government of
Nigeria must protect civilians and provide unimpeded
humanitarian access. In parallel, the Government
should set out clear steps for ending the conflict that
do not depend on military measures alone. Sustainable
peace can only be achieved by addressing the root
causes of the violence.
In Yemen, the gravest humanitarian situation
today, food is the biggest weapon and lack of food
is the biggest killer. The Council is being very clear
this week about the need for increased commercial
and humanitarian access into and across Yemen,
including through increased capacity at all Yemeni
ports, particularly Al Hudaydah. We also need to
see public-sector salaries paid regularly across the
country, starting with the health, water, sanitation and
waste-management sectors to stem cholera and preserve
essential Government services.
It is only in Somalia that drought is partially
responsible for the situation. Even there, the war
remains the principal trigger of and contributor to the
unfolding humanitarian tragedy. Access restrictions are
again a central cause of the crisis, with impediments to
the delivery of humanitarian assistance at the federal
6/17

Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing. We appreciate
his leadership and voice in raising the alarm about the
nations on the verge of famine today. The humanitarian
needs in north-east Nigeria, Somalia, South Sudan
and Yemen are unprecedented. Those countries are
experiencing what is being called the most vicious of
vicious spirals, where conflict compounds food and
health-care shortages, which in turn compound the
risk of disease. All four countries are experiencing
devastating cholera outbreaks. The plagues seem to
come one after the other, but they are not the result of the
wrath of God but of the acts of men. In too many cases,
they are the acts of leaders who are more interested in
power or personal gain than the safety and security of
their own people.
In August, the Council acknowledged that unfortunate
reality when we declared that famine is an issue of
international peace and security (S/PRST/2017/14).
Those conflicts threaten us all. People without access to
food, water, basic services and economic opportunities
are more likely to turn to armed and extremist groups.
Epidemics, like cholera, can spread across borders. It
is not a drought or some other natural disaster that has
caused the largest food-security emergency since the
Second World War. The main reason that there is a risk
of famine in Yemen, South Sudan, north-east Nigeria
and Somalia is that fighters are not letting food get to
those who need it. In some cases there are reports that
warring parties are trying to starve entire communities
into submission. That is horrifying and demands the
Council’s full and immediate attention.
Many have responded to the urgent need for
assistance in these four countries. At the opening of
17-32168

12/10/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

the General Assembly, the United States announced
more than $575 million in additional aid, bringing
our total contribution to populations affected by this
crisis to more than $2.4 billion in 2017. We urge all
States Members of the United Nations to join us and do
their part. But more funding, however necessary, will
not be enough. In most cases, access to desperate people
is the key problem. Food aid may be available, but the
assistance cannot be delivered to those in need. That
is especially true in South Sudan, Nigeria and Yemen.
In South Sudan, a massive humanitarian response
helped to roll back famine earlier this summer, but
the pervasive conflict in South Sudan has left half the
population facing life-threatening hunger.
Armed groups and bureaucratic impediments
frequently prevent or delay the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, and attacks on aid workers are increasing at
an alarming rate. Since 2013, 85 humanitarian workers
have been killed in South Sudan alone — 18 were killed
this year. In Yemen, the people are simultaneously
facing the world’s worst cholera outbreak and the
world’s largest food-security emergency. Like
elsewhere, women and children are suffering the most.
There is no military solution in Yemen. A lasting end to
the violence will come only through a comprehensive
political agreement. But the humanitarian needs in
Yemen will not wait for a political process. All sides
must do everything in their power to alleviate the
suffering of civilians in Yemen.
There are practical steps that can be taken now,
today, to facilitate the delivery of food, fuel and
medicine to desperate people. These steps begin with
increasing capacity for aid delivery and allowing
humanitarian access in all of Yemen. In Nigeria, as
well, attacks by Boko Haram and the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant continue to prevent aid from being
delivered. The United States is fully committed to
working with our Nigerian partners to defeat terrorists,
but the needs of the 5.2 million suffering Nigerians
must be addressed. The Nigerian Government must
do more to streamline assistance deliveries and allow
humanitarian workers to reach all civilians in need.
In Somalia, unprecedented donor contributions and
the effective leadership of the Federal Government
of Somalia have helped avert famine thus far, but the
threat persists. There too, terrorists and other armed
groups impede the humanitarian response.
In each of those four countries, avoiding famine
means making sure that aid can be delivered to the

S/PV. 8069

hungry. There is no excuse for a delay. All members
of the Council and the international community
must come together to hold all actors on the ground
accountable. When they block aid, we have to call
them out. When they do not allow the safe passage of
humanitarian workers, we have to insist that aid workers
can operate without fear for their safety and can access
all populations in need.
The job of the Council is the promotion and
maintenance of peace, security and human rights.
Famine prevention is an important part of our mandate.
Famine is both the result of the breakdown in peace,
security and human rights, and the contributor to further
violence and insecurity. We request the Council’s
sustained attention to this good and necessary work.
We asked that we not stop at words and donations alone.
Let us go one step further to hold those preventing
access accountable for their crimes.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation thanks the French presidency for
the holding of this important meeting on the issue of
famine, which requires a coordinated, effective, lasting
or even definitive international response.
Let me also thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for his important briefing and for his ongoing
decisive efforts to mobilize the international community
to fight famine.
In addition to costing millions of people their lives,
famine foments social instability and perpetuates the
vicious circle of poverty and aid dependency. What is
worse, in situations of conflict, it dangerously increases
the vulnerability of the populations affected, especially
children, women and the elderly.
That is no doubt why, at the beginning of the year,
the Secretary-General rightly sounded the alarm, so
as to draw the attention of all Member States to the
plight of the millions of people threatened by famine
in several countries, including in north-east Nigeria,
South Sudan, Somalia and Yemen, to name only the
most urgent and concerning cases; a total of 20 million
people are at risk.
This humanitarian crisis, possibly the worst since
the end of the Second World War — as the then UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs pointed out
during his briefing to the Security Council last March
(see S/PV.7897) — could get even worse if we do not act

17-321687/17

S/PV.8069

Maintenance of international peace and security

quickly, especially in terms of access, the mobilization
of funds and sustainable political solutions.
In Yemen, South Sudan, Somalia and the northeast part of Nigeria, the challenges to humanitarian
action are primarily linked to difficulties in accessing
people in need and to conflict-related insecurity. That
is why we reiterate our call on all parties to those
conflicts to comply with international humanitarian
law, by which they are bound to ensure the protection of
civilians, including their property, as well as of civilian
infrastructure, and to allow full and unhindered access
to humanitarian assistance.
Moreover, the response to the crisis requires
immediate, adequate and easily mobilized funding. In
that regard, we welcome the fact that more than 60 per
cent of the $4.9 billion needed to respond urgently to
the identified needs in Yemen, South Sudan, Somalia
and north-eastern Nigeria has been secured. We
encourage more contributions from both States and the
private sector so as to enable the full implementation
of existing assistance programmes, including the
humanitarian response plans developed by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
At the beginning of my statement, I spoke of the
need for a lasting or even definitive response to the
famine crisis, as my delegation is convinced that the
world has the necessary resources, capacity and means
to permanently eradicate hunger and the spectre of
starvation in the world, once and for all.
Moreover, the impact of any alternative approach,
even if based on immediate and unhindered access,
adequate and available funding and a quicker and more
robust mobilization of humanitarian and development
actors, would of necessity be limited in terms of time
and space.
Additionally, since conflicts are the cause of many
cases of famine, the Security Council, as the principal
organ responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security, must use all means at its disposal to
engage the parties involved in good faith in the quest
for political solutions. In our view, it is the only way to
put a lasting end to the suffering of peoples.
Senegal is convinced of the virtues of prevention.
As such, it calls for reliable and rigorous warning
systems that are based on honest cooperation with
all relevant stakeholders, in particular regional and
subregional organizations, in order to prevent, to the
8/17

12/10/2017

extent possible, the outbreak of conflict. My delegation
also deems it key that we work to promote respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms and to solve
economic, social and cultural problems.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
commitment of Senegal to sparing no effort to ensure
a successful international mobilization. In addition to
the tribute I paid earlier to the Secretary-General for
his dedicated actions, I would like also to extend my
gratitude to all organizations and to all stakeholders in
general — whether within the United Nations or within
non-governmental organizations — that participate
in the humanitarian sphere to help the millions of
crisis victims.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank SecretaryGeneral Guterres for his very insightful briefing on
the stark and painful reality of the suffering caused
by the risk of famine in Yemen, South Sudan, Somalia
and north-eastern Nigeria. In line with the presidential
statement on famine adopted in early August
(S/PRST/2017/14), we commend the Secretary-General
for his bold and timely call for the world community to
respond to those threats.
At the same time, we acknowledge with deep
appreciation the unfailing efforts of United Nations
agencies and humanitarian organizations to alleviate
the large-scale catastrophes that are affecting more
than 20 million people in those countries. Yet despite
those efforts, the statistics we have heard today are
shocking and should awaken us to the realization that
what we are witnessing is now at its worst since the
end of the Second World War and the founding of the
United Nations itself.
While as Council members we express our grave
concern, we must go beyond expressions of solidarity
and immediately address the problem with workable
strategies. One of the major reasons for famine in the
countries under discussion is that they are all affected by
ongoing armed conflicts and violence, which interfere
with people’s livelihoods and access to markets and
create widespread displacement, further aggravated
by climate change. It is clear that military solutions
can never be an option, because they only exacerbate
tensions, leading to more tragedies and food insecurity.
Furthermore, it is obvious that unemployment, poverty,
underdevelopment and the unsustainable use of land
and water and exploitation of natural resources will
further escalate the potential for widespread famine.
17-32168

12/10/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

The interconnected nature of today’s humanitarian
crises and the importance of strengthening the securitydevelopment nexus were clearly visible during the
Council’s visit to the Lake Chad basin region in March
and will no doubt be confirmed during its upcoming
visit to the Sahel region next week. It is clear that the
response to famine requires strength and connectivity
between political solutions and long-term development
strategies. Humanitarian crises require billions of
dollars, and there are deficits in the delivery on pledges.
Our calls for more funding to breach the shortfalls are
often futile, despite the best intentions and political
will of Member States, owing to competing claims
all over the world. It is therefore vital to harness
international assistance with the funds received in order
to boost resilience and overcome the divide between the
humanitarian and development investments.
Our target should be ensuring food security and
the protection of rural livelihoods and investments in
agriculture, livestock and indigenous means. All of
that plays a role in peacemaking — as the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations has
stated — and will help to reduce tensions, especially
where food supplies and markets are severely strained.
Food security and agriculture should therefore be
supported across conflict cycles as well as during
sustained peace.
It has also been shown that supporting livelihoods
is the best defence in the effort to protect and save lives,
foster recovery and strengthen resilience. We should
therefore think creatively about the provision of seeds,
cash payments, rapid-response kits, treatment and
vaccinations to protect livestock and prevent disease
outbreaks, and about training community-based
workers. Livelihood projects can be a good basis for
bringing people together and facilitating local peace
processes through community groups. In each of the
countries that we are focusing on, we could develop
schemes such as cash for work and nutrition and
input vouchers.
As the same time, full, rapid and unimpeded
humanitarian access is essential; hence the need for
inclusive dialogue with all parties to the conflict so
as to eliminate all obstacles preventing aid from being
delivered to vulnerable populations. That is a process to
be engaged in by the entire United Nations system and its
peacekeeping missions and country teams in particular,
working alongside Governments and armed groups. We
should also seek the support of neighbouring countries

S/PV. 8069

and regional organizations and their mechanisms
for timely intervention, along with donors, partners
and, above all, civil society and local populations.
Besides working to ensure the implementation of peace
agreements, we must aim to make agriculture, forestry
and fisheries more productive and sustainable so as to
reduce rural poverty and enable inclusive and efficient
food systems, thereby increasing the resilience of
human lives.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing.
Since the beginning of this year, some countries and
regions in Africa and West Asia have been suffering
severe food shortages and even famine as a result
of drought and climate change. Secretary-General
Guterres has issued an emergency humanitarianassistance appeal urging the international community
to provide relief to the affected countries. China
highly appreciates his initiative and the efforts of the
relevant United Nations agencies to alleviate their pain
and risk. The Chinese Government is sympathetic to
the plight of these countries and their peoples, and
has been delivering rapid emergency food assistance
through bilateral and multilateral channels to Nigeria,
South Sudan, Somalia and Yemen in the amount of
¥190 million, or about $27 million.
The famine and serious humanitarian situations
in the countries and regions concerned have improved
considerably thanks to the energetic efforts of the
international community, but the risks remain, and
there is still a considerable shortfall in humanitarian
resources. The international community should
continue to provide them with the necessary help. First
of all, China would like to stress that attention should
be given to helping the countries concerned achieve
development. Because of inadequate economic and
social development, many developing countries are
vulnerable in the face of natural disasters such as drought
and famine, which in turn have a negative impact on
their domestic peace and security. The United Nations
should continue to increase its contribution to these
countries’ development, advance the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
help the countries concerned accelerate their economic
and social development. That will help to eliminate
the causes of conflicts and promote sustainable peace
through sustainable development.
Secondly, the various United Nations entities should
conduct their work according to their mandates and

17-321689/17

S/PV.8069

Maintenance of international peace and security

improve their division of labour and cooperation. As
the organ with primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, the Security Council
should focus on helping the countries and regions
concerned address issues of peace and security. On that
basis, it should play an active role in coordinating and
enhancing communication and cooperation with other
United Nations agencies and relevant international
organizations working in areas such as development,
humanitarian relief and children’s issues. Particular
attention should be paid to fully leveraging the positive
role of regional and subregional organizations and
thereby forging synergies within the international
community in addressing various problems.
Thirdly, we call on the international community
to uphold the concept of community and the common
destiny of mankind by continuing to respond to the
Secretary-General’s appeal to provide humanitarian
assistance to the countries and regions concerned. At
the same time, we must uphold the principle of country
ownership, taking into consideration the practical needs,
level of development and priorities of the countries in
question. Formulating targeted assistance programmes
with a focus on helping the affected countries improve
their capacities with regard to food production, storage,
transportation and reprocessing, as well as ensuring
better nutrition for children, will enhance the countries’
capacity to generate their own food while we support
them with emergency sustenance.
China stands ready to work jointly with the rest
of the international community to help the affected
countries and peoples surmount this difficult time
and contribute to achieving world peace, security and
sustainable development.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing today on the humanitarian
situation in the four areas under discussion and for his
personal leadership in the efforts to respond to the crisis.
We have been discussing the humanitarian situation in
each of these countries separately, but today’s briefing
gives us the opportunity to have a comprehensive look
at the unprecedented level of the humanitarian needs
and threat of famine facing Yemen, Somalia, South
Sudan and north-eastern Nigeria, which requires a
global response. Unless the international community
takes urgent and concerted action, millions of lives
will be in grave danger. Of course, we realize that the
underlying causes and the gravity of the situation are
not the same in all of these areas. We therefore believe
10/17

12/10/2017

that the humanitarian response should be tailored to fit
the particularities of each situation.
One thing that could be an element common to all four
situations is the devastating impact of climate change.
That, coupled with the ongoing conflicts and violence
in the four areas, has left many people on the brink of
famine. That kind of trend — a conflict-exacerbating,
climate-induced humanitarian crisis — poses
serious threats to global peace and security and to
development agendas. That is why it requires concerted
and urgent global action. Mobilizing the necessary
support to deliver lifesaving assistance to those in need
in the short term and investing to build resilience in the
long term are therefore extremely critical.
Moreover, ensuring safe and sustained humanitarian
access so as to facilitate the delivery and assistance of
aid, and ending armed violence through comprehensive
political dialogue, is crucial, since there is only so
much that humanitarian assistance can achieve in the
absence of peace and security. In that regard, we would
like to stress the importance of ensuring the safety and
security of humanitarian operations and personnel.
Humanitarian actors face enormous challenges,
including risks to their own lives as they provide
support to people in need. Ensuring safe, timely and
unhindered access for humanitarian assistance is
extremely important for the provision of an effective
humanitarian response, and all parties to the various
conflicts should be called on to cooperate in that regard.
While appreciating what the international
community has been done so far to reach out to those
in need of urgent assistance and avert a humanitarian
catastrophe, we realize that a lot more remains to be
done. There is an urgent need to step up efforts to
provide humanitarian assistance in order to save lives
and support the people of Yemen, South Sudan, Somalia
and north-eastern Nigeria. The funding gap in all four
of those areas is huge, and we call on the international
community to provide additional resources and find
funds for the relief efforts. It is also important to ensure
that the commitments and pledges that have been
made in various international forums are honoured
and fulfilled.
Finally, we appreciate the efforts undertaken by
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners in
extremely difficult circumstances. We remain ready to
support the Secretary-General’s call for action to avert
famine in conflict-affected countries, and encourage
17-32168

12/10/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

him to continue to provide early warnings when a
conflict that is producing devastating humanitarian
consequences and hindering an effective humanitarian
response also runs the risk of leading to an outbreak
of famine.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank the Secretary-General for his
presence and his briefing, especially for the clarity of
his message and proposal.
The humanitarian situation in Yemen, Somalia,
South Sudan and north-eastern Nigeria is certainly
alarming. The crises in those regions are concentrated
in fragile communities that are experiencing serious
conflicts or are threatened by terrorist groups, and in
areas that are particularly vulnerable to the effects of
climate change. Let us be clear. The world produces
more than enough food to meet the needs of its entire
population. It is the actions of humans that result in
such unprecedented humanitarian crises, through
armed conflicts that displace populations and the
destruction of productive infrastructure and fooddistribution channels.
We must act urgently to respond to the grave
humanitarian situation in Somalia, which has been
exacerbated by years of conflict and insecurity that
have the potential to derail the country’s political
development and the legitimacy of Federal and state
institutions. We sjpi;d redouble our coordinated
efforts to meet immediate needs and strengthen
future resilience.
With regard to Yemen, the violence produced by the
armed conflict and the paralysis in the peace process
are causing great suffering to Yemeni civilians. With
each passing day, that suffering further jeopardizes
the country’s humanitarian situation, which is on the
brink of collapse, aggravated by famine, the spread
of cholera and difficulties in delivering aid. The three
years of conflict in Yemen have led to a catastrophic
humanitarian situation and the world’s most serious
food-security crisis. Millions of people need assistance,
in the form of food, water and medicine, to survive.
It is the civilians who are paying the highest price
for this war, as they lose their lives. Ending the suffering
caused by such man-made crises is possible, but it will
only happen when the parties return to the negotiating
table — without preconditions and in good faith — and
agree to put an end to the armed conflict. Recalling
the provisions of resolution 2286 (2016), we emphasize

S/PV. 8069

that aerial attacks on schools and hospitals, where the
most vulnerable, innocent civilians are to be found, are
despicable and unacceptable. We reiterate once again
that the rebels in Yemen do not control its airspace,
which means that those bloody attacks are being
perpetrated by other forces. Sadly, when such attacks
are carried out, we are putting the future of the whole
of Yemeni society, especially children, in jeopardy. The
widespread violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law that all the
warring parties have committed are unfortunately now
common currency in Yemen.
With regard to the crisis in South Sudan,
Mr. Stephen O’Brien, the former Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, told the Council in
March (see S/PV.7897) that the famine that the people
of South Sudan are enduring is man-made. Those who
are inciting and perpetuating the conflict there are
complicit in the people’s starvation.
There is a multidimensional crisis in north-eastern
Nigeria, with many factors sowing seeds of instability
in the region. In an area whose economy is dependent
on agricultural activity and where 5 million people are
suffering from food insecurity, climate change, drought
and the terrorist threat presented by Boko Haram are
wreaking ever greater havoc.
We have said that these situations are man-made.
It is therefore also up to humankind — all of us — to
bring an end to that suffering, identify those responsible
and make sure that they are held accountable for
their actions.
If I may, I would like to point out that another
victim of these horrors, besides the innocent civilians
suffering from famine around the world, is our own
consciousness. I would ask my colleagues to think about
the words that we use to talk about this situation. We
have become used to antiseptic euphemisms that protect
us from harsh realities. Today we often talk about food
insecurity. What that actually means is that there is no
food. We often talk about severe food insecurity. What
that actually means is that there are people who on the
verge of famine. Or we say that people are enduring
livelihood crises. What we are really saying is that they
do not have the most minimal amount of food that a
person needs to survive. I believe we must stop being
indifferent to such perversities.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive briefing and his

17-3216811/17

S/PV.8069

Maintenance of international peace and security

outstanding commitment to addressing the issue
at hand.
The unprecedented level of global humanitarian
needs, exemplified by the food crises that more than
20 million people are facing in Yemen, Somalia, South
Sudan and north-eastern Nigeria, is an urgent problem.
The conflicts and violence in those countries present
both short- and long-term obstacles to an effective
humanitarian response and as a result represent the
main drivers of hunger.
The situation in Yemen is especially alarming.
Millions of people there are facing a triple threat of
food shortages, cholera and violence. Fifteen million
lack adequate access to clean water, sanitation, hygiene
and health services, and 7 million are at risk of famine.
Ukraine commends the United Nations and other
humanitarian actors for delivering lifesaving assistance
to the Yemeni people, and we especially appreciate the
efforts of the World Food Programme, which provided
aid to 7 million people in August alone. We urge the
parties to ensure the sustainable delivery of commercial
and humanitarian supplies.
We are no less concerned about the plight of the
millions of Somalis who are in need of assistance
owing to malnutrition and food insecurity, armed
conflict and climate issues. As a result, nearly half
of the population, most of them women and children,
require humanitarian assistance, and not just with
food; even water has become a luxury for more than
4.5 million people.
Ukraine commends humanitarian actors’ collective
efforts to ease the famine conditions in South Sudan,
but, with a record-high 1.7 million people still on
the brink of famine, that does not mean that the food
insecurity there is over.
North-eastern Nigeria is another example of acute
food insecurity. During the Security Council’s visit
to the Lake Chad basin, we saw that challenge at first
hand, together with its complex root causes, which
include aspects related to security, terrorism, climate
change and development.
The single biggest factor depriving local populations
of access to even the most basic needs is violence. In
other words, the current hunger crises unfolding before
our eyes are, above all, man-made, which means that
they would be fully preventable if it were not for the
irresponsible actions of human beings. In the light of
12/17

12/10/2017

that fact, we welcome and fully support the joint efforts
of the Security Council and the Secretary-General to
pursue every possible way to end the conflicts in these
countries, including by addressing their underlying root
causes comprehensively and sustainably. At the same
time, we deplore the fact that in the conflict-afflicted
countries of Yemen, South Sudan, Somalia and northeastern Nigeria, the parties to those conflicts have all
too often failed to ensure unfettered and sustained
access for deliveries of vital food assistance and other
forms of humanitarian aid. We call on all the parties
to armed conflicts to respect and protect civilians. It
is also important to recall that the obligation to uphold
international humanitarian law applies not only to
direct participants in conflicts but also to those who
have influence on them. Another imperative is the
security of humanitarian personnel in conflict-affected
countries. We therefore call on all parties to respect and
protect medical and educational facilities and personnel.
Ukraine highly appreciates the efforts of the
international community aimed at the long-term
recovery and resilience of the countries in question.
Ukraine stands ready to contribute to that vital
endeavour with the goal of keeping famine and human
suffering at bay.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I join previous speakers in
thanking the Secretary-General for his briefing and for
his commitment to resolving such critical issues as the
famines in the four countries under discussion.
Italy remains deeply concerned about the devastating
levels of extremism, instability, violence and conflict
that currently exist around the world and have
resulted in famine conditions and starvation chiefly
in four regions — South Sudan, Somalia, Yemen and
north-eastern Nigeria — thereby affecting more than
20 million people. Let us say it clearly. This is perhaps
the largest humanitarian crisis that the world has ever
witnessed, with a particularly devastating impact on
the most vulnerable, including women, children and
persons with disabilities.
Since we last discussed those issues in the
Security Council — in the Arria-formula meeting
that Italy organized with other partners in June and
in the presidential statement adopted in August
(S/PRST/2017/14) — the situation has not improved.
On the contrary, despite the fact that the famine in
South Sudan has been contained, the number of people
suffering from food insecurity has reached a record
17-32168

12/10/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

of more than 800 million around the world. There is
therefore no more time to lose if we wish to prevent
the worst effects of such crises and counter those that
are already going on. Italy has always believed in the
importance of a consolidated and multidimensional
approach to such issues.
First, it is clear that these famines are the result
of man-made, conflict-driven crises. However, as we
have long advocated, we believe that we should also
pay attention to the fact that the relationship between
conflict and food insecurity functions in both directions.
We have to realize that food insecurity can fuel even
more violence, prolong conflicts and bring about the
displacement of peoples. In particular, its role as a root
cause of forced migration was recently highlighted in
the World Food Programme report entitled “At the root
of exodus: Food security, conflict and international
migration”. In that regard, we must step up our efforts
to strengthen the resilience of agriculture and food
systems at risk, so as to render them less vulnerable to
possible future shocks, honouring the commitment that
we made last May at the Taormina summit under Italy’s
presidency of the Group of Seven. In that regard, I also
want to recall the seminar that we held last week in
Rome on conflicts and hunger, organized by Italy, the
Netherlands and Switzerland in partnership with the
Food and Agriculture Organization and the World Food
Programme, which was one part of a three-part cycle
of seminars aiming at highlighting the link between
conflicts and food security as key to tackling those
issues in a holistic and effective way.
Secondly, in terms of methodology, we are
convinced of the importance of ensuring the Council’s
backing and engagement on these issues, through earlywarning mechanisms and real action, so that we can
break the cycle of violence and ensure full humanitarian
access and the immediate disbursement of pledged
funds. In the specific case of these four famines, I
would like to pay tribute to the spirit of initiative
and leadership shown by the Secretary-General, who
exercised his function of providing early warning to
the Council in his February and June letters. If we
have been able to provide some effective and timely
responses to the ongoing crises, we owe a great deal of
that to his initiative.
Thirdly, from a broader perspective, Italy believes
that the Security Council’s growing commitment
this year to humanitarian issues is heading in the
right direction, as it clearly falls within its mandate,

S/PV. 8069

given the wide-ranging implications of those issues
for international peace and security. We must take a
holistic approach when dealing with peace and security
issues, and we therefore encourage members to keep
those issues high on the Council’s agenda. That should
also be the case in the future, with another possible
update to the Council by the Secretary-General coming
in the next few months.
Finally, I want to conclude with a thought I had
while I on my way to the meeting this afternoon. As
I was looking around at the city of New York, after an
excellent lunch, I was thinking that we were going to
come to this Chamber to talk about famine and hunger.
It felt like one of those wake-up calls that we who work
here in the Council sometimes have. It is true that we
discuss many crises here, but at the end of the day, this
is one area where we really can make a difference.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, we would like
to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres,
for his important briefing today. I would also like to
take this opportunity to thank him for his personal
commitment and his resolute action on this front.
The increase in food insecurity and the risk of
famine in Yemen, South Sudan, Somalia and northeastern Nigeria is worrying not only because the lives
of more than 30 million people are at risk, according to
figures from the Food and Agriculture Organization,
but also because that humanitarian crisis is the result
in great part of ongoing armed conflicts and humangenerated violence, the consequences of which have an
impact on the lives and rights of millions trapped in the
middle of those conflicts.
Tragically, the number of victims and other people
who have left their homes and livelihoods in droves to
escape violence has given rise to an alarming number
of forcibly displaced persons — more than 65 million
around the world, according to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. That constant
flow of the forcibly displaced has clearly resulted in
a cessation of agricultural and productive activities
on the one hand, affecting sustainable basic food
supplies, and, on the other, severe restrictions on those
supplies, producing skyrocketing prices of foodstuffs
in local markets. In several cases, the situation has been
aggravated by the fact that the parties to the conflicts
impose restrictions on the transit routes, ports and
airports where imported food as well as other forms of

17-3216813/17

S/PV.8069

Maintenance of international peace and security

humanitarian assistance enter those countries to meet
the needs of the population.
Climate change is also clearly a determining factor
that negatively affects the capacities of countries in
crisis to combat food insecurity. However, as has already
been said today, food insecurity is exacerbated by the
cross-cutting instability that conflicts bring, thereby
contributing to a spiral that prolongs that instability.
We must also bear in mind that the high
humanitarian costs of such conflicts go hand in hand
with the politics of war and enormous expenditures
on armaments for conflicts, to the detriment of the
well-being of the people. They perpetuate the cycle of
poverty, need and confrontation. That is immoral and
intolerable. If there is starvation, it is not because there
is a lack of food but because of a lack of political will
on the part of the parties concerned when it comes to
resolving their differences. To that end, we urge the
Council, and Member States in general, to maintain
a firm, unanimous position with regard to the crises
in the four countries under discussion that have led
to damaging instability affecting the lives of millions
of innocent people. We also call on the parties to
the conflicts to ensure the security and integrity of
humanitarian facilities and personnel, which must
never be seen as military targets for any reason. The
principles of international humanitarian law must be
upheld at all times.
We believe that the multiple and complex causes
of humanitarian crises in the three countries under
discussion and in north-eastern Nigeria call for a
comprehensive, coordinated and sustained response
from the international community. We must take
preventive measures on the basis of early warnings
issued by the Secretary-General, as such crises have
humanitarian consequences and can lead to famine.
We must also strengthen the global information and
early-warning system for food and agriculture of the
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) in order to
develop preventive measures and create resilience so
that such crises can be handled better. In that regard,
we support the initiatives of the Secretary-General to
address the obstacles that are impeding the efforts to
counter famine in Yemen, South Sudan, Somalia and
north-east Nigeria.
In conclusion, we believe that the joint efforts
of the international community and the coordinated
work of United Nations agencies such as the Office
14/17

12/10/2017

for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
FAO, among others, are vital to alleviating the fragile
humanitarian situation in those countries. We would
also like to take this opportunity to express our support
and pay tribute to all humanitarian workers, who often
risk their own lives in order to help others.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing on the international efforts to avert
famine and to respond to its appearance in conflictaffected areas in Yemen, Somalia, South Sudan and
north-eastern Nigeria. I also commend the efforts of
the United Nations and the international community in
response to the Secretary-General’s early-warning call
for action against famine earlier this year.
In Somalia, this crisis is not one of famine alone but
also has many political and security aspects, given the
increasing number of displaced persons and the ensuing
competition for scarce natural resources, which will
ultimately threaten the recent but fragile political and
security gains in Somalia. We are also concerned about
the obstacles to humanitarian access for those affected
by the crisis in various parts of Somalia, especially
those created by the Al-Shabaab terrorist movement. It
will be important to redouble efforts to support Somali
institutions, not only with regard to the mechanisms
needed to address such humanitarian crises, but also in
order to prevent those crises and provide early warnings
and responses to them.
In South Sudan, despite the fact that economic
and climatic factors have colluded to exacerbate the
humanitarian situation there, the direct and main reason
for the worsening situation lies in the ongoing vicious
circle of violence and armed conflict. It is therefore the
legal and ethical obligation of the parties to the conflict
to cease all forms of violence, observe international
law and the relevant international principles relating to
civilians and facilitate the rapid, safe and unimpeded
access of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
to the affected areas. South Sudan needs the support of
international donors and the international community as
a whole, since the available resources for addressing the
deteriorating humanitarian crisis are still inadequate.
We believe that the humanitarian relief efforts cannot
be a lasting solution to the crisis and that the only way
to resolve the continued humanitarian plight of South
Sudan’s civilians will be through an inclusive political
process that opens prospects for a solution based on the
peace agreement.
17-32168

12/10/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8069

Egypt is following the emergency food insecurity
situation in Yemen with concern, especially given
the added danger brought on by the cholera outbreak.
These tragedies can be partly blamed on the Houthis’
continued refusal to participate seriously in the efforts
of the United Nations Special Envoy to reach a political
settlement of the crisis. We reaffirm the importance
of reaching a political settlement that can lead to
sustainable solutions to the myriad humanitarian
challenges in Yemen. The international contributions
to the humanitarian response plan should be increased,
and pressure should meanwhile be brought to bear on
the Houthis to allow the safe passage of humanitarian
goods throughout Yemen.

We believe that the premise that hunger is primarily
triggered by conflict is extremely simplistic. The
presidential statement on hunger and on famine adopted
by the Security Council in August (S/PRST/2017/14)
rightly noted that conflicts are only one of the factors
that cause hunger. It would be wrong to slight the no
less and indeed often more obvious reasons for hunger,
such as global food-market volatility, global economic
stagnation, slow progress in achieving sustainable
production and demand, gaps in access to farming and
agro-industrial technology, lack of investment, and
plain underdevelopment, poverty and inequality. We
believe that without accounting for all of these factors,
an effective response strategy is hardly possible.

In Nigeria, we commend the efforts of the
Government to enhance its national response and scale
up its efforts to address the humanitarian crisis in the
north-eastern part of the country. The Government
has facilitated humanitarian access to the affected
areas, provided financial contributions in response to
their need, managed large numbers of refugees and
displaced persons and developed a comprehensive
plan for its humanitarian response, the Buhari Plan
for north-eastern Nigeria’s reconstruction on the
humanitarian, security and development fronts. We
urge the international donor community to act rapidly to
honour its pledges announced at the Oslo humanitarian
conference on Nigeria and the Lake Chad region,
held earlier this year, so as to avoid exacerbating the
humanitarian situation in north-eastern Nigeria.

In our view, we can find a solid basis for this
argument in the official annual report of the United
Nations agencies, The State of Food Security and
Nutrition in the World 2017, which the SecretaryGeneral mentioned today. The report states clearly that
of the 815 million malnourished people worldwide,
489 million live in conflict-afflicted countries, which
means that the remaining 320 million who do not
live in such countries are still experiencing equally
and sometimes even more severe food shortages.
Incidentally, the same report has another noteworthy
statistic, which is that the prevalence of hunger in
conflict-ridden countries is only between 1.4 per cent
and 4.4 per cent higher than in other countries.

Despite the success of our collective efforts to avert
famine, the crisis is not yet over. Millions of people in
those areas, especially women and children, still cannot
meet their most basic needs. The famine crisis has shed
light on the importance of improving the coordination
of humanitarian assistance and scaling up United
Nations early-warning mechanisms. Famines do not
come out of the blue or happen by chance. They are
actually avoidable.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation agrees that we should
not accept the fact that 108 million people around the
world, of whom 52 million are children, are starving.
We support the determination of the Secretary-General
and the plans of the United Nations specialized agencies
to draft a strategy to tackle that challenge. We believe
that, among other things, the success of our common
struggle will depend largely on how correctly we
identify the causes behind that issue.

Of course, that does not mean that we should pay less
attention to the issue of hunger and famine in conflictafflicted countries. We believe that to seriously improve
the food security situation, we should implement the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, ensure
sustainable agricultural production, make rational
use of natural resources and improve effectiveness
and modern practices at every stage of the food chain.
One current challenge is including the question of
balanced nutrition within comprehensive strategies for
socioeconomic development. In that regard, the relevant
United Nations entities — the Food and Agricultural
Organization (FAO), the World Food Programme
(WFP) and the International Fund for Agricultural
Development — have a significant role to play. All of
these issues are being fully and productively discussed
in the General Assembly.
Russia, as a major producer and exporter of
foodstuffs, is making a significant contribution to
global and regional food security. Together with major
international entities, including the United Nations,

17-3216815/17

S/PV.8069

Maintenance of international peace and security

we are implementing a development project designed
to ensure food security and sustainable agrarian
production for countries in need. In the past 10 years,
Russia has delivered humanitarian assistance in the
form of a total of 650,000 tons of food supplies to more
than 110 States. Furthermore, every year for the past few
years Russia has conducted more than 45 humanitarian
operations
delivering
humanitarian
assistance
amounting to some $120 million. We view the WFP as
one of the key channels for delivering food assistance
to those in need, and Russia’s annual assistance
through the WFP totals more than $30 million. We
also deliver significant humanitarian aid through the
International Civil Defence Organization, amounting
to another $30 million. In 2017, recipients of Russian
food assistance through the WFP included Tajikistan,
Kyrgyzstan, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Syria, Palestine, Namibia, Kenya, Iraq and Jordan.
Russia has undertaken considerable efforts in
the area of school meals, financing relevant projects
in various Central Asian countries through the FAO.
Needless to say, we consider aid to countries with acute
hunger and famine issues, particularly Yemen, Somalia
and South Sudan, to be extremely important. In the
past four years, Russia has allocated food assistance
to those countries amounting to $8 million through the
WFP. Since 2015 we have delivered some 110 tons of
humanitarian cargo to Yemen, including two Russian
emergency flights this July. Russia intends to continue
actively contributing to international efforts to arrive
at a comprehensive solution to the problem of ending
hunger worldwide.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I join others in thanking the
Secretary-General for his insightful briefing. I would
also like to express my appreciation to the United
Nations for holding a high-level event on famine
prevention and response together with the World Bank
in New York last month.
Japan is deeply concerned about the continued
serious state of food insecurity in Yemen, Nigeria,
Somalia, South Sudan and other countries. The swift
delivery of humanitarian assistance is crucial to
people suffering from famine. Regrettably, as the
Council emphasized through its presidential statement
in August (S/PRST/2017/14), conflict and violence
are major causes of the food insecurity in most of
the cases we are discussing today. Conflicts destroy
livelihoods and human food production, force people
to flee and hamper food distribution. Furthermore,
16/17

12/10/2017

they impede effective humanitarian access to those
most desperately in need of help, and in some cases,
starvation has become a part of deliberate strategies to
gain or maintain political control or military advantage.
I would like to stress once again that the Council must
address such problems and contribute to the mitigation,
resolution and, if possible, the prevention of food crises.
For that, we need to enable a more robust short
and long-term response. The international community
must enhance measures to address the root causes of
conflicts, not only by making post-conflict responses
but also by focusing more on preventing conflicts and
their recurrence. To this end, Japan emphasizes the nexus
between humanitarian efforts, development and peace.
Together with urgent humanitarian assistance, Japan
provides development cooperation aimed at promoting
mid-to-long-term self-reliance. In the post-conflict
phase, we will also supply peacebuilding and conflictprevention assistance, as well as assistance for poverty
reduction and economic development. For example, in
Uganda, which is taking in a large number of South
Sudanese refugees, Japan is providing, along with
urgent humanitarian assistance, projects in the areas of
technical assistance with rice farming and vocational
training through the Japan International Cooperation
Agency and international organizations. That synergy
for projects is designed to promote refugees’ selfreliance and support host communities, as well as
helping refugees prepare for a smooth repatriation. We
believe that such assistance will facilitate and stabilize
South Sudan’s development when its refugees return
home, thereby contributing to its peacebuilding and
conflict-prevention capacities in the future.
As a first step to exercising this approach to famine
response, Japan has decided to provide a new emergencyaid grant in December, totalling $11 million, to South
Sudan, Somalia, Yemen, and north-eastern Nigeria.
It will be used for capacity-building assistance to the
local people for pest control and monitoring nutrition,
for example, along with urgent humanitarian assistance.
Japan will enhance measures with the humanitarian
development and peace nexus in mind, with the aim of
helping countries suffering from famine to overcome
their humanitarian crises and achieve sustaining peace.
While the August presidential statement focused
on four countries, more are suffering from severe
food insecurity. The presidential statement requests
the Secretary-General to provide early warning when a
conflict that has devastating humanitarian consequences
17-32168

12/10/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

and hinders an effective humanitarian response has the
potential to lead to an outbreak of famine. We continue
to count on the efforts of the Secretary-General in that
regard so that we can act swiftly and effectively to
address the risk of famine and link our efforts to the
goal of achieving long-term peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.
I would like to begin by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for being the first to alert us in February
to the tragic humanitarian situation of the nearly
20 million people in Africa and Yemen on the verge
of starvation. The Secretary-General’s impetus was
crucial to triggering prompt action by the international
community to contain the crisis and prevent mass
starvation in the countries concerned.
The link between international peace and security
and famine is both proven and documented. The
humanitarian situation in South Sudan, north-eastern
Nigeria, Yemen and Somalia is a shock to our collective
consciousness and a sad illustration of that link, since
60 per cent of those affected by food insecurity are
in conflict zones. That shows the degree to which it
is the Council’s responsibility to continue to remain
actively seized of the problem. It is why France took
the initiative to organize a first Arria-formula meeting
in June on the link between famine and conflict, with
the welcome participation of the World Bank. Many
member States of the Council joined us in that initiative,
and subsequently, together with Sweden and the United
Kingdom, we drafted a Council presidential statement
(S/PRST/2017/14), adopted in August.
I am particularly grateful to the Secretary-General
for continuing to alert us by reporting on developments
in the situation we are discussing today. Many points
have already been highlighted by previous speakers,
and I do not wish to revisit the important points that
they have raised. I will limit myself to citing five
important lessons. The first is that malnutrition, a
consequence of poverty, food insecurity and inadequate
development, weakens the most vulnerable populations
and aggravates the scale of those tragedies. Chronic
food-insecurity situations create conditions that can
lead to starvation when crises occur. The working
conclusion is that the fight against food insecurity must
be a priority for all of us.

S/PV. 8069

The second lesson is that it would not have been
possible to cope with the magnitude of the needs
without a strong, coordinated and rapid response from
the international community. But let us be realistic as
well as vigilant. We are not at the end of the road. Far
from it, we must continue to intensify our action in
financing food aid, and humanitarian aid in particular.
The third lesson is that without safe, comprehensive
and unhindered humanitarian access, our efforts to
eradicate famine in conflict areas will be useless.
Obstacles to humanitarian access, attacks on
humanitarian workers and the fact that hunger is still
too often used as a weapon of war must be reported,
documented and condemned as firmly as possible. Let
me point out that such actions may constitute war crimes
under international law and should be prosecuted as
such. The medieval practice of using sieges to starve
entire cities, as we have seen in Syria, is an extreme
form of such barbarous practices. The Council must
therefore redouble its efforts on such issues and provide
practical responses.
The fourth lesson is that such famines are, to a
large extent, man-made humanitarian disasters. In that
context, only political solutions will make it possible
to alleviate the people’s suffering. It is therefore up to
the Council to find permanent political solutions to the
conflicts that worsen a population’s food insecurity.
The fifth and last lesson is the accuracy of our
shared understanding of the continuum. Preventing and
fighting famines is both a requirement of preventive
diplomacy and an illustration of the fact that in order
to be effective and produce results on the ground, the
United Nations must make progress on the dual fronts
of peace and development, including its humanitarian
dimension. The presence of the Secretary-General here
today has an undeniable galvanizing effect, and that
is why I would like to join Sweden and several other
members in appealing to the Secretary-General to
come back to this subject in the Council. The Security
Council must remain mobilized, and France will
continue to play its full part in that.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

17-3216817/17
