S/PRST/2004/21

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 June 2004
English
Original: French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4994th meeting of the Security Council, held on 22 June 2004, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reiterates its grave concern at the continued
violence and instability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and at
reports of threats to the peace and transition process. It condemns in the
strongest terms any involvement by outside forces in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
“The Security Council urges all Congolese parties to remain fully
committed to the peace process of the Global and All-Inclusive Agreement and
to respect the Government of National Unity and Transition, as the sole
legitimate governing authority in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
warns all parties against any attempt to seize power by force. It urges all
parties to refrain from statements or actions which might inflame the situation,
including by supporting armed elements.
“The Security Council warns all parties against any attempt at engaging
in belligerent actions or violations of the embargo imposed by resolution 1493
(2003), in the Eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It invites
the Secretary-General to further determine the need for a possible rapid
reaction capability for the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).
“The Security Council calls on the Government of National Unity and
Transition to begin work immediately with the International Committee in
Support of the Transition (CIAT) and with MONUC to establish mechanisms
for closer coordination, in order to expedite security sector reform, the
adoption of essential legislation and electoral preparations.
“The Security Council urges the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda to respond without further delay to
MONUC’s efforts taken under its current mandate to establish, as soon as
possible, a joint verification mechanism for their common security, including
verification of cross-border movements.
“The Security Council strongly encourages the Heads of State of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi to work
04-39979 (E) 220604 220604

*0439979*

S/PRST/2004/21

together to reduce tensions and restore confidence in the region, in accordance
with the commitments made in the Declaration on Good Neighbourly Relations
of 25 September 2003, including by holding meetings at the earliest possible
opportunity.
“The Security Council urges Rwanda not to provide any practical or
political support to armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
particular those led by Mr. Laurent Nkunda or Mr. Jules Mutebusi. It further
urges Rwanda to use its influence positively to de-escalate the current crisis
and support the restoration of stability.
“The Security Council reminds Uganda not to interfere in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including through military support for armed groups.
“The Security Council calls on Burundi to prevent any support from its
territory to armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
encourages the Transitional Government to facilitate humanitarian assistance
for Congolese refugees now in Burundi, and the international community to
provide its full assistance.
“The Security Council underlines that any attempt to disrupt the peace
and transition process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including
through support for armed groups, will not be tolerated.
“The Security Council condemns the deaths of innocent civilians and
human rights abuses in the East of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
calls for such incidents to be fully investigated. Those responsible for
atrocities and human rights abuses should be held to account, and the
Government of National Unity and Transition should take immediate steps,
with support from the international community, to reverse the current climate
of impunity.”

2
