S/PV.7861

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7861st meeting

Thursday, 12 January 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Skoog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Peace and Security in Africa

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-00841 (E)
*1700841*

S/PV.7861

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Nigeria to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Tayé-Brook
Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs; Mr. Stephen O’Brien, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; and Ms. Fatima Yerima Askira, Borno
Women Development Initiative and Youth Programmes
Coordinator at Search for Common Ground Nigeria.
Ms. Askira is joining us today by video teleconference
from Maiduguri, north-east Nigeria.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zerihoun.
Mr. Zerihoun: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in the Lake Chad basin region, a region that
continues to suffer from the combined effects of violent
extremism and a serious humanitarian crisis as well as
from human rights abuses and violations by terrorist
elements and counter-terrorism measures. Boko Haram
continues to perpetrate violence against civilians in
the Lake Chad basin region, with varied frequency
and intensity, through kidnappings, suicide bombings,
improvised explosive devices and ambushes on towns
and villages.
Since October 2016, Boko Haram has shifted
most of its assaults to military positions. It is unclear
whether the military is the intended target. However,
the upsurge in clashes with the military seems to be the
result of reaction to the counter-insurgency operations
of the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF) and
a shift in tactics following the split in Boko Haram’s
leadership last August between Abubakar Shekau and
his former second-in-command Abu Musab al-Barnawi.
The recent trend of attacks appears to be in line with
al-Barnawi’s stated intention to focus operations less
2/23

12/01/2017

on Muslim civilians and more on military, Western and
Christian targets.
Despite the commendable military efforts by the
region against Boko Haram, including the takeover
of its stronghold in the Sambisa Forest in Nigeria,
Boko Haram retains the capacity to carry out attacks,
as illustrated by its attack on 3 January on a military
checkpoint in Baroua in the Diffa region of the Niger,
the 7 January attack on a Nigerian military brigade in
Buni Yadi town, Yobe state, in north-eastern Nigeria,
and the multiple suicide attacks in Maiduguri, capital of
Borno state, Nigeria, on 8 January.
Far too much time has passed since the fateful
day of the kidnapping of the Chibok girls. The release
of some of the girls, especially the 21 who were set
free on 13 October following negotiations facilitated
by the International Committee of the Red Cross and
the Swiss Government, is encouraging. According
to the Nigerian Government, negotiations for the
release of the remaining girls are continuing. Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Chambas
continues his engagement with the Nigerian authorities
and international partners to determine how best to
support the Government’s efforts for the release of
the remaining abductees. In his consultations, Special
Representative Chambas continues to stress the need
for the international community to support Nigeria in
addressing the issue of mass abductions by Boko Haram,
the rehabilitation and reintegration of abductees, and
for better humanitarian access to the north-east of
the country.
Under-Secretary-General Stephen O’Brien will
brief the Council on the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in the Lake Chad basin region and the
challenges there. The countries of the Lake Chad basin
continue to face a serious humanitarian crisis. The fact
that the number of people in need of assistance has
continued to increase underscores the seriousness of
the situation and the need to address the root causes
of the crisis, if further violence, displacement and loss
of life are to be averted. The ongoing violence has had
devastating effects in the region. It has destroyed lives,
livestock and food stocks, paralysed the local economy
and undermined the economic development of the
affected countries. The economic impact of the crisis is
substantial and is estimated at about $9 billion in northeastern Nigeria alone.
17-00841

12/01/2017

Peace and security in Africa

Boko Haram’s destructive activities have been
taking place in areas of entrenched poverty and
marginalization with high levels of income and social
inequality, which has been caused, in part, by the
absence of State authority and a severe financial crisis.
The response of the United Nations, as well as that of
the States concerned and their partners, will need to
address the immediate violence and the humanitarian
needs, while simultaneously addressing the root causes
of the violent extremism and radicalization. Only a
combined approach will help to repair the material
and social damage inflicted on communities. The
overall goal of the response to the Lake Chad basin
crisis should be the achievement of lasting solutions,
recovery and sustainable development. Support should
also entail measures to help reverse the adverse effects
of climate change on the livelihoods of communities in
the affected areas, including the resuscitation of Lake
Chad and the preservation of its microeconomy.
Despite the challenges, progress has been made
in addressing the immediate humanitarian needs,
as well as in the restoration of State authority and
local governance systems in reclaimed areas. In
northern Nigeria, the United Nations has significantly
increased its physical presence so as to help improve
social cohesion, basic social services, livelihoods,
reconciliation and psychosocial support for returnees
and internally displaced persons, as well as in the
rehabilitation of damaged infrastructure and in building
the capacity of local Governments. The three-phased
reconstruction and rehabilitation plan unveiled by the
Nigerian Government on 7 January for the affected
areas in the north-east over a five-year period is a
welcome development and deserves support.
Grave human rights violations and abuses have
accompanied the Boko Haram attacks and the counterterrorism responses. Women and girls remain subject
to sexual violence, including sexual slavery and forced
marriage. Counter-insurgency operations, both by
national forces and by the Multinational Joint Task
Force (MNJTF), have been accused of breaches of
international humanitarian law, including the detention
of Boko Haram suspects, including children, in dire
conditions, and the prolonged holding of internally
displaced persons and refugees by security forces for
screening purposes. Notable measures have been taken
by the Government of Nigeria to address the incidents
of sexual and gender-based violence against displaced
women and children in camps. We urge the authorities in

S/PV.7861

all countries of the region to strengthen their responses
to such violations and abuses, including by providing
assistance to survivors, bringing all perpetrators to
justice and providing targeted protection services in
camps and host communities.
There have been encouraging reports of the
surrender of former Boko Haram fighters in Chad and
the Niger; those fighters are mostly nationals of those
two countries. We encourage the authorities of the
countries concerned to examine their rehabilitation and
reintegration programmes for ex-Boko Haram fighters
and their families, and to enable the United Nations and
partners to better support the programmes.
The promotion and protection of the human rights
of the victims of terrorism must be a priority in national
responses to acts of terrorism. Respect for due process
and prompt trials for persons detained for Boko Haramrelated offences should guide broader counter-terrorism
measures. Children detained in that connection should
be treated as victims and dealt with in accordance
with international standards for juvenile justice. All
children encountered in military operations should be
handed over to child protection actors, and standard
operating procedures should be developed in that
regard. The importance of ensuring that military and
security responses respect international human rights
law, humanitarian law and refugee law and of taking
all precautionary and preventive measures during
operations to ensure the protection of the civilian
population is self-evident. Failure to do so could
fuel pre-existing grievances and perpetuate conflict.
As the Secretary-General has emphasized, counterterrorism measures and the protection of human rights
should not be seen as conflicting goals, but rather as
complementary and mutually reinforcing.
In order to support the efforts of Member States
to combat terrorism and ensure that perpetrators
are brought to justice, the United Nations continues
to provide strategic counter-terrorism technical
assistance and training. Additionally, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, with
the support of the European Union, held a high-level
meeting in December 2016 with Nigerian federal and
local authorities to consider approaches to prosecuting,
rehabilitating and reintegrating persons associated
with Boko Haram. The consultations underlined the
need to develop a comprehensive legal framework
to deal with persons associated with Boko Haram,

17-008413/23

S/PV.7861

Peace and security in Africa

including a prosecution strategy, and to design and
implement human rights-compliant and gendersensitive rehabilitation and reintegration strategies.
Similar consultations will be proposed to Cameroon,
Chad and the Niger during a visit by the Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee planned for early this
year. The visit will aim at facilitating the development
of national comprehensive and integrated approaches
to prosecuting, rehabilitating and reintegrating persons
associated with Boko Haram, and at promoting regional
cooperation in criminal law and other related matters.
The Multinational Joint Task Force is now
undertaking military operations in the area of the thickly
forested shores of Lake Chad and its many rivers. The
operation faces unique challenges, including difficult
terrain, a lack of dedicated airlift capacity, especially
for casualty evacuation, logistics and the sustenance of
troops, as well as the lack of amphibious capabilities,
improvised explosive device detection equipment, night
vision equipment, reconnaissance assets and long-range
field communication equipment. The contribution of
€50 million by the European Union Commission to the
African Union Commission in support of the MNJTF
and the funds provided by other bilateral donors need
to be disbursed in a timely manner to the Lake Chad
Basin Commission so as to enable the regional force to
address the challenges it faces.
A military approach will not bring an end to Boko
Haram. The countries affected must simultaneously
tackle the humanitarian consequences, as well as the
root causes that led to the emergence of the group.
Military operations should be followed by stabilization
measures, the restoration of State authority and efforts
to address the social, economic and political grievances
of marginalized communities. The four countries of the
Lake Chad basin region are, without distinction, equally
affected by the Boko Haram scourge, in a context of
dire financial crisis and associated political and social
tensions. They need the support of the Security Council
and the wider international community if they are to
succeed in their efforts to bring about stability and
build the resilience of affected communities.
The United Nations remains committed and ready
to support regional efforts to address the consequences
and root causes of the Boko Haram crisis. However,
the apparent failure of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to hold
their long-planned joint ministerial summit on Boko
4/23

12/01/2017

Haram continues to be a concern. The United Nations
continues to encourage the region to develop a common
strategy to address the drivers of the Boko Haram
crisis. The support of the Security Council in urging
ECCAS and ECOWAS to convene their joint meeting
will underscore the urgency of the matter.
The President: I thank Mr. Zerihoun for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the humanitarian
situation in the Lake Chad basin. I particularly want
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for so
clearly and comprehensively setting up the context,
the current dynamics and the options for actions.
I especially appreciate that my remarks will be
complemented by the genuine report from the ground
by Ms. Fatima Yerema Askira of the Borno Women
Development Initiative, who will be following me via
video teleconference from Maiduguri.
The humanitarian crisis across north-east Nigeria
and parts of Cameroon, Chad and the Niger, triggered
by the horrendous, violent and inhuman campaign of
Boko Haram, is deepening. Although Boko Haram has
lost much of the territory that it once controlled — but
by no means all of it — raids and suicide bombings
targeting civilians continue to cause widespread death
and destruction, fear and psychological and physical
trauma. Those threats have wiped out livelihoods and
vital infrastructure and prevent people from accessing
essential services.
In July 2016, when I last briefed the Council on
the Lake Chad basin (see S/PV.7748), approximately
9 million people were in need of humanitarian
assistance. Since then, the crisis has grown further, and
there are today 10.7 million people in need of assistance,
including 8.5 million in north-east Nigeria and another
1.6 million in the Far North region of Cameroon. Some
2.4 million people are currently displaced, and the
vast majority of them — more than 1.5 million — are
children. While many families would undoubtedly
prefer to return to their areas of origin, continued
severe insecurity, limited livelihood opportunities and
the lack of essential services still make that difficult,
if not impossible, despite considerable encouragement,
if not pressure, from local authorities. Members of the
Council will recall that, in my most recent briefing,
I spoke of how many internally displaced people,
like Mustafa, whom I met at the Konduga camp near
17-00841

12/01/2017

Peace and security in Africa

Maiduguri, had been forced from their homes in Bama
in the Lake Chad basin in mid-2015. And when you are
torched out of your home, there is no home to return to.
As I witnessed during my latest mission to Nigeria
and the Niger, about 80 per cent of the displaced
persons are staying with host communities that are
themselves among the world’s poorest. But they have
nevertheless generously opened their homes to the
displaced. The protection needs that I highlighted
during my briefing in July remain dire. Civilians face
violations of humanitarian and human rights law every
day, including death, injuries, sexual and gender-based
violence, arbitrary detention, disappearances, forced
displacement and forced recruitment. In north-east
Nigeria alone, more than 7,000 women and girls have
been subjected to Boko Haram-initiated sexual violence,
including forced marriage, rape, abduction and slavery.
Upon their release, many of the survivors continue
to be treated by their own communities as suspected
Boko Haram sympathizers and face deep stigma
preventing them from reintegrating effectively into
society. In response, the United Nations and its partners
have provided care and support to 5,900 women and
children formerly associated with or captured by Boko
Haram who have been victims of sexual and genderbased violence. However, those and other protection
activities must be scaled up in order to ensure that
the survivors receive the necessary medical care,
psychosocial support and livelihood support. We also
need to work even more closely with the Government
and the communities to prevent the stigmatization of
those women.
What started as a protection crisis has become a
major food and nutrition crisis as well — today one of the
largest humanitarian crises in the world. More than one
year ago, there were 3 million severely food-insecure
people in need of assistance across the Lake Chad
basin area. Despite the United Nations and partners’
mobilizing response, today there are 7.1 million. As
the Nigerian Government has scaled up its security
offensive over the past six months, it has recovered
land and released captured people and communities
trapped at the tyrannous hands of Boko Haram,
thereby revealing large numbers of oppressed, hungry
and abused persons so quickly that it has outpaced
the humanitarian response’s ability to accelerate its
action as well as our ability to raise additional funds
from the international community to keep up. That
therefore has resulted in the staggering increase in the

S/PV.7861

numbers of very vulnerable people. The Multinational
Joint Task Force has also driven many Boko Haram
terrorists and agents back out of Cameroon, Chad and
the Niger, thereby concentrating more challenges and
needs in north-east Nigeria. For those reasons, food
and nutritional insecurity have reached extreme levels,
especially in parts of Borno, Adamawa and Yobe states
in Nigeria, with 5.1 million people food-insecure at
crisis and emergency levels.
In the worst affected and least accessible areas,
severe forms of hunger have been reported. Despite
all the assistance going in today, it is clear that, given
the forecasts that the situation may get even worse
and that the numbers of those in need may continue
to increase, our planning should be guided by those
pessimistic assumptions. And that is all in addition to,
and aside from, the chronic severe and moderate acute
malnourishment across the wider Sahel region — to
the west and north of the Lake Chad basin — affecting
millions of people, mainly children, women, the elderly,
the sick and those living with disabilities.
Children in north-east Nigeria and in the Lake
Chad basin are particularly vulnerable in this situation,
and reports indicate that the mortality rates for children
under the age of 5 in individual internally displaced
persons (IDP) locations have reached a level of four
times the emergency threshold. In July 2016, I briefed
the Council that 244,000 children in Nigeria’s Borno
state were severely acutely malnourished. Today, that
number has grown to 300,000 children, and up to
450,000, as we must also include those from Borno,
Adamawa and Yobe.
Despite such worrying trends, there is hope that 2017
will yet prove to be a turning point for the people affected
by the crisis. As the nature of the conflict changes
and an increasing number of areas are coming under
Government control, now is the time to act decisively
to expand humanitarian assistance and protection, as
well as basic services, and thereby lay the groundwork
for early recovery and reconstruction, so as to prevent
this from becoming a protracted crisis. Over the past
six months, together with each of the Governments in
the Lake Chad basin region, we have taken significant
steps forward in scaling up the humanitarian response.
For example, the United Nations, with new leadership
in Abuja and in Maiduguri, and its partners in Nigeria
are reaching more than 2.1 million people with food
assistance, more than 4 million with emergency
primary health care and more than 1.7 million with

17-008415/23

S/PV.7861

Peace and security in Africa

12/01/2017

water and sanitation, despite a difficult and high-risk
environment for aid workers.

countries affected to provide immediate assistance to
the people in need.

Since the beginning of 2016, UNICEF has provided
the following support to children in crisis-affected
areas. Approximately 160,000 children under 5 years
of age have been reached with lifesaving treatment for
severe acute malnutrition. More than 4 million people
have had access to primary health care services through
Government-run health centres and clinics set up in both
IDP camps and host communities. Approximately three
quarters of a million people continue to have access to
safe water, and more than 1 million people have access
to sanitation facilities meeting international standards.
More than 100,000 children have access to safe
temporary learning spaces. Nearly 200,000 traumatized
children have been provided with psychosocial support.

At the same time, several of the Governments in
the Lake Chad basin are experiencing fiscal constraints
as they face economic recession and are also involved
in a costly military operation against Boko Haram.
Their means to respond to the humanitarian crisis
are thus limited and vastly surpassed by the scale of
the needs. In September 2016, in the margins of the
General Assembly, my Office organized a high-level
event at which the Presidents of Chad, the Niger and
Nigeria, and a senior Minister from Cameroon, all
joined me in calling for humanitarian assistance for the
Lake Chad basin, which was followed by new pledges
of $163 million by donors at the same event; I thank
them, a good result, but insufficient.

In support of the scale-up, since July 2015, within
a month of my taking up this post, I have released over
$91 million from the Central Emergency Response
Fund (CERF) for lifesaving humanitarian assistance
to 3 million people affected by the crisis in the Lake
Chad basin region. I would like to thank all Member
States that supported that vital work through their
contributions to the CERF, and I would urge every one
here other than the three Security Council members
who have already done so to make pledges for the CERF
for 2017. Last December, during the CERF pledging
conference for 2017, the President of the Niger himself,
Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou, described the CERF as
a central and indispensable funding mechanism in
support of humanitarian action to relieve the suffering
of so many people across the Lake Chad basin.

The regional humanitarian crisis that has
significantly deepened and broadened with the
despicable actions of Boko Haram takes place in an
extremely fragile and rapidly changing part of the world,
one that contains many of the elements — poverty,
unemployment and the absence of prospects and
opportunities for youth — conducive to both violent
extremism and protracted humanitarian need. There is
a clear need for continued action and attention from the
international community and the Security Council.

I am pleased to report that we have a close
cooperation with the Governments of the countries
affected and that they are taking a fast-increasing lead in
the humanitarian response. The Nigerian Government,
for example, appointed a Chief Humanitarian
Coordinator in October 2016 and in the last few weeks
has set up platforms both at the capital and the State
level for close coordination between the Government
and the humanitarian community. And just in the last
week, Nigeria’s Presidential Committee on Northeast
Initiatives has now adopted a three-phase reconstruction
and rehabilitation plan, with an immediate focus on
comprehensive relief efforts, social stabilization and
early recovery to address the needs of 7 million people
over the next 12 months. I welcome this and indeed
other initiatives taken by the Governments of the four
6/23

In addition to the urgent provision of life-saving
assistance to those in need, we must also address the
root causes of the crisis, particularly at the community
level. Poverty, underdevelopment and environmental
degradation need to be addressed through longerterm assistance, supporting the sustained efforts
of the Governments of the countries affected. As
humanitarians, we are ready to continue to scale up and
to work closely with development partners, in line with
the outcomes of the 2016 World Humanitarian Summit.
I would like to call on Member States to ensure that
development and political actors strengthen longer-term
investments to address the root causes of the conflict.
This is the time to stand in solidarity with
the people of Nigeria, Cameroon, Chad and the
Niger. This crisis is urgent. Without our action, our
political engagement and sustained humanitarian and
development assistance, we will not be able to prevent
this from becoming an even more protracted crisis. For
example, supporting agriculture will be key to allowing
people to re-establish their livelihoods and to avoid
creating dependency on aid. In north-east Nigeria,
17-00841

12/01/2017

Peace and security in Africa

many farmers have missed three planting seasons in a
row. It is vital to support them immediately, as doing so
now would allow them to prepare their land and plant
their crops ahead of the next rainy season, in June.
As the Council is aware, initially, 19 months ago,
it was extremely difficult, despite repeated events and
statements, to get the global community’s attention
focused on the humanitarian issues of the people in the
Lake Chad basin; it was as though I was shouting into
an empty room.
Today, the situation is different, as there is growing
global attention and focus on the Lake Chad basin, and
a clear recognition, including by the Governments of
the countries affected, that this is a major humanitarian
crisis and not just a security situation. In Nigeria, the
epicentre of the crisis, the United Nations has a new
and strong leadership in place and a close coordination
with the Government, as I briefed the Council earlier,
and mechanisms to iron out tensions as and when they
arise. I am very heartened to learn of the Council’s
proposed visit to the area in the coming period, subject
to arrangements being finalized.
Donors have demonstrated increasing commitment
to the crisis in the Lake Chad basin, contributing more
than $238 million to the humanitarian response in
the Lake Chad basin in the second half of 2016, thus
tripling their contributions compared with the first six
months of the year. This led the appeal for the Lake
Chad basin in 2016 to be 49 per cent funded. But it
is that, 49 per cent, so we can do only less than half
of what we know is needed. Despite this acceleration
of contributions, which I commend, we need donors to
dig even deeper. We also need more donors to come on
board. And, as the Council will appreciate from all that
I have just set out, the 2017 humanitarian response plan
and appeal for the Lake Chad basin has doubled relative
to the one in 2016, reflecting the deteriorating situation
in the region, to $1.5 billion. Together, we simply must
do more, and from here it is funding that is key.
In addition, I call on the Council to maintain and
enhance its support for national and regional action,
that is, security, political as well as humanitarian;
support for the conference on Nigeria and the Lake
Chad basin being organized in Norway on 24 February;
support for development strategies to help sustain
recovery and peace; and support for the engagement of
local organizations, non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and international NGOs.

S/PV.7861

Over the past 12 months, the crisis has not only
persisted, but grown in dramatic fashion. Serious
protection concerns remain, and the food security
situation is critical. In the face of this reality, we have
made progress in scaling up the response, but it is still
not enough. We now need to redouble our collective
efforts to meet the growing needs. During my many
travels to the Lake Chad basin over the decades, I have
been struck by the tremendous resilience and generosity
of the people. Their ability to cope with severe hardship
and shocks is second to none. My hope is that today’s
discussion will take us further towards a collective
response that is commensurate with the desperate
plight, and the almost unique resilience, of the people
in the Lake Chad basin.
The President: I thank Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
I give the floor to Ms. Askira.
Ms. Askira: I thank you, Sir, for allowing me to
speak at this meeting today.
May I kindly invite the Council to join me, here in
the outskirts of Maiduguri, the place where I live.
Please take a moment to picture a community
of vulnerable women and children outside the city,
with neither a floor nor a bed. There is a woman in
her early 70s lying sick in the sun, covering her body
with a carpet cloth; that is what she calls a blanket. Her
grandchildren, aged 4, 6 and 7, are sitting right next to
her, often with no idea of what to eat.
I was in this community, on the outskirts of
Maidugiri, three days ago. I went to give assistance and
give blankets to the children. This is to tell the Council
that such communities actually exist. They do not exist
because people choose to live there, but because people
do not have a better place to go.
Another is a young girl, Yaga, who looks a lot
like I did when I was 15 years old. We all know how
15-year-olds are. She was abducted by an armed group
and, fortunately, got released. Yaga is struggling to be
integrated into her community, her family, her friends,
people with whom she has been staying with her whole
life. I noticed the fear in her face when I was speaking
to her and she mentioned to me that she had suffered
from stigmatization. We all knew she was scared of
being alone. She was scared of people pointing to her a
terrorist. She was scared that people would look at her
as associated with Boko Haram. That girl could easily
have been me, but I had met her — who could not be

17-008417/23

S/PV.7861

Peace and security in Africa

me — and she was in this situation because we did not
do enough to prevent violent conflict from affecting
her. We could not protect her and we could not protect
her community.
She said: “I really want to be like you, Fatima,
because you inspire me.” That was so touching.
People here are not hopeless, but the frustration and
desperation make them want to make changes. I know
of many young people whose stories are inspiring. I
know a lady who actually volunteered her time to go
and teach the people in an internally displaced persons
(IDPs) camp. I know a group of young boys who came
up with a challenge to do something. They encouraged
many young people to engage in different ways to pass
on this message, enrol in school and even teach in their
community schools and in IDP camps, as well.
I started a campaign on 8 December to raise money
and get clothing and blankets for women and children
IDPs. Those who gave the most were people who did
not have much at all, but still gave because they did
not want anyone to sleep in the cold. By 3 January, we
were able to reach a little more than $1,500, with which
we managed to buy about 500 blankets and share them
with 500 people. It turns out that we are still receiving
a lot from people, because people are still supporting
one another. People are still believing that they should
actually help one another.
I launched the campaign through social media. It
got the attention of many and made an impact in the
community. I thought it was important to recognize
the collegial efforts of people on the ground who want
to remain your friends and who are changing life and
protecting the community to the best of their ability.
And to the members of the Security Council and the
Governments they represent, I want to say that ordinary
Nigerians like me are working every day to improve
security and reintegration into the community, and to
start rebuilding our lives and our region. We are grateful
for the Council’s political, military and financial
support. While the Council debates, our region is in
shambles. I want to add two points.
First, we are grateful for all the humanitarian and
development assistance. As the United Nations and its
members’ Governments design future programmes, I
would like to ask that they ensure that the programmes
they support have mechanisms to communicate with
and listen to communities, and that there is transparency
and flexibility. In some areas, we have seen that helping
8/23

12/01/2017

people recover is a challenge, and support is needed for
that. In other regions, it is still too unsafe for people to
relocate and we need aid that is adequate to addressing
such emergency situations — aid that prevents trauma
and local conflicts, promotes people’s coexistence,
affects communities and reduces tension.
Secondly, as the Council looks at security in our
region today, I would like to ask it to go beyond just
looking at the war against Boko Haram, extending it
to proactive prevention of violent conflict as a longterm solution to the emergent threat to the ethnic and
religious balance here in Nigeria and in the Lake Chad
region in general. We need a peace architecture, a way
for citizens — young and old, male and female, boys
and girls — and the State working together to reduce
the scourge of Boko Haram, but also to address the
conflict between farmers and herders and ethnic and
religious conflict. Right now peacebuilding is urgently
needed, especially when it can be used to engaged
young people and women in dealing with the horrors
we have seen from Boko Haram and the Islamic
State — not that they should stop at that. Of course, it
is impossible to exaggerate the humanitarian need, as I
highlighted before. From my story, we can see clearly
that the need for scaling up is plainly there. I believe
that donor agencies and the members of the Security
Council will try their best to actually see this scaled up
to the maximum.
I am grateful for the rare opportunity to share this
experience and some of my recommendations with
the Council. As a young woman, I am truly honoured
that the Council is listening to young people on the
front lines.
The President: On behalf of all the members of
the Security Council, I should like to thank our briefers
for their useful and informative reports, bringing to us
the complexity and scale of the challenge that is facing
the region — but also, like Fatima just did, a flavour
of what individuals are going through on the ground
as we speak, and of local campaigns and inititiatives.
I understand that, due to the late hour and the security
situation in north-eastern Nigeria, we fully understand
if Ms. Askira needs to leave the meeting, but I want
to thank her for joining us and for her excellent
contribution to this important meeting. I would like to
convey to her our support for her and her colleagues for
her invaluable input and for her efforts on a daily basis.
17-00841

12/01/2017

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.7861

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.

get aid out the door. If famines are man-made, that
means that the solutions are man-made as well.

Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank you
so much, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. I
also thank the briefers — Assistant Secretary-General
Zerihoun; Under-Secretary-General O’Brien, who has
led for so long on this issue and challenge; and, above
all, Ms. Askira, for sharing the vital voice from the
ground. I think what she described speaks to what the
briefers have noted, which is the generosity of people,
who have so little themselves, and how generous they
have been in opening up their homes to these internally
displaced persons. The fact that the vast majority of the
displaced in Maiduguri live with other families who
themselves are struggling to deal with this threat and
to deal with very difficult socioeconomic conditions,
really demonstrates tremendous goodness. Ms. Askira
is an embodiment of that and I thank her.

To be clear, it is impossible to overstate the savagery
of Boko Haram — the savagery of the group that has
set in motion the events that have given rise to these
conditions and the misery that they have caused around
the Lake Chad basin. This is a terrorist group that
forces mothers with infant children and girls as young
as 9 years old to walk into markets and detonate suicide
vests. Boko Haram fighters systematically enslave and
rape women and girls in camps deep in the forest, force
marriages and brainwash defenceless victims to get
them to carry out more attacks. They forcibly conscript
boys to fight in Boko Haram’s ranks, and they hold
those boys in captivity in virtual enslavement against
their will.

In 2016, a famine likely happened on our
watch — not in one of the places that dominates the
Security Council’s agenda, but in the Borno state of
north-eastern Nigeria, in the area of Bama — a likely
famine. Severe fighting kept humanitarian agencies
from reaching Bama for nearly 18 months. When they
were finally able to access the town and assess the
situation, they found that at least 2,000 people in Bama
had died from the effects of famine last year, mostly
young children.
The situation in Bama has since improved somewhat
with the arrival of aid. But right now, across northeastern Nigeria there are far more towns that are not
getting food assistance, where people are experiencing
the most extreme levels of hunger. As many as 800,000
people are living just like the people of Bama last year,
cut off from food aid; 800,000 people who are at acute
risk — as we sit here — of literally starving to death.
Famines, as we all know, are not natural
occurrences. Famines are man-made. The fact that
anyone could be experiencing famine conditions in
the year 2017 should spur the Council to do everything
it possibly can to ensure that food assistance reaches
those who are starving. The world does not lack for food
to send, but aid workers need more funding and they
need greater security. And the Nigerian Government,
at every level — federal, state, and local — must
collaborate with United Nations humanitarian agencies
and international non-governmental organizations to

The Chibok girls kidnapped more than 1,000 days
ago from their school remain the most well-known
example of Boko Haram’s brutality, with 195 of the
original 276 girls still in captivity to this day. They are
among the thousands and thousands of people held by
Boko Haram, as millions across the region live in fear
that Boko Haram will capture them or their loved ones
next. The deepening linkages between Boko Haram and
the Islamic State are alarming and ominously suggest
that such a clear and present threat to international
peace and security may get worse.
As the Council has heard, the statistics are grim.
According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, there are 1.64 million internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in north-eastern Nigeria
alone. Because that area remains so insecure, owing to
Boko Haram, 76 per cent of the IDPs fear going back to
their homes, where they could plant crops and take care
of themselves and their families. Across the entire Lake
Chad basin region, 5.1 million people are food-insecure,
which includes 455,000 with what the United Nations
system and others call severe acute malnutrition.
In plain English, severe acute malnutrition means
that if those 450,000 kids do not get food rations and
emergency nutrition interventions quickly, one out of
five of those 450,000 will likely die.
Statistics alone cannot convey the human cost of
the crisis or the extent of the brutality that drives it.
Last spring, I visited refugees camps in the region — in
Cameroon and Nigeria — to meet with victims of Boko
Haram. I have seen many refugee camps over the course
of my career, but meeting those who fled from Boko

17-008419/23

S/PV.7861

Peace and security in Africa

Haram was like nothing I had ever experienced before.
Virtually every individual whom I met described for
me either a close relative who had been slaughtered by
Boko Haram or an experience where they had had a
child who was literally grabbed from their arms — an
infant child, daughter or son. The marauders just came
in and stole their child. Many of us here are parents and
can well imagine how a parent must feel remembering
the clutching and the cries of their child as they were
taken by such savages.
In the wake of crimes like that, those broken,
shattered families are too frequently stuck in squalid
IDP camps, with virtually no services, no health care
and no education. Those are the people now dying
because assistance is not getting through fast enough.
I would urge the Council to witness that situation up
close, travel to the region to see the crisis and meet
the families, speak to men who have seen their wives
and daughters dragged off into the bush, women who
have watched their sons gunned down before them.
We must be emboldened by their pain. There should
be more people here in the Security Council Chamber
for today’s discussion. This kind of thing is not run of
the mill. It is an extreme crisis, and we have to draw
more coverage to it. I think that a trip could help to
achieve that. But we also have to bring a greater sense
of urgency to our deliberations.
It is definitely the case that there are many in the
Nigerian Government — and I know that we will hear
from our Nigerian colleagues — who are working
tirelessly to save lives. On the other hand, we continue
to see reports, including this week, of some who dispute
the magnitude of the crisis and state that humanitarian
agencies are exaggerating the statistics. Some have even
maligned the role of the United Nations in delivering
lifesaving assistance. It is extremely important that
United Nations officials be able to get in there and visit
people in need so that they can ascertain in an impartial
way what the needs are.
Part of what is causing some of the access issues
is a concern about the rampant insecurity, a concern
about Boko Haram, and that is a very legitimate concern
and something that preoccupies the humanitarian aid
workers in the region as well. But it is essential for the
aid groups, the United Nations and the Government
to expeditiously develop a plan for improving access.
Nearly every time the humanitarian agencies acquire
access to a new location that had previously been
off-limits, the needs encountered prove far worse
10/23

12/01/2017

that had been imagined before. For example, when
United Nations agencies and other non-governmental
organizations arrived in the town of Rann in Borno
state on 22 December, just a couple of weeks ago, aid
workers discovered around 400 fresh graves of people
who had just died of hunger and untreated illness.
What more can the Council do? In order to defeat
Boko Haram, the international community has to
generally devote far more resources to supporting
a more effective, regionally led military response.
Here too, there are positive signs. Together, Nigeria,
the Niger, Chad, Cameroon and Benin are slowly but
steadily improving regional military coordination.
Boko Haram controls a small fraction of the territory
it had back in 2015. The military operations of those
countries deserve our collective support, and the United
States is dispatching advisers, sharing intelligence and
providing training, equipment and logistic support to
our partners. But there is no separating the imperative
of defeating Boko Haram from the need to address
the humanitarian catastrophe unfolding in the region.
That means that Governments must facilitate access
for humanitarian organizations, and I cannot stress
access enough.
The Nigerian Government must work with the
United Nations and regional Governments to develop
options for delivering aid to more areas, even near
the front lines. Although we know that the military
operations must continue, humanitarian organizations
are ready. They work in war zones all the time, but they
need permission to move in. In some cases, security is
still fragile, so the aid groups can reach communities
only with the help of armed convoys that must be
coordinated with the Nigerian military. Unfortunately,
coordinating aid with the availability of armed convoys
is now turning into a serious bottleneck, a serious
impediment. The Government and the United Nations
will need to work together on expediting aid delivery.
It is a logistic and operational question that needs to be
resolved soon.
Donors have to do far more. As we have heard, the
Lake Chad basin region has become the site of one of the
world’s greatest overlooked crises, and I think that we
see it in the modest level of interest in today’s meeting.
The United Nations 2016 humanitarian appeal ended
up just half-funded. The States Members of the United
Nations need to move quickly to donate the $1 billion
that the United Nations has requested for this year.
17-00841

12/01/2017

Peace and security in Africa

Let me conclude with a final suggestion, and
that is, once again, to reinforce my claim that far
more Security Council involvement is needed. What
we are discussing today is a transnational, counterterrorism challenge involving one of the world’s most
dangerous terrorist groups, and the region’s desperate
humanitarian needs are the result of that group’s
monstrous actions. The situation in the Lake Chad
basin region presents therefore the textbook definition
of a threat to international peace and security. It is what
the Council is on this Earth to address.
Let us do it then; let us see the crisis for ourselves.
Let us demand that the United Nations and its partners
have access to the millions of people who so badly
need food, water and medicine, and let us look for
other ways to have the United Nations play a positive
role, such as helping to reintegrate the victims of Boko
Haram’s violence — too many of whom, as we have
heard, carry a stigma when they are freed or manage to
escape. Or, after discussing on Tuesday the importance
of sustaining peace (see S/PV.7857), let us work on
rebuilding institutions in that region.
The need could not be more urgent. In an interview
last week, a Médecins sans frontières doctor talked
about what it was like to visit camps in Borno, Nigeria.
She said,
“when I go to the field, I am used to being
surrounded by a lot of kids, but in Borno, the kids,
especially children under five, were missing. Most
of them have, unfortunately, already died”.
A 31-year-old mother in Cameroon named Dayo
told an aid worker that she was sometimes so hungry
that she was losing her senses. Dayo said,
“When somebody spoke to me, I couldn’t even tell
if it was a man or a woman”.
Or finally, Awa Mudu, stranded in another IDP
camp, was interviewed coming back from a nearby
forest, carrying some leaves to eat. As Awa said, “The
leaves are not enough to live on, but that is all we have.”
The Council can help give the people of the Lake Chad
basin, people like Awa, more to live on. But we must
do far more.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank today’s briefers, and to pay special tribute to
Ms. Fatima Askira for the bravery she represents and
the inspiration she gives to many.

S/PV.7861

The United Kingdom is taking the floor in this
afternoon’s open meeting because we believe we
cannot afford to stay silent on this issue, as Ms. Power
has so clearly articulated. We have just heard that
the humanitarian situation in the Lake Chad basin is
simply horrifying. More than 11 million people are in
need of humanitarian assistance. More than 2 million
are displaced in north-eastern Nigeria alone, with
hundreds of thousands more in the Niger, Cameroon
and Chad. And it will only get worse. In a matter of
months, supplies from the poor harvest will begin to
run out, further compounding a disastrous situation.
Behind the suffering of the millions of men,
women and children in the Lake Chad basin lie the
brutality and unrelenting cruelty of Boko Haram.
The group is a clear threat to international peace
and security, and we have a clear responsibility to
take action in response. That action will require a
sustained, multi-year international effort to address
the overwhelming humanitarian need and the drivers
of conflict that have helped Boko Haram flourish in
the first place. We must therefore up our game. I call
on donors, Governments in the region and international
non-governmental organizations to act with urgency
to step up their efforts. Collectively, our response so
far has frankly been inadequate and underfunded. The
United Nations has called for $1 billion for Nigeria and
$310 for Cameroon. The United Kingdom will do its bit.
In September, we announced an additional $97 million
in humanitarian aid for the region on top of our existing
multi-year commitment of $110 million. I hope that
others will join us.
But money alone is not enough. We must also see
strong, effective leadership, both from Governments in
the region and from the United Nations. We look to the
Organization to increase its capacity in the Lake Chad
basin and develop multi-year plans, coordinated across
borders, to aid recovery. We in this Chamber must also
show leadership ourselves. A Security Council visit
to the region in the coming weeks would be a signal
of that leadership and a chance for all of us to see at
first hand the challenges the region is facing. One
such is the worrying report of forcibly incentivized
returns of displaced people to areas that remain unsafe.
When one has fled murder or enslavement, it is simply
unthinkable to be forced back to the scene of that horror,
and unthinkable to be lied to or coerced into returning.
All the parties to the conflict have a responsibility to
respect international conventions on returns and on

17-0084111/23

S/PV.7861

Peace and security in Africa

the protection of civilians more broadly. I urge them
to do so.
Ultimately, a humanitarian response is just one part
of the solution. It is a vital part, of course, but it must
be delivered hand in hand with a coherent security,
political and economic response as well. There is
little sense in healing the wounds of conflict without
addressing its root causes. Let us therefore call on all
Governments in the region to win the peace — to tackle
underdevelopment and other conflict drivers, and to do
so in a way that respects international humanitarian
and human-rights laws. That means doing so for all
people in the region and making sure that women have
an equal say and an equal role in reaching that peace.
It is vital that strategies for tackling Boko Haram
include women’s voices. That includes all efforts to free
the remaining Chibok girls, and also when providing
protection for women affected by sexual and genderbased violence.
I would like to conclude by turning to Maiduguri
in north-eastern Nigeria. We raised the subject of the
plight of displaced people in that city six months ago,
when we last discussed this issue (see S/PV.7748).
Six months on, the situation remains desperate. More
than 1 million displaced people now call Maiduguri
home. The cost of food has doubled in the past year.
Disease and hunger are all too common. But there are
signs of hope. In the past three months, Médecins Sans
Frontières (MSF) has delivered 810 tons of food to
Maiduguri. As the head of the MSF mission there made
clear, it is not normally the role of a medical charity to
provide people with food. But faced with a desperate
need, MSF stepped up to help. That is the spirit that we
should all channel in the weeks and months ahead if we
are to end the catastrophe in the Lake Chad basin.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Stephen O’Brien, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. Tayé
Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for their briefings on the situation in the
Lake Chad region. I would particularly like to thank
Ms. Fatima Yerima Askira of the Borno Women
Development Initiative for her especially powerful
testimony, which is a source of inspiration for all of us.
As we have seen in recent weeks, Boko Haram,
while weakened, still has a real ability to conduct
targeted, lethal attacks, particularly in Borno state,
and, as we have just heard, the crisis it has provoked has
12/23

12/01/2017

resulted in enormous humanitarian problems. Women
in particular have been targeted. This vulnerable
population is not safe anywhere, and we are well aware
of how difficult the situation in the camps for displaced
persons is. Too often, the Lake Chad basin is not on the
the major international media’s radar screen, despite
the fact that it is one of the regions of the world most in
need of us and our engagement. In that regard, we are
actively encouraging the efforts of the countries of the
region and the United Nations and working with them
on three main fronts.
The first is military, with the goal of combating
Boko Haram with all the determination that requires
and weakening its ability to do harm. We know that
the military effort led by the countries of the region,
coordinated through a multinational hybrid force,
is a particularly difficult one both militarily and
financially. We are all united in the fight against
terrorism, whatever form it takes and wherever it
strikes. That is why France has expressed its solidarity
through its active support for the operations against
Boko Haram led by the countries of the region. In
particular, we have been supplying useful intelligence
to the countries involved as well as logistical support to
Chad and the Niger and training for the Cameroonian
forces. The current military operations have already
shown their effectiveness. Many soldiers have already
shed their blood in the regional offensive and we pay
them respectful tribute.
The second priority is the humanitarian one, for,
as we have said, the problems are huge. It is vital to
ensure that the United Nations focuses all its efforts,
in close collaboration with all its partners and the
local authorities, on responding to the people’s needs.
In that regard, we hope that the humanitarian hubs
established by the United Nations in north-eastern
Nigeria as base camps for the humanitarian workers
will enable them to access the population more quickly
and will be operational as soon as possible. We are
especially grateful to Médecins Sans Frontières and
all the humanitarian organizations that are working on
the ground. I should recall here that international law
applies to everyone and that all the parties are obliged to
allow the United Nations and its partners access to the
displaced. The countries involved in the crisis are on the
front lines when it comes to facilitating humanitarian
access, coordinating the various initiatives and ensuring
that aid for the displaced is not diverted. France will do
its full share in this collective effort. For 2017 alone
17-00841

12/01/2017

Peace and security in Africa

we have already contributed €13.5 million in response
to the humanitarian needs of the countries affected by
Boko Haram.
The third priority is development in the regions
where Boko Haram has established itself. Without
that essential ingredient, this terrorist movement will
continue to prosper thanks to the poverty and sense of
exclusion that fuel it. That is why France has launched
the Lake Chad Initiative with funding amounting to
€35 million. This major initiative seeks to promote the
economic recovery of the region and the creation of
employment, especially for young people, who are, it
should be remembered, the first target of Boko Haram.
In the context just referred to, the Lake Chad basin
region must be at the heart of the Council’s priorities. As
the Secretary-General has urged, let us combine all the
military, humanitarian and development means at our
disposal in order to make a difference on the ground.
In that spirit, France strongly supports the plan for an
upcoming visit by the Security Council to the region.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun,
Under-Secretary-General O’Brien and Ms. Askira for
their briefings.

S/PV.7861

and further eliminate the threats posed by terrorism to
the countries of the region.
Secondly, there must be greater cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations, including the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Lake Chad Basin Commission.
The international community must respect the leading
role played by regional organizations in addressing
the region’s problems and fully leverage the unique
expertise and advantages that those organizations
have with a view to building synergies and promoting
appropriate solutions to regional hotspot issues through
such methods as dialogue, mediation and good offices.
Thirdly, the countries of the region must also
be provided with assistance to accelerate their
development and address the root causes of conflict.
The international community should provide financial
and technical assistance to those countries on the basis
of respect for their national sovereignty, so that they can
truly build their capacities and enhance their economic
and social development.

Recently, the overall situation in Central and
West Africa has been stable. The regional countries
have strengthened their security cooperation, and
the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF) of the
Lake Chad basin countries has made good progress
in combating terrorism. China appreciates those
developments. On the other hand, the security problems
and the humanitarian situation in the Central and West
African region remain very serious. Repeated terrorist
attacks and displaced civilians, together with rampant
violent crimes, pose a threat to the security and stability
of the region. The international community should
strengthen its support for the countries of Central and
West Africa, including the countries of the Lake Chad
basin region.

Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi has just
completed a visit to five African countries, namely,
Madagascar, Zambia, Tanzania, the Republic of the
Congo and Nigeria. That visit achieved its planned goals
of deepening friendship, enhancing communication,
aligning ideas, building greater confidence and
deepening our cooperation. China will continue to
uphold the policy of sincerity, real results, affinity and
good faith and the correct viewpoint on righteousness
and benefit. China will faithfully implement the results
of the Johannesburg Summit meeting of the Forum
on China-Africa Cooperation. China is ready to work
with the international community and the countries
concerned to support the countries of Central and West
Africa in their efforts to achieve lasting peace and
common prosperity and make new contributions to
peace and development in Africa.

First, they should support countries of the region
in their counter-terrorism efforts. African counterterrorism efforts constitute a very important component
in international counter-terrorism efforts. Subject to the
condition of respecting the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the countries concerned, the
international community should assist the countries of
the region in building their capacity to fight terrorism,
enable the MNJTF to effectively conduct its operations,

Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking the three briefers on the
security and humanitarian situation in the Lake Chad
basin region. I thank Ms. Askira in particular for giving
us a local view on the situation. Those briefings have
given us some idea of the humanitarian tragedy that the
region is facing. It is a tragedy that the countries and
people of the region have been suffering for some time
now. Unfortunately, the crisis has gotten more serious

17-0084113/23

S/PV.7861

Peace and security in Africa

recently, as was indicated by the briefers, owing in
particular to the security situation in certain countries,
such as Mali and Libya, and the environmental threats
in the region.
The military operations of the Multinational Joint
Task Force (MNJTF) have made significant progress
in fighting Boko Haram and have been able to limit its
activity. We commend the leadership of the MNJTF.
Egypt calls upon the international partners and the
international community to increase their aid to the
MNJTF so that it can, once and for all, complete its task,
put an end to Boko Haram and liberate the outstanding
areas still under that group’s control.
With regard to prevention, Egypt would invite
the international community to provide the necessary
support to the Governments of the region to help
them with their rehabilitation programmes for former
Boko Haram fighters and to help the Governments
to rehabilitate the villages that have been freed from
Boko Haram.
At the 10 January ministerial open debate under
your presidency (see S/PV.7857), my delegation
stressed the need to adopt an approach that would
address the root causes of those problems. The crisis in
the Lake Chad basin region is an example of a situation
that would benefit from such an approach. We need
to concentrate on developing institutional and human
capacity in order to eradicate the terrorist groups and
counter their ability to recruit young people to commit
crimes on their behalf. That requires assistance to the
countries of the region so that they are able to invest in
health and economic and social development projects.
We need to build and sustain peace in order to put
an end to the crisis, as Ambassador Power said a few
moments ago. That means, inter alia, that we need to
have a new comprehensive Sahel strategy, because the
strategy up until now has been rather lacking.
The approach that I have referred to requires
the international community, including the United
Nations and its specialized agencies and regional and
subregional organizations, to pool their efforts and work
together with the States of the region. What is needed
is coordination and cooperation among the mechanisms
of all of the parties concerned, because that will ensure
peace and save the peoples of the region from political,
humanitarian and security crises.
Egypt is fully prepared to step up its cooperation
with the countries of the Lake Chad basin region
14/23

12/01/2017

through projects and programmes under the Egyptian
Partnership Agency for Development, with a view to
alleviating the crisis faced by the region and its people.
That will be within the framework of a comprehensive
strategy aimed at sustaining peace in that region and
other regions of the African continent.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank Mr. O’Brien, Mr. Zerihoun
and Ms. Askira for their important briefings.
Years of violence by Boko Haram have profoundly
undermined peace, security and livelihoods in the
Lake Chad basin region. The ongoing hit-and-run
attacks by Boko Haram have displaced millions of
people, disrupting agricultural activities and access
to basic services. As indicated by our briefers today,
the humanitarian crisis in the region has unfortunately
become even worse since the previous briefing in July
2016 (see S/PV.7748).
Japan has focused its financial assistance to the
Lake Chad basin region on humanitarian assistance and
the strengthening of social stability. On the bilateral
front, we announced approximately $3 million in food
assistance to the Niger in December 2016. In the light
of the large gender impact of the Boko Haram crisis,
we have also been supporting the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women’s Gender-Responsive Humanitarian Action
and Assistance of Women and Girls Affected by Boko
Haram Terrorism in Diffa, the Niger, since last year. We
hope to do more. But obviously, the scope and intricacy
of the challenges facing the region require more than
humanitarian assistance. The continuous efforts of
the Multinational Joint Task Force and other military
operations by countries in the region have significantly
contained Boko Haram and dislodged them from
their former strongholds. As tragically illustrated
by the attacks on soldiers in Diffa on 31 December,
the region must, however, remain vigilant against
insurgents, who are still capable of attacking villages
and military installations.
Along with the progress in military operations, the
long-term socioeconomic development challenges also
require persistent attention. As noted by the President
of Nigeria during the Dakar International Forum
on Peace and Security in Africa, which was held in
December last year, reducing youth unemployment
promotes stabilization and discourages recruitment
by Boko Haram. We must not allow Boko Haram to
continue to poison young people, who are among the
17-00841

12/01/2017

Peace and security in Africa

most precious assets of Africa. The Council needs to
mobilize comprehensive responses to the complex
issues affecting the Lake Chad basin region and work
towards sustaining peace. It is equally vital that the
countries in the region demonstrate ownership of
the socioeconomic development activities in their
communities over the long term.
Japan supports the proposed Security Council
mission to the region aimed at assessing the situation in
the Lake Chad basin region and hopes that it will result
in useful discussions with the regional stakeholders
and demonstrate the keen awareness of the Council of
the crisis.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Mr. Zerihoun, Mr. O’Brien, and
Ms. Fatima Yerima Askira for their briefings.
The situation in the Lake Chad basin region is very
alarming. Lake Chad, or the “vanishing lake”, as it is
also known, has already lost 90 per cent of its surface
area over the past 40 years. Of the population around
the basin, there are approximately 10 million people in
urgent need of humanitarian assistance. That number is
equal to three times the total population of my country.
Unfortunately, however, that crisis has received very
little media coverage, and the international community
does not know very much about it.
Uruguay has been following the crisis in that
area from a comprehensive point of view. There are
a number of aggravating factors contributing to the
crisis, in particular the very difficult security situation
undermined by the terrorist group, Boko Haram, the lack
of food supplies, and the unmet needs of the population,
among others. The multidimensional nature of the
humanitarian crisis in the Lake Chad basin region has a
whole range of causes and consequences that everyone
here is aware of and which we do not need to spell out
in detail here.
Last Tuesday, we held an open debate (see
S/PV.7857) at the ministerial level on conflict prevention
and sustaining peace, during which much was said
about the importance of preventing conflict and the
need to carry out activities that contribute to sustaining
peace. The Lake Chad basin region has been facing a
multifaceted structural crisis for many years now, and
it is necessary to undertake activities that not only
mitigate the terrorist threat and provide food supplies
to the population, but that also contribute to long-term
stability. The Security Council and the United Nations

S/PV.7861

as a whole should make full use of their interventions
so as to address and contain the crisis there.
According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, there are 1.9 million internally
displaced people in Nigeria alone, of which half are
children. The region is very insecure, with very high
population growth rates, and is affected by climate
change, poverty and low levels of investment and social
infrastructure. The region cannot have a promising
future unless its countries, and its communities in
particular, are given the necessary tools to emerge
from this severe crisis and build lasting peace. The
international community should spare no effort to
provide the region with those instruments. That is why
Uruguay considers it important to acknowledge the role
of the United Nations specialized agencies, as well as
that of the donor countries that have lived up to their
pledges of assistance. We would also like to recognize
the role of the Multinational Joint Task Force and its
progress in combating Boko Haram. That is a clear
example of the fact that coordinated regional efforts
are essential in crises of this type, where those who are
trying to undermine stability recognize neither borders
nor nations.
In a region where 10 million people need assistance,
where 7 million people are severely undernourished and
2.7 million people are internally displaced, we need to
address the deep-rooted causes of the crisis, including
hunger, lack of education and access to water, insecurity,
lack of medical facilities, among other factors. We need,
therefore, to offer lasting solutions to the people in the
region that can bolster their capacity for resilience and
adaptability in the face of so much adversity.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I thank the President for
organizing this briefing. I would also like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun,and UnderSecretary-General O’Brien for their updates. I also
thank Ms. Askira for her testimony.
Italy has been following very closely the situation
in north-eastern Nigeria, the Lake Chad basin and
the region as a whole, where, as we have heard,
there is an ongoing complex crisis encompassing
security, development and humanitarian factors. In a
demonstration of its concern, Italy recently decided to
open a new Embassy in Niamey, the Niger, which will
provide an addition to our already extensive network in
that part of the world.

17-0084115/23

S/PV.7861

Peace and security in Africa

First, with regard to the security dimension,
although some progress has been achieved against
Boko Haram, it continues to represent a serious threat
to peace and security. We therefore fully support the
ongoing efforts by the Governments of the region,
regional organizations and the Multinational Joint Task
Force to curb the activities of Boko Haram. We support
their efforts, both bilaterally and through the European
Union — which, by the way, is providing substantial
funding for the mission. Moreover, we are concerned
by the numerous trafficking networks that are operating
in the region. We cannot underestimate their ties with
Boko Haram and transnational criminal activities. We
believe that we must show resolve in combating all
instances of smuggling, especially human trafficking,
which is connected to that phenomenon.
In that regard, I would like to mention resolution
2195 (2014), which calls for international action to secure
borders and prosecute illicit networks so as to prevent
terrorists from benefiting from transnational organized
crime, and urges Member States to enhance regional
coordination on cross-border counter-measures to fight
terrorist- and other related crimes. We believe that the
role played by regional and subregional organizations
is essential in countering those threats, and the Council
must encourage them to play an even more proactive
role by also developing a comprehensive regional
strategy. In that respect, this very debate could perhaps
give new momentum to the proposal for a joint summit
between the Economic Community of Central African
States and the Economic Community of West African
States to discuss the threat posed by Boko Haram
from a regional perspective. That is why we also fully
support the idea of a Security Council mission to the
region, as it would provide an opportunity to deliver a
strong unified message of support and commitment, as
well as an opportunity to examine the effects of climate
change on security and the displacement of people in
the region.
Turning briefly to the humanitarian aspect, we
have heard about the terrible situation that millions of
people in the region are facing. Boko Haram, which
compounds that difficulty, continues to use sexual and
gender-based violence and rape as weapons of war, as
well as to exploit women and minors as suicide bombers.
We therefore believe that efforts to prevent and address
sexual violence should also be strategically aligned
with efforts to prevent violent extremism and terrorism
in the region. We are particularly concerned by the
16/23

12/01/2017

increasing number of internally displaced persons.
Although we have heard the sheer numbers of people
involved, we also wish to draw attention to the fact that
the current instability, the effects of climate change
in the region and the movement of populations create
an environment that is conducive to illicit activities,
such as smuggling and human trafficking. In that
respect, we believe that it is important to increase the
involvement of economic and development actors, such
as the World Bank, and to direct our efforts towards
institution-building, which other colleagues have
mentioned, and towards strengthening infrastructure
in the region. Accordingly, it is key to extend to the
countries of the region initiatives developed by the
Peacebuilding Commission based on the concept of
sustaining peace and preventive diplomacy, so as
to ensure the implementation of early development
programmes as a potential means to reduce the risks of
radicalization.
In conclusion, Italy stands ready to support
the efforts of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and other international agencies
to bring relief to the people affected by the massive
humanitarian crisis in the Lake Chad basin region,
as well as the Government of Nigeria, which must be
supported in its tireless efforts. We must also strengthen
cooperation with the agencies and non-governmental
agencies on the ground. Italy also contributes bilaterally
and through United Nations agencies, in particular by
funding projects aimed at strengthening the resiliency
of the local population and mitigating the risks of
internal displacement and migration.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun and Under-SecretaryGeneral O’Brien for their briefings on the security and
humanitarian situation in the Lake Chad basin region.
I also wish to thank Ms. Askira for her briefing via
video teleconference.
The security challenge faced by the region,
including but not limited to the threats of terrorism and
violent extremism, should indeed be a matter of huge
concern. Both Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun
and Under-Secretary-General O’Brien were very
convincing in their description of the magnitude of the
challenge that the region is facing. At the same time, we
take note of the progress that the countries of the region
have made in the fight against Boko Haram through the
Multinational Joint Task Force of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission. However, we know that that terrorist
17-00841

12/01/2017

Peace and security in Africa

group continues to pose serious a threat to peace and
stability in the region by targeting innocent civilians,
particularly women and children.
The attempts by Boko Haram to forge links with
known regional and international terrorist networks,
including Al-Qaida, Da’esh and Al-Shabaab, present
a matter that needs to be taken seriously. Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun has highlighted the various
dimensions of the threat posed by Boko Haram, and we
share those concerns. We believe that it is critical to
support the countries of the region and their various
existing security mechanisms by sharing intelligence
and by building their capacity to handle old and new
security challenges.
In that regard, we take note of the work being done
by the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
(CTITF) in cooperation with other United Nations
bodies, and we encourage the CTITF to help the region
develop a comprehensive and integrated strategy to
counter terrorism and violent extremism. Furthermore,
the need for the coordination of efforts among the
United Nations, the African Union and their respective
regional mechanisms cannot be overemphasized. In that
context, we believe that the proposal for the Security
Council to undertake a visit to the region together with
the African Union Peace and Security Council would
send the right message. We fully subscribe to that idea
and share the sentiments of United States Ambassador
Power on that matter. She was very convincing, as she
was with regard to the other matters that she mentioned.
We are trying to cooperate with some of the
countries of the region bilaterally in order to exchange
experiences and share intelligence, particularly on
linkages among various regional terrorist groups. It is
our hope that there will be more enhanced cooperation
and coordination on the basis of a common strategy
among the countries of the region. We understand the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in the Lake Chad
basin region. It has resulted from a number of factors,
including the security threats that it has been facing.
Although there are competing priorities for addressing
the worsening humanitarian situation around the world
and the available resources are not commensurate with
the challenges at hand, we believe that the situation
in the Lake Chad basin region, particularly the
plight of women, children, girls and minors there, is
excruciatingly painful. We therefore remain hopeful
that the United Nations and the rest of the international

S/PV.7861

community will redouble their efforts to respond to the
humanitarian challenge facing that region.
Moreover, we cannot overlook the impact of
climate change and the extent to which it fuels conflict.
That is one of the areas in which the imperatives of
development, humanitarian concerns, the dangers of
conflict, the problems associated with climate change
and human rights concerns converge. It is therefore
critical that the challenges facing the region be
addressed in a comprehensive manner.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to express my appreciation to Under-Secretary-General
O’Brien for the major contribution that he continues to
make in discharging the mandate of his Office, not only
with respect to the Lake Chad basin region but also in
connection with our own region — the Horn of Africa.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We express our deep
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General O’Brien,
Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun and Ms. Fatima
Askira for their comprehensive briefings. We also
welcome the representative of Nigeria.
We would like to raise several points.
First, we take note of the situation in the Lake
Chad basin area, which we consider to be difficult
and volatile.
Secondly, Kazakhstan strongly supports the work of
the African Union aimed at enhancing the effectiveness
of the Multinational Joint Task Force on the fight
against Boko Haram. This terrorist organization is
threatening not just the Lake Chad basin area, but the
African continent as a whole. In the struggle against
Boko Haram, a global approach on the part of the
international community, with leading functions on the
part of the African countries, is needed.
Thirdly, Boko Haram remains a great threat to
the region, despite the recent achievements reported
by the countries of the region, which produced some
positive results through increased military cooperation.
Kazakhstan strongly condemns the deadly attack that
occurred last December, in which 57 people were killed
by two women suicide bombers in Maiduguri, Nigeria.
We commend the progress made by Benin, Cameroon,
Nigeria, Chad and other countries of the region in
terms of the geographical area of operational activity
and potential of this terrorist organization.

17-0084117/23

S/PV.7861

Peace and security in Africa

Fourthly, another aspect of this fight is the
deteriorating humanitarian situation. The humanitarian
crisis has worsened despite the military success against
the group and is now one of the largest in the world. More
than 7 million people in Nigeria, the Niger, Cameroon
and Chad are internally displaced as a result. As was
mentioned by the representative of the United Kingdom,
more than 11 million people are in need of humanitarian
assistance. Moreover, we have to ensure respect for
the human rights of children, women, youth and all
other vulnerable groups in the region. The slogan of
our campaign to the Security Council included energy,
water and food security for all. We need to ensure such
important aspects of security for the region. We also
emphasize in this regard that significant numbers of
refugees and internally displaced persons add pressure
on host communities that are already insecure in terms
of those important pillars.
We therefore also support the Economic
Community of West African States initiative to create a
special fund of solidarity with the victims of terrorism.
As our ministers discussed two days ago, we are
convinced that the long-term stability and sustainable
peace can be achieved only by understanding the strong
connection between peace, security and development.
In this regard, we should address the root causes of
the crisis.
Fifthly, another problem is that some areas of the
region remain inaccessible to humanitarian actors
owing to the continued threat posed by Boko Haram.
We believe that Council members must focus on how to
increase the volume of humanitarian aid to the region
and ensure that it reaches its final destination in full.
Finally, we commend the efforts of and measures
taken by the United Nations, the African Union,
international organizations and Governments to
introduce peace initiatives in the Lake Chad basin
area, thus requiring a synthesis between bottomup approaches and top-down strategies in a way that
brings about transformation.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation would like to congratulate the
Swedish presidency of the Council for having convened
this timely debate on the complex, multidimensional
situation in the Lake Chad basin. It really is an urgent
issue of concern, as was described very eloquently this
afternoon by our briefers, Mr. Zerihoun, Mr. O’Brien
and Ms. Askira, whom we all thank for their respective
18/23

12/01/2017

statements and for the updated and detailed information
that they provided us.
Without referring back to the origins of the crisis,
I think it fair to say that the physical constraints facing
the area, including drought, desertification and climate
change, compounded by the overexploitation of natural
resources, are at the root of the structural vulnerability
of the countries and the peoples of the Lake Chad basin.
The situation exacerbates the effects and consequences
of social conflicts relating to access to and the use and
allocation of the basin’s natural resources.
All of these factors taken together, as well as their
negative impact on the social and economic fronts,
have made this area fertile ground for the deadly
activities of the Boko Haram terrorist group. In that
respect, we welcome the fact, as has been mentioned
that during the past year its spread was stemmed
thanks to the concerted efforts of the countries of the
region, supported in particular by the African Union,
subregional organizations and other organizations and
countries throughout the world.
But despite Boko Haram having been militarily
weakened by the regional, coordinated response against
it through, inter alia, the Multinational Joint Task
Force, we must point out that it is by no means defeated
and retains the capacity to wreak havoc, as it continues
to demonstrate through various asymmetrical attacks
and other acts of savagery. These residual activities
unfortunately continue to have devastating effects
on the political, social, economic, humanitarian and
human rights situation in the areas where the group
continues to carry out its attacks. Thus in addition to
military action, an urgent and adequate humanitarian
response must be provided so as to meet the numerous
challenges on the ground, which include the massive
displacement of people, the specific protection needs
of refugees and displaced persons, food insecurity, and
taking responsibility for the victims as well as for exBoko Haram fighters and their families, with a view
to reintegrating them into their already crisis-affected
societies of origin.
The report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Central Africa and the activities of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (S/2016/996), issued
in late November 2016, indicates that there were
approximately 1,500 Boko Haram defectors in recent
months. In this respect, the international call issued with
17-00841

12/01/2017

Peace and security in Africa

a view to enabling the reintegration of such defectors
and members of their families should be heeded.
We commend the efforts undertaken by partners,
including members of the Council, of course, and those
deployed by humanitarian organizations, including the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
Médecins sans frontières and other agencies. However,
my delegation calls on the international community to
increase its support for the region in the fight against
Boko Haram by continuing to provide humanitarian
assistance and support for early recovery, which the
region urgently needs.
Here we would underline the crucial importance
of funding. As Mr. O’Brien noted, $1.5 billion is
being requested by humanitarian organizations to
respond to the most urgent needs for 2017. It would
also be desirable for the international community to
provide political, logistical and financial support to the
regional initiatives and structures that were created to
overcome the challenges facing the region, including
the Multinational Joint Task Force and the Lake Chad
Basin Commission.
Nevertheless, the mobilization of the region at
the national and subregional levels remains a priority.
In that connection, it is important, as the SecretaryGeneral has noted, for the Economic Community of
West African States and the Economic Community of
Central African States finally to be able to hold the
planned summit of Heads of State and Government on
Boko Haram in order to devise a interregional strategy
to address the crisis caused by that group, but also to
specifically address the root causes that contributed to
its emergence and resilience.
In addition to the military and humanitarian
dimensions of our response, we must also consider the
equally important elements of education, information
and communication — with particular emphasis on
raising awareness among the population, especially
women and young people, and on engaging in dialogue
with religious and other leaders, who have a key role
to play in countering the violent extremist narrative.
Similarly, in order to secure the tenuous progress made
in our response to the crisis, our strategy must bolster
the resilience of the States and communities of the Lake
Chad basin region through urgent interventions within
a broader long-term development framework.
In conclusion, the Security Council must actively
consider the issue and show proactive solidarity to

S/PV.7861

the States, organizations and humanitarian groups of
the region that provide emergency aid to individuals
and communities in need. Given the urgency of the
situation, an imminent Security Council visit to the
Lake Chad basin countries, as some delegations have
suggested, would be a clear show of the support that
we would like to see, as it could give new life to efforts
under way to resolve the crisis.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
O’Brien and Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun
for their detailed briefings about the development
of the military, political and humanitarian situation
in the Lake Chad basin region. We would also like
to thank Ms. Fatima Yerima Askira for her very
moving statement.
We are particularly concerned about the continuing
activities of Boko Haram, which, in spite of the losses
that it has suffered, remains a major source of instability
in Cameroon, the Niger, Nigeria and Chad. The fact
that Boko Haram pledged allegiance to Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant in March 2015 makes it even
more urgent to mount an immediate, unified and robust
response to the terrorist threat in Africa.
We are very worried about the group’s new tactic,
whereby it refrains from direct clashes with Government
armed forces, preferring to attack civilians or civilian
facilities and use suicide bombers and explosive devices.
That is precisely why ridding territories of fighters has
not led to improvements in the humanitarian sphere.
The problems of refugees, humanitarian access and
other issues related to terrorist activities cannot be
resolved without eliminating the threat posed by the
terrorist group. In that connection, we welcome the
efforts of the Lake Chad Basin Commission States and
the Multinational Joint Task Force, which was created
by them and Benin. We are convinced that only through
joint efforts will it be possible to achieve victory.
In that connection, we also think that the decision
adopted at the twenty-seventh African Union Summit,
held in Kigali in July 2016, on establishing a counterterrorist fund for the continent will be crucial to the
elimination of terrorism in Africa. We also greatly value
the measures taken by the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel and the specialized agencies
of the United Nations in providing multifaceted
assistance to the countries of the Lake Chad basin
region. We are convinced that, in addition to combating

17-0084119/23

S/PV.7861

Peace and security in Africa

the terrorist threat, it is essential to tackle the deeprooted causes of the region’s problems, which requires
eliminating poverty and fostering social and economic
development. We will continue to actively cooperate
with the States of the region in the framework of
regional structures, including the African Union, and
on a bilateral basis.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would also like to
thank all of today’s briefers for their important input.
As we have all heard from the briefers, the
humanitarian situation in the Lake Chad basin region
is truly one of the most neglected in the world. So
far, the international community has not had much
success in resolving the multifaceted problems of
the region — not for lack of trying, but because of a
lack of understanding of how to deal with all of them
at once. Extreme poverty, severe food insecurity
and malnutrition, weak governance, climate change,
particularly desertification, and the destructive
activities of Boko Haram — all of those factors
contribute to the disastrous situation. In that regard, we
have a few points to make.
First of all, how can the Security Council
effectively react to the crisis, apart from expressing
its deep concerns and calling for more international
awareness? Such actions no longer impress anyone.
Instead, we have to find a proper role for the Security
Council to play. First of all, the Council has to be fully
aware that a constantly deteriorating humanitarian
crisis can evolve into a full-blown threat to peace and
security in the region. An already apparent constraint
with security implications lies in the fact that, owing to
dwindling economic resources and the resulting strains
on State budgets, regional Governments are struggling
in their efforts to eradicate Boko Haram, which poses
an undeniable and serious security threat.
In that regard, we commend the efforts of the
Multinational Joint Task Force and other actors that are
fighting that terrorist group. But the countries of the
region need additional support from the international
community in order to rise to that challenge.
In our opinion, the Council would do well to
engage in a serious discussion on how to strengthen
the use of existing sanctions mechanisms against Boko
Haram’s members and its affiliates. Relevant inputs
and initiatives from the region would contribute greatly
to the Council’s work on that subject. Additionally,
improving socioeconomic conditions has to be the top
20/23

12/01/2017

priority, if any progress is to be made in alleviating
the immense suffering of people in the Lake Chad
basin region.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
Bolivia would like to thank Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun
and Mr. Stephen O’Brien for their briefings this morning
on the humanitarian and security situation in the Lake
Chad basin region. We would also like to particularly
thank Ms. Fatima Yerima Askira from the Borno
Women Development Initiative for her testimony.
As I listened to the statements of my colleagues,
I took notes on some of the words that impacted me
personally, but I can only assume that they had a similar
effect on everyone gathered here: famine, slavery,
captivity, abduction, forced marriage, brutality, extreme
crisis, horror, fear, disease, killings, suicide attacks,
displaced persons, destruction and extreme poverty.
We, too, are concerned about the humanitarian
and security crisis that has beset the Lake Chad basin
region for several years now. Boko Haram continues to
pose a threat to the subregion, the African continent
and international peace and security. We commend
the progress made in combating that extremist group
thanks to the enhanced cooperation over the past two
years among Nigeria, Chad, the Niger, Cameroon and
other countries through the special Multinational Joint
Task Force.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia firmly condemns
the acts committed by the Boko Haram terrorist group,
which poses a serious threat to international peace
and security and exacerbates the region’s already
fragile humanitarian situation. The actions of that
terrorist organization are reprehensible and include the
kidnapping of girls, boys and young men and women, as
well as the destruction of civilian infrastructure, such
as schools. We express our solidarity with the victims
of Boko Haram’s criminal activities, including the
most recent deadly attack in Madagali on 9 December
2016, in which 57 people died from two suicide bomb
attacks and the attack described by Mr. O’Brien that
occurred on 8 January. We demand the immediate and
unconditional release of those who were kidnapped,
including those who were forcibly recruited.
The humanitarian disaster affecting the region is
a source of great concern. As many members of the
Council have already pointed out, the crisis in the
Lake Chad subregion has had little media coverage
but is one of the greatest challenges faced by the
17-00841

12/01/2017

Peace and security in Africa

Security Council and the international community.
According to information released by Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, in December
2016, 11 million people in the Lake Chad basin region
required humanitarian aid and 2.6 million people were
displaced. As I read those figures, the same sentiment
as that expressed by my Uruguayan colleague crossed
my mind. Bolivia has a population of 10 million, and the
tragic situation before us today affects an even greater
number of people than my country’s entire population.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia reaffirms that
defeating terrorism once and for all does not depend
on military action alone. As Ms. Askira stated, in order
to make headway on the problem of addressing its root
causes, it is essential to develop a long-term response
not only to the military and political challenges, but
also, and most important, to the economic and social
challenges. Bolivia will support initiatives to bolster
the efforts of the countries on the front line of that fight,
while respecting their sovereignty and independence.
Similarly, we call upon regional organizations to
enhance their efforts to address that tragic situation.
The President: I would now like to make a
brief statement in my capacity as the representative
of Sweden.
Earlier this week, during our open debate on conflict
prevention and sustaining peace (see S/PV.7857), my
Foreign Minister noted that prevention efforts require
us to address the root causes of conflict and instability
before the crises concerned reach the Security Council’s
agenda. The subject of today’s briefing is a vivid
example of the consequences of the failure to act early
in response to fragility and underdevelopment.
As stated by many, there is a clear need for a
comprehensive regional approach, focusing not only
on the immediate insecurity and humanitarian crisis,
but also on longer-term challenges and root causes. The
aim of putting the Lake Chad basin region on today’s
agenda is not to stigmatize a region, but rather to put
the spotlight on a silent and often neglected crisis and
to pave the way forward for increased engagement in
the region and with the region.
The situation is a complex one. The conflict and
violence that has led to immense human suffering and
humanitarian needs in the region are the result of an
insurgency by Boko Haram, which has indiscriminately
been targeting civilians, even attacking them, even in
places to which they have fled to find shelter and safety.

S/PV.7861

However, the root causes run deeper. They include
the challenges presented by a growing population of
young people with little hope for the future and a lack
of investment in the region. It includes climate change
and its impacts — drought, land degradation and
desertification — which lead to resource scarcity and
food insecurity, which, in turn, generate conditions that
spur conflict.
I believe that we need to ensure that the United
Nations system can provide adequate risk assessment
related to climate change, as has been requested by many
African and Pacific island States. I think that that would
also improve the way in which the Council understands
the connection between climate and security. The large
number of vulnerable, malnourished and displaced
persons was mentioned by Mr. O’Brien, and they
are almost impossible to comprehend. I just wanted
to remind the Council of the picture that Ms. Askira
painted for us earlier. Her voice was powerful, but the
line was slightly weak. She said,
“Picture a woman lying sick in the sand,
covering herself with a tattered rug. Her children,
four, six and seven years old, sitting right next to
her, with no idea of what to eat that day”.
Progress and scaled-up assistance in recent months
by the United Nations system and partner organizations
deserve to be recognized as part of the regional efforts
to address the crisis. But the desperate conditions
persist, and recent weeks have once again seen an
upsurge in suicide bombings and attacks on civilians
and displaced persons. So what do we do?
First, we must step up humanitarian assistance. The
conference to be held in Oslo on 24 February presents
an opportunity to mobilize additional support and
reinforced engagement on the part of the international
community. We must also bring in development
actors and international financial institutions more
robustly, so as to enable recovery, reconstruction and
longer-term development, which is crucial for creating
conditions for the return of displaced populations and
for building resilience.
We must also heed the voices of women in their
diverse roles. Ms. Askira’s powerful briefing to the
Council presents clear evidence of that. I think that
we also need to work more closely with and support
national Governments and regional organizations,
including in their efforts to make progress on the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, on which we

17-0084121/23

S/PV.7861

Peace and security in Africa

have all agreed and which needs to be implemented. As
many have mentioned, we need to support Governments
in their fight against Boko Haram, so as to replace
Boko Haram’s savagery with the rule of law, justice
and benevolent State authority. The nature of the crisis,
which involves challenges that do not respect borders,
requires an integrated and comprehensive response
for the whole region. I think the idea behind today’s
briefing was precisely to raise awareness, but we must
remain engaged across the board and follow up. As the
next step, I think that it makes perfect sense to follow
up with a trip by the Council to the region.
I now resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): First and foremost, I would
like to thank the Swedish presidency and the entire
membership of the Security Council for organizing
today’s briefing. It is indeed emblematic of the interest
of the United Nations in the security situation in the
Lake Chad basin region. We are particularly and
deeply appreciative of the work by the Council and
its positive attitude in seeking to resolve the security
and humanitarian situation and the crisis in the Lake
Chad basin region. Our special appreciation goes to
Under-Secretary-General O’Brien for his insights into
the situation in the region, and to Ms. Fatima Yerima
Askira for sharing her perspective on the matter being
discussed.
When Boko Haram reared its ugly head in Nigeria
a couple of years ago, it heavily impacted virtually
every facet of human endeavour in the north-eastern
part of Nigeria, including the economy, policy and
people’s livelihoods. That impact also had unsavoury
reverberations across the country. The insurgency and
its attendant consequences may have tested our will,
but they have not broken the resolve and the resilience
of the Nigerian people.
It has been a difficult time that has fuelled additional
waves of terrorism and violent extremism in other parts
of the world. In spite of the devastation in the Lake Chad
basin region occasioned by the Boko Haram insurgency,
we are happy to report that the Multilateral Joint Task
Force has recorded great success in degrading Boko
Haram. We have continued to witness the emergence
of survivors and victims who have been rescued from
Boko Haram’s brutal oppression in the north-east.
22/23

12/01/2017

For its part, the Nigerian Government has made
significant progress in the fight against Boko Haram.
Just before Christmas, our military successfully took
over the Sambisa forest, formerly a hideout of the Boko
Haram militants. That progress notwithstanding, the
Government is aware of the other challenges impacting
development in the region, including the shrinking
of Lake Chad, a situation that continues to serve as
a tinderbox for violence and attendant humanitarian
crises. Tackling that problem successfully by recharging
the lake will require major international intervention.
As we celebrate our gains in the war against Boko
Haram, we are not oblivious to the humanitarian
challenges that the crisis has created through the
massive displacement of persons, the abandonment
of farmlands and the disruption of the educational
system. In that regard, the Government of Nigeria is
embarking on programmes aimed at restoring the
livelihoods of the communities in those areas. We have
put in place a robust, people-driven counter-terrorism
strategy based on a combination of revamped security
operations and a human rights-based approach, which
will help to implement rehabilitation, reintegration
and reconstruction. In order to achieve that, we have
empowered the Presidential Committee on North-East
Intervention with a mandate to coordinate and provide
synergy, leadership and direction for the various
initiatives in the area, encompassing the Government,
development partners, private foundations and civil
society. We are also accelerating the implementation
of existing legal and institutional frameworks for
alleviating our people’s suffering in the region in
order to improve the effectiveness of our humanitarian
efforts, in the spirit of the Istanbul World Humanitarian
Summit of May 2016.
Nigeria is firmly committed to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and recognizes that it is
the primary responsibility of States to protect civilians
within their national jurisdiction. That conviction
underlines our Government’s resolve to take all the
measures necessary to protect civilians in the battle
against Boko Haram and similar terrorist groups.
Indeed, no priority is higher for the Government than
to rescue all those whom the group is holding hostage.
We should stress that the kidnapped Chibok schoolgirls
remain in Nigeria’s national consciousness, and that the
Government is working hard to ensure the release of
all Nigerians held captive by Boko Haram, including
the Chibok girls. Once they are freed, we are ready
17-00841

12/01/2017

Peace and security in Africa

to ensure their swift rehabilitation and reintegration
and the continuation of their studies. Overall, we are
focusing our efforts on ensuring that all victims can
regain their personal dignity and resume the enjoyment
of their God-given fundamental rights and freedoms as
soon as possible in Nigeria’s democratic setting.
I would like to emphasize that our holistic approach
in that endeavour is based on the promotion of good
governance, transparency and accountability. We renew
our call for determined international action to help us
meet the victims’ humanitarian needs and address the
root causes of terrorism itself. Genuine humanitarian
intervention by the international community must
no longer be delayed or downplayed. It is time for
collective global action aimed at investing in the people
of Nigeria’s north-east and the Lake Chad basin region.
The President: I would like once again to thank
the three briefers and the representative of Nigeria for
their participation in today’s meeting. And, of course, I
thank the members of the Council for their statements
and, more important, their engagement on this issue.

S/PV.7861

We have noted and welcomed the progress made
by the Governments in the region to push back Boko
Haram and improve humanitarian access. That progress
must be consolidated, sustained and supported. I heard
support around the table for a reinforced humanitarian
engagement, working with the Governments of the
region to meet the growing humanitarian needs there.
In that regard, the conference in Oslo in February will
be an important milestone. I also heard support for more
long-term and sustained engagement from development
partners in the region, which would include addressing
the root causes of the problems and the underlying
needs. Finally, there were calls for more regular and
sustained engagement on the issue on the part of the
Council, and it was proposed that the Council visit the
region. Let us make every effort to ensure that 2017
does indeed become a turning point for the people of
the region of the Lake Chad basin.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

17-0084123/23
