United Nations

S/PV.6092

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6092nd meeting
Wednesday, 18 March 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shalgham/Mr. Dabbashi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Zhang Yesui
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Jurica
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Heller
Mr. Shcherbak
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Rugunda
Sir John Sawers
Ms. Rice
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Identical letters dated 24 December 2008 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the General Assembly and the President of the
Security Council (S/2008/813)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-27161 (E)

*0927161*

S/PV.6092

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Identical letters dated 24 December 2008
from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the General Assembly and the
President of the Security Council (S/2008/813)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Australia,
Bangladesh, Benin, Brazil, Canada, Congo, Cuba, the
Czech Republic, Egypt, Italy, Kenya, Nigeria, Norway
and South Africa, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I wish to extend a
warm welcome to Her Excellency Ms. Nkosazana
Dlamini Zuma, Minister for Foreign Affairs of South
Africa.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Dlamini
Zuma (South Africa) took a seat at the Council
table; the representatives of the other
aforementioned countries took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Romano Prodi,
Chairman of the African Union-United Nations panel
on modalities for support to African Union operations,
and Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
2

meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/813, which contains the text of
identical letters dated 24 December 2008 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
General Assembly and the President of the Security
Council transmitting the report of the African UnionUnited Nations panel on modalities for support to
African Union peacekeeping operations.
I should now like to make a few introductory
remarks.
Today’s open debate comes in the context of
continuing contacts regarding the cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations, in
particular the African Union, in the maintenance of
international peace and security under Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations. We have urged that
this open debate be convened, fully aware that issues
of peace and security are of concern not only to the
African Union, but to all regional organizations.
Wherever armed conflicts arise, they have severe
consequences, reflected in a lack of security, in human
suffering and in flows of internally displaced persons
and refugees. Those problems, which are being
suffered most intensely on the African continent, are
imposing grave burdens on the African Union, which
continues to seek to strengthen its capabilities in the
maintenance of peace and security. Thus, it is essential
to promote more systematic cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union in addressing
issues related to peace and security, particularly given
the fact that the majority of United Nations
peacekeeping operations are being carried out on the
African continent and the need to respond swiftly to
crises on the continent and provide the African Union
with predictable and strengthened capacities.
Today’s debate is being held to follow up on the
Council’s open debate held on 16 April 2008 (see
S/PV.5868), presided over by the then President of
sisterly South Africa. At that meeting, resolution 1809
(2008) was adopted. It recognized the need to enhance
the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of
financing regional organizations when they undertake
peacekeeping under a United Nations mandate. It also
welcomed the Secretary-General’s proposal to set up
an African Union-United Nations panel consisting of
distinguished persons to consider in depth the
09-27161

S/PV.6092

modalities of how to support such peacekeeping
operations, in particular start-up funding, equipment
and logistics, and to consider in depth lessons from
past and current African Union peacekeeping efforts.
In September 2008, an African Union-United
Nations panel was established, chaired by former
Prime Minister Romano Prodi of Italy, who focused
most specifically on ways and means to support
African peacekeeping operations established under
United Nations auspices. The panel carried out its work
and has now submitted its report to the Security
Council.
On behalf of the members of the Security
Council, I cannot fail to pay tribute to His Excellency
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and the
African Union-United Nations panel for submitting the
report with a view to useful deliberations in the
Council.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and invite him to
take the floor.
The Secretary-General: I am pleased to be able
to participate in this meeting of the Security Council,
and I welcome the opportunity to focus both on
strengthening the relationship between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) and on efforts by
the international community to further enhance the
AU’s capacity for peacekeeping.
Before I begin, I would like to welcome you, Sir,
as new Permanent Representative of your great
country, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, and congratulate
you on assuming your role as President of the Security
Council soon after having taken up your new
responsibilities. I assure you of my full cooperation
and support in discharging your duties not only as
President of the Council, but also as Ambassador of
your country. Let me also take this opportunity to
welcome to the United Nations His Excellency
Mr. Romano Prodi, former Prime Minister of Italy, and
to express my appreciation for his leadership of the
panel, whose report on modalities for support to
African Union peacekeeping operations (S/2008/813)
is before the Council today.
Last year’s high-level debate on peace and
security in Africa (see S/PV.5868), chaired by former
President Mbeki on 16 April 2008, provided the United
Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace

09-27161

and Security Council with an opportunity to look more
closely at the partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union in ensuring peace and security
in Africa. The panel’s report, before members today,
presents a number of ideas to strengthen that
partnership with a view to improving our collective
response to addressing conflicts in Africa.
The role played by regional organizations in
peace and security is indispensable to the work of this
Council. I am encouraged by the progress we have
made in our cooperative endeavours with the African
Union Commission towards achieving peace and
security in challenging areas such as Darfur and
Somalia. Lessons learned from these endeavours will
strengthen our cooperative work in the future.
The African Union continues to develop its
capacity for peacekeeping. The Department of
Peacekeeping Operations is supporting these efforts
with a dedicated capacity and through specific
programmes.
The panel’s report (S/2008/813), while outlining
significant remaining challenges, offers various
recommendations that draw on the lessons of the past
and aim at an enhanced relationship in the future.
Central to this analysis is the strategic relationship
between this Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council, which is supported by that between
the United Nations Secretariat and the AU
Commission. In both cases, the relationship has been
much expanded, but it has yet to develop the
responsiveness that will enable us to work together to
prevent conflicts rather than only respond to crises.
The Department of Political Affairs has instituted a
series of desk-to-desk meetings with AU counterparts,
and I hope that we can build on this initiative to
quickly develop a more comprehensive approach for
the future.
Many of the challenges facing the African Union
result from the difficulties it faces in securing the
necessary resources to support both its deployments
and its own long-term development. A peacekeeping
mission that is under-resourced can imperil the initial
benefits gained by its deployment and can raise
expectations without providing the means of fulfilling
them.
It was in this context that the panel made its
recommendations to address issues of funding and
resources. These recommendations have far-reaching

3

S/PV.6092

implications and will require detailed analysis,
particularly in the case of assessed contributions,
which need to be considered by the requisite United
Nations
legislative
bodies
and
processes.
Notwithstanding the complexities, the report offers a
first step in a process through which these issues can
be examined comprehensively while allowing us to
develop a more effective partnership.
I look forward to constructive interaction with
key Member States, including the members of this
Council, AU members, troop-contributing countries
and other stakeholders. The forthcoming retreat with
Security Council members this weekend will offer a
valuable opportunity to look at this issue in greater
detail.
The development of the African Peace and
Security Architecture is crucial to an effective longterm approach to conflict prevention and resolution.
This requires the sustained support of the international
community, including the European Union and many
bilateral partnerships. The strategic relationship
between the United Nations and the AU is at the heart
of this evolving framework and has the potential to
affect millions of people on the African continent.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Secretary-General for his kind words to me personally
and to my country.
I now give the floor to Mr. Romano Prodi,
Chairman of the African Union-United Nations panel
on modalities for support to African Union operations.
Mr. Prodi: I am truly thankful for the opportunity
given me, as Chairman of the African Union-United
Nations panel on modalities for support to African
Union peacekeeping operations, to present the results
of our work. Allow me to first address two basic issues.
First, I deeply acknowledge both the quality of
the individual contributions that each member provided
during the intense work of the panel and the generous
support received from United Nations staff. I am
particularly thankful to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon.
Secondly, it has been clear from the very
beginning that while the terms of reference of the panel
were framed in technical terms, the issues have strong
political implications.

4

The foreword to the panel’s report (S/2008/813)
clarifies the link between peace and development. No
peace means no development. Yet the complexities
inherent in that statement are such that it is often
difficult to reconcile the need for regional engagement
with the capabilities available.
The responsibility of regional actors to address
issues of peace and security in their own regions is
indisputable. This is not to say that the African Union
or the regional economic communities should replace
the United Nations. That is clear. Rather, the principles
of the United Nations Charter must be reinforced and a
framework must be developed in which our collective
response can ensure an appropriate answer to any given
circumstance.
It was with this in mind that the panel approached
its work and, in delivering its report, I hope that we can
move towards a more systematic approach in our
response to the challenges to peace and security in
Africa.
The African Union is to play its full part. It must
have the means to support future short-term operational
deployments, and also the capacity to develop the
essential capabilities necessary for the long-term.
In addressing the high-level meeting chaired by
former President Mbeki, in April last year (see
S/PV.5868), I underlined the need for closer
cooperation between the international and the regional
levels and the need for more effective responses by the
international community in crisis situations. We are in
a new era in which the scale and complexity of the
challenges demand increased cooperation between all
actors.
Addressing those challenges calls for effective
relationships, improved coordination and a clear
understanding of each other’s strengths and
weaknesses. We have come a long way in the past few
years, and I acknowledge the enormous progress that
has been made by the African Union and the regional
economic communities of Africa. We can all learn from
that process.
However, that process needs to be consolidated
so that it can truly enhance the capacity of the African
Union to contribute to global security and enable it to
play a front-line role in international efforts to bring
peace to the continent.

09-27161

S/PV.6092

Indeed, the ability of the African Union to
respond to continental crises within the context of a
broader international framework requires significant
capabilities. Developing those capabilities requires the
permanent support of the international community,
including less traditional partners and donors. We must
do it in spite of the present competition for scarce
resources. Achieving this objective requires improved
coordination, new mechanisms and brand-new
instruments.
Thanks to the African Peace and Security
Architecture (APSA), significant progress has been
achieved in many fields, from conflict prevention to
the deployment of peacekeeping missions and the
development of long-term capacity. We must ensure
further progress in this direction.
The APSA cannot operate in isolation, and the
report emphasizes the importance of establishing a
shared vision between the United Nations and the
African Union when addressing issues of mutual
concern. That implies new, strong coordination
between the two Councils. The joint meetings that have
already taken place represent a major step forward, but
the panel is keen to encourage a more regular exchange
through which greater continuity of approach could be
cultivated and a shared vision truly established.
At the level of the African Union Commission
and the United Nations Secretariat, the panel
recognizes the great progress made and the solid basis
for cooperation that has been established, both in terms
of supporting operational deployments and long-term
capability-building. Nonetheless, there is still
significant
room
for
improvement.
Limiting
operational support to individual missions is
understandable, but it does not necessarily promote
sustained and efficient cooperation.
If the African Union Commission and the United
Nations Secretariat aim to develop the level of
cooperation necessary to support effective mutual
synergy, they must be able to work together in a much
more structured way. To that end, the panel
recommends the creation of a mechanism through
which the respective organizations could exchange
views on a more regular basis. Various potential
models exist that can be used in order to implement
that process without creating new structures.
The ability to work together can be constrained
by the limited resources of the African Union

09-27161

Commission. Improving coordination is therefore not
sufficient. It is necessary, but not sufficient. It has to be
supported by the institutional capacity that will
increase African ownership of the process. That can be
achieved only once the Commission is properly staffed
by skilled personnel provided by the African Union’s
member States.
Inevitably, it is military capability that catches
the headlines in terms of the development of the
African Standby Force, but the report underlines the
point that peace on the African continent cannot be
achieved through the deployment of military force
alone. Capacity needs to be developed across a wide
range of activities, such as intelligence, early warning,
conflict prevention, post-conflict reconciliation and
reconstruction. Here, I repeat, there is a need to
develop a shared vision.
As recently stated by the current President of the
African Union, Muammar Al-Qadhafi, if Africa does
not develop a common political view it will never be in
charge of its peaceful destiny. Developing a shared
vision is one thing; implementing, clearly, is another.
That requires partnership underpinned by credible
capability, and that requires huge resources.
The panel examined a range of possible options
by which greater financial predictability could be built
and sustained in the long term. The technical details of
that proposal must be further developed in the near
future.
The recommendation that United Nations
legislative bodies approve the use of assessed
contributions under certain criteria recognizes the
importance of the United Nations/African Union
relationship, as well as the advantages to be gained by
exploiting the African Union’s comparative advantage
in quickly deploying a bridging operation until
conditions are established for longer-term United
Nations engagement. The panel was sensitive to the
wide range of different views on that proposal, and it
expressed the opinion that it is time for the United
Nations to expand all aspects concerning the role of the
African Union in resolving peace and security issues —
of course, in coordination with the efforts of the United
Nations.
Similarly, the recommendations concerning the
need for logistical support require much closer
examination. In particular, there is an opportunity to
break with some of the traditional approaches of the

5

S/PV.6092

past and to take advantage of more innovative ideas
that avoid the need to stockpile large quantities of
equipment, which is something that is increasingly
important in the current economic climate.
In relation to long-term capacity-building, the
panel recommended the establishment of a multi-donor
trust fund. The very concept of a multi-donor fund
implies that all those that have an interest in a peaceful
Africa shall be called on to contribute financial, human
and technical resources in order to build that capacity.
New donors were encouraged, are encouraged and will
be encouraged to start and increase their contributions.
If, as we hope, a large multi-donor fund is successfully
established, its size and complexity will require
expertise that is found in very few international
institutions. I know that this is debated, but that is why,
in the start-up phase, we recommend the involvement
of the United Nations Development Programme.
However, in order to ensure the progressive
empowerment of the African Union, the headquarters
of that structure will be initially located in Addis
Ababa. The African Union is expected to take over full
responsibility in a short period of time, and thereafter
have full ownership of the fund.
Moreover, it should be stressed that, from the
very beginning, the African Union will be in charge of
defining priorities and projects in the area of capacitybuilding. In various meetings with the heads of State or
Government of countries interested in supporting the
role of the African Union in peacekeeping, I have
found a generally positive attitude with regard our
proposal for a multi-donor fund dedicated to long-term
capacity-building. I understand that the engagement of
a Prime Minister is different from that of a Minister for
Finance, but it was very a very encouraging
development.
That idea also requires additional consideration in
order to define the detailed modalities and to determine
how it can work in synergy with existing mechanisms
such as the African Peace Facility, which was created
and supported by the European Union.
In conclusion, I would emphasize that some of
the recommendations can be implemented relatively
easily, in particular those dealing with strengthening
the political relationship between the United Nations
and the African Union. Some of them are already
moving forward as part of an ongoing process. Others

6

require much more detailed analysis than was possible
to do under the panel.
The panel conducted the bulk of its work when
the consequences of the current economic downturn
were not yet fully expressed. Nonetheless, it is
important that support for the African Union increase
in the future. It is too important. We have to work
better together, and we have to find more efficient
instruments for cooperation.
All of us must be engaged in developing the
African Union’s capacity. The support of African
Union member States is as critical as the material
support of non-African States Members of the United
Nations. Ownership must belong to Africa, but all
Member States, particularly those with interests in
Africa, need to be committed to supporting the process.
It is clear that there cannot be development without
peace, but it is also clear that peace in Africa affects
not only Africa’s future but the future of all of us. This
report should therefore be seen as a significant step in
a longer process that will require further consultation
and work for the development of its recommendations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Prodi for his briefing and statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union.
Mr. Lamamra (spoke in French): Mr. President,
allow me at the outset to say what a pleasure it is to
address the Security Council under your presidency on
behalf of the African Union Commission and its
Chairperson, Mr. Jean Ping, on a question of great
importance for the promotion of peace, security and
stability on the African continent. But first of all, I
should like, Mr. President, to congratulate you upon
your appointment as Permanent Representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations and
upon your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I am especially grateful to you,
Sir, for having invited us to this debate devoted to the
consideration of the report of the African Union-United
Nations panel on modalities for support to African
Union peacekeeping operations (S/2008/813). This
question now lies at the very heart of the problem of
strengthening the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations throughout our continent and throughout the
world.

09-27161

S/PV.6092

In this context, we are also grateful to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his unswerving commitment
to peace in Africa and to the promotion of an effective,
exemplary partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union. With respect to this partnership, the
appointment of Chairman Romano Prodi, a faithful
friend of Africa, to head this African Union-United
Nations group of experts was a guarantee of the
success of this endeavour, as demonstrated by the
report currently being considered. I should like to
convey here to Chairman Prodi, as well as to the
members of the panel, the congratulations of the
African Union Commission and my own.

Certainly, a great deal remains to be done to render this
architecture fully operational. Nonetheless, significant
progress has been achieved, as evidenced by the daily
actions of the Peace and Security Council and the
initiatives undertaken by the Panel of the Wise as well
as the measures undertaken within the framework of
the setting up of the Continental Early Warning System
and the measures aimed at the launching in June 2010
of the African Standby Force. Moreover, the African
Union and the regional mechanisms are working ever
more closely together within the framework of the
Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation
concluded in January 2008.

In fact, this report accurately reflects the quality
of work built on the lessons learned from peacekeeping
operations in Africa and opens up new, promising
prospects for greater effectiveness in the African
Union’s efforts in this regard via the availability of the
predictable and lasting financial resources that the
Union needs to further strengthen its role in the field of
peace and security. The need to strengthen institutional
capacities of the African Union, the increase in
resources and the stabilization of peacekeeping
financing in Africa are opportunely highlighted in this
report.

Alongside the progressive implementation of this
architecture, the African Union is, on a daily basis,
committed to efforts aimed at preventing, managing
and settling conflicts. That the challenges are huge is
clear to all. It is sufficient to skim through recent news
articles on the continent to see that. However, today,
we have a strong political will to face those difficulties
by stepping up efforts to ensure that structural
prevention, mediation and good offices enable us to
keep latent tensions and crises from degenerating into
open armed conflict.

Just as pertinent are the special recommendations
aimed at strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in the field of
operational collaboration at various levels. The same is
true with regard to the creation of new financing
mechanisms that would enable us to support specific
peacekeeping operations, whether through United
Nations-assessed funding or by way of the proposal for
a multi-donor trust fund funded by voluntary
contributions. In our opinion, this measure is timely,
innovative and worthy of everyone’s support.
Over these last few years, regional arrangements
have demonstrated renewed dynamism in the
promotion of peace, security and stability in their
respective regions. Nowhere is this new reality more
apparent than in Africa. For a few years now, the
African Union has given a new dynamic to its efforts
aimed at meeting the pressing challenges facing the
continent in the field of peace and security.
On the basis of relevant provisions of the
Protocol relating to the establishment of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union, a continental
peace and security architecture has been born.

09-27161

Africa’s experience in the field of the deployment
of observers and military units has developed in
various parts of the continent in sometimes especially
difficult conditions. That was the case in the recent
past in Burundi and the Sudan. It is the case today in
Somalia, where battalions deployed by Uganda and
Burundi within the framework of African Union
Mission in Somalia are bravely striving to support the
incipient progress of the Somali people on their road to
peace, reconciliation, security and stability.
In undertaking such initiatives, the African Union
is of course discharging its own political
responsibilities, and clearly such actions are eloquent
proof of an African solidarity that yearns to be
proactive and that wants other African States to stand
side by side with Somalia in its ordeal. At the same
time, the African Union, through all these initiatives in
the field of restoring peace and in promoting and
supporting peace, is also acting on behalf of the
international community, specifically on behalf of the
Security Council, which bears the main burden in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
It is thus in this context that the African Union
has requested that the United Nations, within the

7

S/PV.6092

framework of Chapter VIII of its Charter, consider the
possibility of financing, via regularly assessed
contributions, peacekeeping operations undertaken by
the African Union or under its authority and with the
consent of the Security Council. The process launched
following that request, pursuant to a well-advised
proposal submitted by South Africa, has resulted in the
report submitted for the Council’s consideration today.
I wish to express the deep appreciation of the African
Union Commission to Ms. Dlamini Zuma, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of South Africa, for her country’s and
her personal commitment to undertaking this noble
project.
Indisputably, the report being considered today is
an important step in the overall efforts aimed at
building the capacities of the African Union, meeting
the challenges facing the continent in the field of peace
and security, and mobilizing increased support from the
international community. The recommendations on the
financing of African Union peacekeeping operations
are, from that point of view, of special importance.
The President of the African Union Peace and
Security Council for March will have the opportunity
to share with Council members the specific
contributions that the Peace and Security Council
wishes to make directly to the Council’s consideration
of the issue.
The future of maintaining international peace and
security requires creativity and boldness from all of us.
Greater decentralization or devolution, requiring
harmonized efforts at the global and regional levels
and cohesive strategies, is an ever more essential part
of addressing the major challenges in the field of peace
and security facing the international community,
especially in Africa. At a time when Africa, having
correctly anticipated the new realities and requirements
of peacekeeping and acquired a comprehensive and
progressively
operational
peace
and
security
architecture — of which the African Standby Force
must be a rapid and effective tool — it is necessary to
effectively meet the challenge of financing equitably
and as a shared responsibility.
The Prodi report stands as a qualitative and
decisive step in that direction. The African Union will
spare no effort to ensure that the guidance and
recommendations of the report are turned into realities,
to the greatest benefit of peace and security throughout
our continent and the world.

8

The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union, for his briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency
Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of South Africa.
Ms. Dlamini Zuma (South Africa): We thank
you, Sir, for allowing us to participate and share our
views on the important issue of strengthening the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union (AU), at
today’s open meeting. I also take this opportunity to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March. My delegation is also grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for his statement and participation in this
meeting.
Our appreciation also goes to Mr. Romano Prodi,
Chairman of the African Union-United Nations panel
on modalities for support to African Union operations,
for introducing his important report (S/2008/813), and
we hope that he will continue to accompany the
process to its logical conclusion.
Today, the need to strengthen and enhance the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations remains more important than ever before
because we are seeing an increased reliance on regional
organizations in addressing and resolving some of the
conflicts facing us. We are encouraged to note that,
over the years, the cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU has improved. The recent
partnership between the United Nations and the AU in
the deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur is testimony to the fact that
United Nations cooperation and partnership with
regional organizations are crucial.
In addition, we commend the decision of the
Security Council to adopt a resolution approving the
proposals to strengthen and provide support to the

09-27161

S/PV.6092

African Union Mission in Somalia. We hope that
positive development will lead to greater and more
systematic cooperation and partnership.
Notwithstanding the need for enhanced
cooperation and partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations, that cooperation
does not seek to absolve the Security Council of its
Charter-mandated responsibility in the maintenance of
international peace and security. In that context, the
Security Council remains the main international body
entrusted with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. South
Africa believes strongly that we should coordinate our
collective security efforts under the auspices of United
Nations. It is for this reason that, during its tenure as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council, South
Africa focused on the important question of the
enhancement of the relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular the
African Union.
Among others, resolution 1809 (2008) recognizes
the need to enhance the predictability, sustainability
and flexibility of financing regional organizations
when they undertake peacekeeping under United
Nations authority. Furthermore, the said resolution
welcomed the Secretary-General’s proposal to establish
an African Union-United Nations panel to consider in
depth the modalities of how to support peacekeeping
operations.
South Africa welcomes the report of the African
Union-United Nations panel on modalities for support
to African Union operations. We also commend the
tireless efforts of Mr. Romano Prodi, Chairman of the
panel and other members of the panel, in preparing the
report. As noted in paragraph 4 of the report, the panel
consulted as widely as possible with the United
Nations, the African Union and other relevant
interlocutors.
South
Africa
welcomes
the
bold
recommendations contained in the report of the panel.
It
should,
however,
be
noted
that
those
recommendations reflect a work in progress and do not
provide conclusive answers on ensuring necessary,
sustainable and predictable resources for African
peacekeeping operations undertaken by the African
Union.
My
delegation
welcomes
the
panel’s
recommendations, in particular in paragraph 90 of the

09-27161

report relating to the use of United Nations-assessed
contributions. The issue of the funding of regional
peacekeeping operations remains central to enhancing
and streamlining the relationship between the United
Nations and the African Union. We believe that this
recommendation is the first important step towards
addressing the most important constraints that limit
Africa’s capacity to resolve conflicts on our continent.
For its part, the AU remains committed to
resolving African conflicts. The operationalization of
the AU Peace and Security Council and the Continental
Early Warning System, post-conflict reconstruction and
development and the Panel of the Wise and the African
Standby Force are clear indications of that resolve and
the basic framework for addressing peace and security
on the continent. However, that commitment is not
matched by the resources at its disposal. For its part,
the United Nations, in particular the Security Council,
should augment its efforts in a concrete manner.
The issue of capacity-building is equally
important. My delegation concurs with the argument
raised by the panel on the importance of enhancing the
institutional capacity of the AU. We believe that any
efforts aimed at improving that area should build on
existing mechanisms. In that context, we commend the
ongoing efforts by various stakeholders aimed at
providing support to the AU in the area of capacitybuilding. In particular, my delegation would like to
acknowledge the continuing pivotal role that the
European Union, through the new African Peace
Facility, is playing in enhancing the early response
mechanism of the African-led mediation and peace
support operations.
My delegation fully supports the panel’s view
that its recommendations are only an initial phase in a
long-term process of developing and supporting the
AU’s own capacity. In that regard, South Africa
endorses the panel’s recommendation that a joint
African Union-United Nations team should be
established to examine the detailed modalities to
support the recommendations made in the report. We
would also like to say that we share the views of the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, Mr. Lamamra, and thank him for being here.
In conclusion, we are pleased that the Security
Council will adopt a presidential statement that
contains language addressing common and mutual
challenges and opportunities facing both the United

9

S/PV.6092

Nations and the AU. For its part, South Africa supports
that statement but also lends its support to the common
endeavours aimed at further enhancing cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
in particular. We therefore hope that the SecretaryGeneral will continue his efforts in that direction.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Minister Zuma for her statement.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The delegation of the Russian Federation,
Sir, is pleased to see you assume your new functions as
Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya. We wish you every possible success. We
note with satisfaction the presence at today’s meeting
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of South
Africa, Ms. Dlamini Zuma, and the Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union,
Mr. Lamamra.
We are grateful to Mr. Prodi and the team that he
leads for the comprehensive report on modalities for
support to African Union peacekeeping operations
(S/2008/813). We note the timeliness of that document.
In our view, the report significantly contributes to the
international community’s efforts towards settling
conflicts throughout the African continent. It contains
an in-depth analysis of African Union peacekeeping
efforts and of ways to strengthen the peacekeeping
capacities of that regional organization. It proposes a
broad range of short- and long-term practical steps to
bolster cooperation between the African Union and the
United Nations.
Clearly, the capacities and resources of the
African Union need international support. In that
regard, priority attention should be paid to developing
a continental peace and security architecture and to
establishing and operationalizing an African Standby
Force. Here, it is necessary to look at coordinating the
international community’s efforts to assist the African
Union in increasing its own peacekeeping capacities.
With regard to increasing the cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union,
which today the Secretary-General rightly referred to
as a strategic relationship, substantial positive
experience has been accumulated. A joint peacekeeping

10

force has been set up in Darfur under the aegis of the
United Nations and the African Union and vigorous
efforts are being made to advance the Darfur political
process. African Union member States are playing an
important role in stabilizing the situation in Somalia.
Political and diplomatic means to avert threats
and conflicts are ever more topical. Here, a key role
should lie with the Africans themselves. The
peacekeeping efforts of the African Union and of
subregional organizations such as the Economic
Community of West African States, the Southern
African
Development
Community
and
the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, as well
as mediation missions by prominent African political
actors, have on a number of occasions contributed to
achieving significant advances in regional stability.
Experience has shown the effectiveness of the
model of the preventive deployment of regional
peacekeeping operations in hot spots throughout the
continent with subsequent transfer of those missions to
the United Nations. We share the assessment of
Mr. Prodi’s report that the crux of today’s
peacekeeping operations lies in the fact that no single
organization can alone resolve these issues. Furthering
collective approaches are necessary to effectively
overcome today’s threats and challenges and demand
the consistent stepping up of cooperation among the
United Nations, the Security Council and its regional
partners. Such cooperation should be based on the
2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly
resolution 60/1) and the United Nations Charter, in
particular Chapter VIII. The provisions of Chapter VIII
of the Charter provide a sound legal basis for
conducting
African
peacekeeping
operations
sanctioned by the Security Council, helping set up an
African security architecture. African mechanisms
aimed at preventing and settling conflicts must become
fully operational.
In the past few years, the Council has repeatedly
considered the issue of stepping up practical
cooperation with regional organizations. Today’s
debate, which is focused on practical cooperation with
the African Union, is further confirmation of the
serious attention the Security Council is paying to
developing effective strategies to preserve peace and
security in Africa. The report’s recommendations
deserve close attention and substantive further
development. Many of those recommendations touch
upon the interests of all States Member of our global

09-27161

S/PV.6092

Organization. The recommendations on providing
temporary logistical and financial support to African
Union peacekeeping operations from Member States’
assessed contributions should be carefully analysed
both by the United Nations Secretariat and by the
General Assembly.
The Russian Federation is actively participating
in drawing up and implementing an international
programme of strategic support for Africa, including
strengthening the peacekeeping capacities of the
African Union. Russian peacekeepers are active in
almost all United Nations peacekeeping operations
throughout the African continent. A Russian helicopter
unit is deployed as part of the United Nations mission
in the Sudan. Another helicopter unit is deployed as
part of the European Union-led peacekeeping force in
Chad and the Central African Republic and will soon
start discharging its duties as part of the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad. Russia’s specialized training institutions are
implementing a training programme for African
peacekeeping personnel.
In conclusion, I would like to state the readiness
of the Russian delegation to endorse the draft
presidential statement that is being prepared by Libya.
We hope that today’s discussion will serve to lend new
impetus to the practical cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I wish, Sir, to welcome
you and to congratulate you upon assuming the post of
Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and the presidency of the Security Council.
I also wish to thank you for organizing this important
debate, which has given the wider United Nations
membership an opportunity to contribute to a
discussion on peace and security in Africa.
I wish to welcome Ms. Dlamini Zuma, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa, whose
presence here is a fitting tribute to the important role
that South Africa played while on the Security Council
in having the discussion on modalities for supporting
peacekeeping operations on the Council’s agenda. I
also wish to welcome the Chairman of the African
Union-United Nations panel, Mr. Romano Prodi, and
thank him and other members of the panel for the good
work they have done. Let me also recognize the
presence of Ambassador Lamamra, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union. I wish to

09-27161

thank the guests for the statements they have made,
and also to thank the Secretary-General of the United
Nations for being with us and for his statement.
This debate today is an opportunity for the United
Nations to focus once again on peace and security in
Africa. Uganda commends the panel for the report. It is
significant that from the outset the report recognizes
the primacy of the United Nations Security Council in
matters of international peace and security, which is
very fundamental. The report also emphasizes the need
to enhance the strategic relationship between the
United Nations and the African Union (AU) as the
basis for a more effective partnership when addressing
issues of mutual interest.
As many in this Council know, conflicts have
devastated many parts of the African continent. They
have caused untold economic and social damage and
have adversely affected the continent’s development.
Apart from causing human suffering, those conflicts
aggravate poverty and create breeding grounds for the
emergence of new security threats, including
international crime and terrorism.
It is significant to note that in the last decade
Africa has shown great resolve and has exhibited much
stronger political will in efforts to end conflicts on the
continent.
Africa
has
demonstrated
greater
responsibility in finding solutions to many of those
conflicts.
Since its establishment, the AU Peace and
Security Council has made a tremendous contribution
towards peace and security in Africa. Africa has
developed its own capacity to respond to crises, and we
have seen in recent times the pivotal role the African
Union has played in settling crises on the continent in
places such as Comoros, Liberia, Sierra Leone and
Burundi. African ownership has been clearly
demonstrated through the contribution of troops,
logistics, political management of conflicts and
finances, according to Africa’s capacity.
It is for these reasons that Uganda emphasizes the
need for clarity in the relationship between the United
Nations and the African Union, especially between the
United Nations Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council, and the United Nations
Secretariat and the African Union Commission, as the
basis for a more effective partnership on peace and
security. The role of regional arrangements is
acknowledged in the Charter of the United Nations and

11

S/PV.6092

should rightly be the basis for building a solid
partnership.
The demands placed on the United Nations for
intervention have shown that there needs to be a
division of responsibilities between the United Nations
and regional organizations such as the African Union in
the spheres of conflict prevention, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding in order to make
possible more effective and comprehensive responses
to conflict situations. Such division of labour should
take advantage of the different capabilities. As the
report rightly states, “There is a significant synergy to
be achieved in drawing on the respective capacities of
both organizations and exercising the comparative
advantage that each can offer” (S/2008/813, para. 6). It
is essential that the concept of sharing responsibilities
for the execution of missions for the maintenance of
international peace and security between the United
Nations and the AU is clearly understood.
Uganda therefore welcomes the establishment of
a more effective relationship between the United
Nations Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council and between the United Nations
Secretariat and the AU Commission. Decisions
pertaining to the setting up of missions, the mandates
conferred, the composition of the force, the rules of
engagement and reviews of conduct and performance
of such missions from time to time can and should be
made with consultations with all involved.
Lessons have been learned from various
peacekeeping operations in Africa. One is the need to
develop capacity to support operations. As the report
rightly points out, the African Union will be able to
respond to crises effectively only if there is sufficient
political and financial commitment by its own member
States and also by the international community. By all
accounts, lack of resources remains the single biggest
challenge limiting the ability of missions to implement
their mandates effectively.
The African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) has provided examples that have shown
that the reliance on unpredictable sources of funding
has been a disincentive to potential troop-contributing
countries, who are understandably reluctant to commit
to missions that they see as under-resourced, especially
when that is accompanied by a lack of any guarantee of
sustained reimbursement of resources. The proposed
establishment of a trust fund as one of the secondary

12

sources of funding is welcome. However, that requires
that issues of the predictability and sustainability of
such a fund be addressed. The management of the
proposed trust fund would also need further
elaboration, with a view to creating a management
system that is flexible, transparent and rapid.
The establishment of a predictable, sustainable
and flexible financing mechanism for United Nationsmandated peacekeeping operations undertaken by the
African Union is important. Since the AU acts on
behalf of the United Nations Security Council in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter, it is imperative that the primary source of
funding for peacekeeping operations be United
Nations-assessed contributions. That underscores the
collective responsibility provided for in the Charter.
Finally, I wish once again to commend the panel
for the report. Peacekeeping is and remains an essential
and indispensable tool available to the United Nations
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
Its viability and effectiveness will be greatly enhanced
if there is closer cooperation and coordination between
the United Nations and the AU. The debate today is
part of a process, and Uganda will continue actively
participating in this process in order to identify feasible
actions that can ensure timely intervention so that
conflicts, particularly in Africa, can be prevented and
many precious lives saved.
Uganda subscribes to and supports the Libyaninitiated presidential statement, which, we think, would
be a logical outcome to this important debate.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I wish to
begin, Sir, by welcoming you as the new Permanent
Representative of Libya and congratulating you on
your assumption of the Chair as President of the
Council for this month.
I also want to thank Prime Minister Prodi for his
leadership and to thank the other members of the
African Union-United Nations panel for their valuable
discussion of ways to strengthen the African Union’s
capacity to organize more effective peacekeeping
operations. I am pleased to welcome here as well today
Foreign Minister Zuma of South Africa and African
Union (AU) Commissioner Lamamra, who have both
made enormous contributions in this field.
We are glad to have this chance to discuss ways
to further deepen the important partnership on

09-27161

S/PV.6092

peacekeeping between the United Nations and the
African Union, a partnership that we steadfastly
support and one that lets both the United Nations and
the AU do far more than either could do on its own. We
look forward to further efforts to ensure that the two
organizations coordinate smoothly and draw upon their
own unique strengths.

Secondly, as the panel as noted, peacekeeping is
not the only tool, or even always the best one, to
handle every conflict. The panel recommends that the
African Union also increase its capacities in the areas
of conflict prevention, crisis management and postconflict peacebuilding and stabilization. We welcome
that call.

In the past, United Nations partnerships with the
AU and other, subregional, organizations such as the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) have helped end conflicts and protect
vulnerable civilians. The question today is how best to
build upon those successes, carry out peacekeeping
operations more effectively and promote peace and
stability across the continent.

Thirdly, we are pleased to note that the panel has
recommended that a trust fund mechanism be created
to coordinate donor assistance to the ongoing project of
stronger African Union peacekeeping. The United
States encourages donor nations to join in assisting the
AU, either through a trust fund or through bilateral
programmes.

Africa’s needs are great, but so are the
contributions that Africans have made for many years
to keeping the peace. We salute the many African
countries that have contributed troops and otherwise
supported peace operations across the continent — and,
indeed, beyond the continent. And in particular we
recognize the ongoing courage of the African Union’s
decision to become the first body to deploy troops to
Darfur when the situation there was and is at its most
uncertain, unstable and risky. Tragically, this week’s
further loss of life has reminded us again how brave
the troops of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur are and how crucial their lifesaving mission is.
We also want to express thanks for and
acknowledge the extraordinary contributions and
sacrifices of the Governments of Uganda and Burundi
as they play a crucial role in the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), where the circumstances are
indeed dangerous and where lives have been lost.
Reading the report before us today (S/2008/813)
suggests several important steps forward. Let me
discuss a few of them briefly.
First, we should work together to further enhance
the AU secretariat’s capacity to plan, manage and
sustain peacekeeping operations in the field over the
long term. My Government also encourages the
secretariats of both the United Nations and the African
Union to share the burden of planning for joint
operations and to further develop mechanisms to make
coordination on joint missions easier and smoother.

09-27161

Fourthly, we must recognize how seriously
peacekeeping ventures in Africa can be undermined by
insufficient resources. This is indeed a major
challenge, and we hope we can work together to look
at ways to do better in the future. The United States has
already taken a leading role in the effort to build up
Africa’s peacekeeping capacities and to support
operations already in the field. Starting with the
African Crisis Response Initiative in the 1990s and
United States training and equipment support for
African contingents that deployed then to the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, the United States has
led efforts to help build African peacekeeping capacity.
Just since 2005, we have trained and equipped
more than 68,000 African peacekeeping troops from 22
countries through the Global Peace Operation
Initiative’s African Contingency Operations Training
and Assistance programme. These troops have joined
in peacekeeping missions across the continent under
the auspices of the United Nations, the AU and
subregional organizations such as ECOWAS. Since
2005, through Global Peace Operation Initiative’s
programmes amounting to more than $7 million, the
United States has provided funding, equipment,
advisers and technical assistance to help the AU and
ECOWAS secretariats build up their peacekeeping
capabilities. We have also extensive materiel, logistical
and technical support to AU peacekeeping forces in
Darfur and Somalia.
We urge our colleagues on the Council to
increase significantly their bilateral contributions to
AMISOM. We encourage other donors to follow suit,
and we hope that additional countries will consider
contributing to AMISOM to join in this important

13

S/PV.6092

effort. There is much more for all of us to do, but we
look forward to working together to create a more
peaceful, prosperous and secure Africa.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset, Mr. President, to welcome you as
the new Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to the United Nations and to thank you for
having convened this meeting to consider the report of
the African Union-United Nations panel on modalities
for support to peacekeeping operations undertaken by
regional organizations, in particular the African Union
(AU), under a United Nations mandate (S/2008/813).
I am particularly pleased to welcome the presence
of the Secretary-General, the delegation from the
African Union, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
South Africa, and members of the AU-United Nations
panel. The presence of such distinguished individuals
guarantees open and fruitful discussions aimed at
ensuring better interaction between the African Union
and the United Nations to continue and strengthen
peace and security worldwide, in particular in Africa.
Today’s debate follows the 16 April 2008 meeting
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the United Nations Security Council (see
S/PV.5868). It serves to strengthen our belief in the
importance of close and constant relations between the
two organizations with respect to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
It is clear that Africa is the region most affected
by crises and conflicts which are broad in their scope
and which thus pose a serious direct threat to
international peace and security. Unfortunately,
however, despite Africa’s commitment to safeguarding
world peace, its action remains constrained by a
limited capacity to carry out by itself long-term
peacekeeping operations or operations in complex
crisis situations that require multifaceted intervention.
In its resolution 1809 (2008), the Security
Council was thus correct to endorse the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal that a high-level panel of experts be
established to consider modalities for support to
peacekeeping operations undertaken by regional
organizations, in particular the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing for regional
organizations when they undertake United Nationsmandated peace operations. In our view, the report’s
conclusions are clear-minded and relevant, and we
reiterate our thanks to the panel.

14

While we acknowledge that the Security Council
bears primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, it is clear today that
the complexity of conflicts and threats to peace
requires a collective response. In other words, the
United Nations must act together with other
international organizations.
Thus, the African Union and subregional
organizations such as the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) have
become engaged in conflict settlement — including in
the Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Somalia, Sierra Leone, Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire — by
providing an initial response to crises before the United
Nations takes over. The lessons drawn from those
operations hopefully reflect the political commitment
of those organizations and, above all, the objective
difficulties they face in supporting long-term missions.
It should be noted that the African Union has
experienced some problems assuming leadership of
peacekeeping operations on the continent, and the
report very clearly indicates that. The handicap is not
insurmountable and requires first and foremost the
genuine political will of the United Nations and the
African Union to engage in open cooperation in
accordance with the regional arrangements recognized
under the United Nations Charter.
In the context of peacekeeping, because regional
and subregional organizations can be seen as
decentralized initiatives of the Security Council, it
would be useful to study and consider ways and means
of strengthening the African Union’s institutional
capacities in peacekeeping and security, and to provide
it with the support necessary to establish the African
Peace and Security Architecture and to create a
standing capacity to respond rapidly to conflicts.
Improved interaction between the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council is clearly essential to making their respective
peacemaking and peacekeeping activities more
effective. Ultimately, as I have said, the African Union
acts on behalf and in the name of the Security Council,
and a judicious division of labour needs to be
established between the two organizations.
While we recognize the importance of
peacekeeping activities, it is equally necessary to stress
prevention and mediation and to exploit the

09-27161

S/PV.6092

comparative advantages of regional and subregional
organizations to that end. These have the advantage not
only of being able to grasp the extent of crises from the
outset, but also and above all of helping to avoid
ruinous spending on peacekeeping operations whose
outcome is uncertain. We must continue, in the
framework of effective partnership, to strengthen the
mediation and settlement capacities of regional
organizations, pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter.
In that regard, the establishment of a joint African
Union/United Nations mediation support team is
encouraging on several levels.
In conclusion, we welcome yet again the
recommendations contained in the report of the panel,
which represent an important phase in the reciprocal
efforts to strengthen the African Union’s capacity to
meet the challenges facing the African continent and to
mobilize greater international support. We also
appreciate the panel’s approach in consulting the
greatest possible number of actors within the United
Nations, the African Union, the regional economic
communities, the European Union and Member States,
and in presenting its report cautiously and thoughtfully.
Neither the Security Council nor the regional
organizations — the African Union in particular — can
shirk their responsibility for peacekeeping under the
relevant provisions of the Charter. They must pool their
efforts and define the framework of their partnership
and interventions. We wish once again to thank the
Chairman of the panel, Mr. Romano Prodi, and the
members of his team for their valuable contribution.
We encourage Mr. Prodi to remain available to lend his
experience and expertise to the process of reflection on
how to strengthen the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union.
Burkina Faso thanks the Libyan presidency of the
Council for its efforts to ensure the adoption of a
presidential statement at the conclusion of this debate.
Mr. Jurica (Croatia): I should like first of all to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the duties
of Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and to thank you and the Libyan presidency
of the Security Council for organizing this important
open debate.
I also thank Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa;
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union; and former Prime

09-27161

Minister of Italy Romano Prodi for their important
contributions and valuable remarks.
Croatia recognizes the primary responsibility and
leading role of the Security Council in the maintenance
of international peace and security as the only global
body mandated with that task. Nevertheless, we have
all come to agree that this global task can be more
effectively implemented with active engagement at the
regional, subregional and national levels. Optimally,
because of their interrelated nature, those three levels
of responsibility — global, regional and national —
should act in harmony in order to achieve peace and
security, respecting the principles of subsidiarity, the
clear division of labour and effectiveness. In that
respect, regional organizations should assume their
share of the responsibility, as appropriate, in
global/regional partnership mechanisms.
I would mention that this week we have
witnessed a transfer of authorities from the European
Union-led peacekeeping force in Chad to the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad — a good example of successful cooperation
with a regional organization.
The African Union is an organization set to build
an even more solid and permanent architecture in order
to address the numerous challenges facing Africa. In
that respect, the African Union is a fitting regional
partner for the Security Council and the United Nations
in general in the project to achieve peace and stability
in the continent. The question remains how to
maximize the comparative advantages of each
respective partner, thus making the best use of this
United Nations/African Union partnership. We would
like to emphasize a couple of points in that respect.
First, any true and effective partnership must
have a common vision and shared expectations of
which goals can realistically be achieved. The
strengthening of ties and increased contacts between
appropriate United Nations and African Union
structures seems like a good step towards achieving a
better understanding of, among other things, each
partner’s role, ability and limitations. Thus, we
welcome and support initiatives aimed at that goal.
Secondly, we could not agree more that the
concept of conflict prevention should be strengthened
and given more prominence in the work of the United
Nations/African Union partnership. The United
Nations has continuously built up its conflict

15

S/PV.6092

prevention capacities, including through the work of
the Peacebuilding Commission. The African Union has
also created its own preventive diplomacy mechanisms,
including the Panel of the Wise and the Continental
Early Warning System. All this represents a positive
and most welcome development.

ago, the Security Council began to examine key
questions related to United Nations peacekeeping. At a
time when operational resources are scarce within the
United Nations, we must develop ways to enhance our
cooperation with regional organizations such as the
African Union.

Thirdly, we stress the importance of capacitybuilding as a way of enhancing the African Union’s
effectiveness and efficiency as it performs tasks the
organization has set for itself with respect to conflict
prevention, management and resolution. In that regard,
we see merit in the proposal to establish a voluntary
multi-donor trust fund to address capacity-building
issues.

Over the past few decades, United Nations
peacekeeping has changed tremendously in terms of its
nature and scope. Our response to the evolving
challenges must be updated accordingly. Strengthening
the capacities of the African Union is an essential
prerequisite if the African Union is to take on a more
significant burden in contributing to peace and security
in Africa.

As for the African Union’s peacekeeping efforts,
we firmly believe that they cannot be separated from
the broader deliberations, including those initiated by
the United Kingdom and France, on re-evaluating how
peacekeeping in general is undertaken. Furthermore,
while we agree that there is a need for more systematic,
sustainable and predictable funding for the African
Union’s peacekeeping missions, we strongly advocate
finding a viable, realistic and responsible way to deal
with this challenge.

The panel has made several proposals on how to
address that issue, including the development of a
comprehensive plan for long-term capacity-building
and the establishment of a multi-donor trust fund. Such
a trust fund could help to build synergies among the
efforts of various donors and thereby increase the
overall impact of their contributions. It could also help
to prevent possible funding gaps. African ownership
should be our guiding principle in the design and
implementation of such a mechanism. The positive
experience gained in the context of the African Peace
Facility of the European Union could serve as an
example.

Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): We would ask you,
Sir, to convey our congratulations to the new
Permanent Representative of your country on the
occasion of his assuming the presidency of the
Council.
We are very grateful for the contributions made to
our debate by Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union — whom I
welcome to the Council — and by Ms. Nkosazana
Dlamini Zuma, Minister for Foreign Affairs of South
Africa. I would also like to join others in thanking
President Romano Prodi for his presentation of the
report of the African Union-United Nations panel
(S/2008/813) and for his very able leadership in
preparing it.
Austria fully supports the statement to be
delivered later today by the representative of the Czech
Republic on behalf of the European Union.
Austria commends the panel for the efforts it has
made in addressing the key issue of enhancing support
for African Union peacekeeping and in presenting
recommendations in that regard. The report of the
panel comes at a very timely moment. Just a few weeks

16

In its report, the panel also outlines a possible
way to support African Union-led peacekeeping
missions under a United Nations mandate through
United Nations-assessed contributions at the very
beginning of a peacekeeping mission, before rehatting
by the United Nations has taken place. As I have
already said, we are in favour of enhanced participation
by the African Union in crisis management in Africa.
Therefore, we believe that all possible options aimed at
supporting African Union-led peacekeeping missions
under a United Nations mandate need to be discussed
and explored.
Each crisis or conflict is different. A one-sizefits-all solution is, therefore, neither possible nor
effective. There might be cases in which an African
Union-led operation might be more effective than a
United Nations mission, or other cases in which the
United Nations might decide that it is time to reduce its
presence in a country and hand over to the African
Union. Each of those cases might require a different
support package.

09-27161

S/PV.6092

The recent resolution 1863 (2009), on supporting
the African Union Mission to Somalia, provided an
example in which the Council took a decision based on
the specific needs of that country, setting up a support
mechanism through access to assessed contributions
and a voluntary trust fund. I believe that members are
aware of the important role that the African Peace
Facility of the European Union plays in that context.

role and the responsibility of the United Nations in
leading such efforts. However, many United Nations
peacekeeping missions throughout the world encounter
certain human, material and financial constraints.
Moreover, the ever-growing demand for peacekeeping
around the globe, coupled with increasingly robust and
demanding mandates, suggests that constraints may
persist in the years to come.

Austria looks forward to receiving the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment of the various options for
supporting African Union peacekeeping. As I have
said, we believe it is important that all possible options
be explored. The question of putting in place adequate
accountability mechanisms is also critical, and we
would certainly welcome proposals by the SecretaryGeneral in that regard. Addressing important crosscutting issues, such as respect for international law;
human rights, especially the rights of women and
children, in the situation of an armed conflict; and the
protection of civilians should be an integral part of our
approach.

Against that background, it is imperative that the
United Nations enhance its peacekeeping capabilities,
including by establishing new coalitions and
partnerships in the area of peacekeeping. In fact, that is
a commitment and a challenge that we collectively
undertook under paragraph 170 of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome Document (General Assembly
resolution 60/1). Turkey therefore supports the call for
the establishment of more effective arrangements
between the United Nations and regional organizations
having complementary peacekeeping capabilities.

Let me conclude by saying that we are grateful to
the presidency of the Security Council for having
begun the discussion on this very important issue
today. We look forward to continuing our deliberations
on the basis of a report of the Secretary-General.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): I would like to begin by
welcoming and congratulating Mr. Abdurrahman
Mohamed Shalgham, new Permanent Representative of
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, and wishing him every
success. I would be grateful, Mr. President, if you
could kindly convey that message to our new
colleague. I also wish to thank you for convening
today’s open debate on the report of the African UnionUnited Nations panel on modalities for support to
African Union (AU) peacekeeping operations under a
United Nations mandate. In addition, I would like to
thank His Excellency Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union; Her Excellency Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma,
Foreign Minister of South Africa; and, of course, His
Excellency Mr. Romano Prodi, Chairman of the panel,
for their participation in and contributions to this
important and timely debate.
In today’s volatile and fragile security
environment, effective peacekeeping is of vital
importance to the maintenance of international peace
and security. In that context, there is no doubt about the

09-27161

In that context, we congratulate Mr. Prodi and
other members of the panel for their thorough and
analytical report on the role that the African Union can
play in peacekeeping and the support that the United
Nations can provide for such an undertaking. The
report addresses key issues in a comprehensive way.
Thus, rather than repeating them, I will just say that we
concur with all the basic findings of the report, as well
as with the thrust of its recommendations.
In particular, we support the panel’s visionary
recommendations aimed at developing a more effective
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union not only on peacekeeping, but also on
conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction.
Furthermore, we share the views concerning the need
to enhance African peacekeeping capabilities. The
success of all such efforts requires support from the
relevant United Nations bodies and organs, as well as
from Member States.
The United Nations has embarked upon a
comprehensive review aimed at enhancing the
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. As a matter of fact, the Secretary-General
has invited the members of the Security Council and
high-level administrators of the Secretariat to a retreat
this weekend to discuss that issue. As a major troopand police-contributing country, Turkey actively
follows the review process. We believe that the
development of an effective partnership between the

17

S/PV.6092

United Nations and the African Union, as well as the
enhancement of the Union’s peacekeeping capabilities,
should constitute an integral part of that process.
One of the crucial aspects of long-term capacitybuilding is, of course, funding. Hence, the priority
accorded by the panel to examining the difficulties in
that area is well placed. Indeed, the provision of
predictable and sustainable funding to support the
African Union’s peacekeeping efforts is of utmost
importance to the success of that endeavour. We
believe that the recommendations contained in the
report regarding this particular aspect are of
significance and merit due and in-depth consideration.
In other words, we believe that the panel’s report
depicts the serious challenges standing in the way of
effective African peacekeeping, as well as the
opportunities and prospects that it entails. Therefore,
the thought-provoking recommendations included in
the report with a view to overcoming those difficulties
should be fully taken into account in our own review.
Accordingly, we hope that, following the evaluation of
the Secretary-General, a joint United Nations and
African Union team can soon be established to
examine these recommendations and how best to
implement them.
Investing in Africans’ peacekeeping capacity
means investing in the security, stability and future of
that great continent. It is a sound investment that will
surely pay off as the African continent fully develops
its own capabilities. Turkey is ready and willing to do
its fair share in this regard. The rapidly developing
relations between Turkey and the African countries, as
evidenced by the African Union’s declaration of
Turkey as one of its three strategic partners, provides
us ample ground to build upon, and we are committed
to doing so.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, allow me to welcome the new Permanent
Representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and to
wish him every success during your presidency of the
Council. I also welcome the presence of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ban Ki-moon; the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro; the Chairman of the
African Union-United Nations panel, Mr. Romano
Prodi; the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union (AU), Mr. Ramtane Lamamra; and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa,
Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma.

18

The report of the African Union-United Nations
panel on modalities for support to African Union
peacekeeping operations (S/2008/813) is a useful and
important contribution to the task of identifying more
effective ways of linking the efforts of the United
Nations in the area of peace and security, in particular
those of the Security Council, with those of regional
and subregional organizations.
It is important to remember the inevitable
regional dimension of internal conflicts. This requires
the identification of appropriate strategies that define
actions emphasizing compliance with international law,
the peaceful solution of disputes, respect for human
rights and the strengthening of the rule of law.
This cooperation with regional organizations,
however, is of particular relevance and clearly fruitful
when it occurs within the purview of regional
organizations. We must not overlook this point when
we consider the role of regional organizations. Neither
must we forget that different organizations serve
different purposes in each of the regions — hence the
advantages of exploring this option in the case of the
AU.
We firmly believe that in order to achieve
peacebuilding and peacekeeping in Africa, we need to
work on four main issues: the resolution of conflict —
that is, the establishment of peace; the promotion of
economic development and of institution-building;
respect for human rights; and conflict prevention
through a focus on the causes of conflict and the
eradication thereof.
The shared responsibility of the United Nations
and the AU in achieving those goals is clear. Thus,
drawing on the experience of United Nations
peacekeeping missions in Africa, it is clearly important
for us to have a strategic vision, shared by the AU and
the United Nations, clear and viable mandates and
close coordination between United Nations agencies
and programmes in the field and regional and
subregional organizations when a peace mission is
deployed.
The link between the AU and the Security
Council could be strengthened through exchanges of
information, in particular the presentation of regular
reports on the regional and multilateral peacekeeping
operations deployed on the continent. We therefore
believe that we should explore the issue of mechanisms
to develop AU capacities to take timely action.

09-27161

S/PV.6092

However, my country believes that these endeavours
must be aimed at a lasting solution to conflict and
require wide-ranging and effective measures that attack
the roots of conflict and promote long-term stability in
the continent.
We therefore trust that we will soon have an
assessment by the Secretary-General of the report so
that this Council can focus its consideration of this
issue on the next steps we need to take to support AU
peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): First of all, I would like to
welcome the appointment of the Permanent
Representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, who is a
friend of ours. I thank His Excellency Mr. Prodi for the
introduction of a very important report (S/2008/813). I
would also like to welcome the presence of African
Union Commissioner Lamamra and Ms. Dlamini
Zuma, Foreign Minister of South Africa, at today’s
meeting. The presence of these high-level
representatives demonstrates the importance that
African Union members attach to this challenging
issue.
The Security Council has been devoting
considerable time and energy to addressing many
issues of peace and stability in Africa. Therefore, it is
gratifying that the African Union (AU) has been
playing an increasingly important role in the
maintenance of peace and security on the African
continent. We commend the efforts undertaken by
African countries.
It is important for the United Nations to make full
use of the strength and advantage of regional
organizations whenever appropriate, consistent with
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. We concur
on the need to reinforce practical cooperation between
the United Nations and the AU. More specific steps
should be taken to strengthen cooperation between the
United Nations Secretariat and the AU Commission.
We should also further promote the existing good
cooperation between the Security Council and the AU
Peace and Security Council.
The cooperation between the Security Council
and regional organizations should be developed in a
way that reflects the principle that the Council has the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, according to the
Charter. In particular, when peacekeeping operations
that are initiated and led by regional organizations are

09-27161

considered for transfer to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, the United Nations and the relevant
regional
organizations
must
start
early-stage
consultation, coordination and information sharing.
Japan has promoted the enhanced peacekeeping
capabilities of African countries, the AU and regional
organizations. The Security Council should encourage
the international community and mobilize traditional
and new, unconventional donors to continue to extend
support for the capacity-building of AU headquarters,
AU peacekeeping operations and individual Member
States that are troop-contributing countries.
The importance of capacity-building through
better training and better equipment cannot be
overemphasized and should be given particular
attention. At the fourth Tokyo International Conference
on African Development, held in Japan this past year,
support for capacity-building of African peacekeeping
efforts was stressed as an essential element of the
consolidation of peace and stability in Africa. We
therefore welcome the ongoing efforts made by the AU
support team within the United Nations Secretariat.
Japan will continue to provide its assistance to support
training centres for peacekeeping operations in many
African countries.
The most crucial factor for effective action is
African ownership, and we welcome the growing
commitment to that on the part of the AU. In this
respect, it is interesting to note the recommendation
contained in the panel’s report to establish a system for
financial support for peacekeeping operations through
AU-assessed contributions.
We recognize the panel’s emphasis on the fact
that one of major constraints is resources — how to
secure predictable, sustainable and flexible resources.
We naturally welcome initiatives by regional
organizations such as the AU to maintain regional
peace and security. However, an authorization given by
the Security Council for such an operation itself is
meant for activities of regional organizations and does
not automatically qualify for financial support by the
United Nations.
In our view, we need to clarify practical, legal,
administrative and financial aspects. We should also
study the matter further to determine what would be
credible and realistic conditions in order for such
support to be made available. When it comes to the use
of the assessed budget of the United Nations, we must

19

S/PV.6092

stress the importance of respecting the established
rules and mechanisms of the United Nations. As clearly
stated in the Charter of the United Nations, including
in Article 17, only the expenses of the United Nations
itself shall be borne by Member States through
assessed contributions. We should also consider how to
ensure accountability and transparency in a credible
manner, on the part of the United Nations Secretariat
and also on the part of the African Union.
With regard to the possibility of establishing a
trust fund based on voluntary contributions, we should
examine the relationship with existing mechanisms and
the modalities for effectively managing, planning for,
implementing and evaluating the fund.
We take note of the many interesting ideas
presented in the panel’s report. We are committed to
supporting the African Union and other regional
organizations in Africa and we are ready to consider
carefully every feasible option.
The panel’s report addresses a wide variety of
issues that will require detailed technical consideration.
We believe it would be useful to set the priorities and
timeframe for the Council’s review. In that regard, we
appreciate the Secretary-General’s assessment and
analysis of the panel’s recommendations, on the basis
of which the Security Council should examine the most
appropriate way to follow up the recommendations.
Finally, let me reiterate that peace and security in
Africa are fundamental to the continent’s economic and
social stability. Japan, mindful of that overriding
imperative, continues to promote peace and security in
Africa and support for the efforts of the African Union
and subregional organizations. In that regard, we attach
particular priority to enhancing Africa’s peacekeeping
capabilities, strengthening the African Peace and
Security Architecture, funding issues and an effective
peacebuilding strategy.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin by warmly welcoming to New
York the new Permanent Representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya. I would also like to express my
gratitude for the way that you, Ambassador Dabbashi,
have guided the work of the Council during the time
you have been responsible for representing Libya. I
would also like to welcome the participation of the
Secretary-General and the presence among us of
Deputy Secretary-General Migiro; the Foreign Minister
of South Africa; the Chairman of the African Union-

20

United Nations panel, Mr. Romano Prodi; and the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, Mr. Lamamra.
The international collective security system will
not be able to ensure observance of the principles of
international law unless it enjoys the active
participation of regional and subregional organizations.
Including them in the process of creating an
international environment conducive to harnessing
national efforts in ensuring the development and wellbeing of peoples is an imperative of our day. That was
the message that Costa Rica wanted to impart last
November when it organized an open debate on
strengthening collective security mechanisms, reducing
military expenditures and increasing spending on
social development (see S/PV.6017). The first and most
important contribution that regional organizations can
make to international peace and security is to actively
participate in establishing an environment in which
rights are respected, obligations honoured and all
members participate in extending international
guarantees as to the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States.
History has indisputably illustrated the value of
the participation of regional organizations and
arrangements in preventing conflicts and resolving
them peacefully. Geographic proximity, shared history
and cultural affinities have always been extremely
valuable to international efforts to prevent conflict. For
instance, is it not the case that peace in Kosovo was
facilitated by the regional effort that led to the
Rambouillet Accords? Was not last year’s tension
between Thailand and Cambodia eased as a result of
the efforts of their regional partners in the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations? Was not the peace that
was achieved in Kenya following the tension during
the elections the result of the decisive intervention of
that country’s African friends? My own country’s
decision not to possess an army was only ratified
following the intervention of our regional body to
guarantee our peace and territorial integrity. The whole
world of the past 50 years provides numerous examples
that confirm the decisive contributions of regional
organizations.
In addition to their contribution in the prevention
and peaceful resolution of conflicts, regional
organizations can also play an indispensable role in
focusing attention on a conflict early on. Often, the
cumbersome machinery of the United Nations lacks the

09-27161

S/PV.6092

necessary flexibility to act in the early stages of a
conflict. In addition, it is also frequently the case that
decisive action by regional and subregional
organizations is successful in ending a conflict before
it can have devastating effects.
Those examples of the real and potential
contributions of regional organizations inform our
meeting today. As the debate last April (see S/PV.5868)
illustrated, this is not an easy subject. However, the
current circumstances and the direction that the
international Organization is taking compel us to begin
to design new models for cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations. It is no
surprise that it was the African Union that once again
raised an issue that has always been on the agenda. The
attention that the international community pays to
conflicts in Africa, as well as the growing desire of
Africans to contribute to resolving them, albeit with
very limited resources, make it very urgent for the
Security Council to consider this issue.
The report before us today (S/2008/813)
constitutes an important step forward on a long road
that requires us give up old habits and think creatively
about how to solve new problems. Costa Rica firmly
believes that cooperation between our two
organizations must go far beyond merely agreeing on
support packages to provide African forces with boots,
bulletproof vests, communications equipment and light
weapons, as we did recently with regard to Somalia.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union is of strategic importance. We must
move ahead with identifying responsibilities and
modalities for cooperation. To that end, it is necessary
to increase and improve the quality of communication
at all levels. It will not be an easy process; nor will it
produce results very quickly.
Costa Rica appreciates the report of the joint
panel as a tool to identify goals and make
recommendations, which must now be the subject of a
great deal of consideration, analysis and dialogue. In
order to arrive at the needed answers, we must continue
to build up experiences and learn lessons. A detailed
examination of the experience of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and of the
process launched by resolution 1863 (2009) on Somalia
will undoubtedly contribute to the consideration of this
issue.

09-27161

Everyone knows that financial cooperation issues
will be the most difficult to resolve. Our previous
meeting on this issue identified potential significant
differences in that regard. Such differences are
inevitable. My Government is carefully considering the
recommendations made by the panel in that
connection. We look forward to the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations in order that we can
contribute to developing greater cooperation with the
African Union.
Despite the fact that the report clearly establishes
the need to build this ad hoc relationship without
creating a precedent, my delegation believes that
strengthening the relationship with the African Union
must go hand in hand with the construction of more
flexible and effective models for cooperation with
other regional and
subregional
organizations
throughout the world. In the last analysis, what we are
building is not a link that will result in preferential
treatment for one particular organization; rather, we are
bolstering multilateralism and the international
collective system of security in our world.
Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank you, Sir, for presiding over today’s
open debate and to avail myself of this opportunity to
welcome you in your new post as the Permanent
Representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. I would
also like to welcome Ms. Zuma, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of South Africa, and Mr. Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union (AU), to our meeting today. I would also like to
thank Mr. Prodi and the African Union-United Nations
panel of eminent persons under his leadership for the
report they have submitted (S/2008/813). The report’s
recommendations on strengthening the peacekeeping
capacity of the AU merit careful consideration.
The world today is confronted with more and
more challenges. As Africa is the region with the
greatest concentration of wars and conflicts, achieving
peace and security in Africa has become one of the
most immediate and pressing challenges facing us.
Maintaining peace and stability on the African
continent is not only in the interests of African
countries and peoples, but also in the common interest
of the international community as a whole.
The Security Council is entrusted with the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The Council has

21

S/PV.6092

invested an enormous amount of energy in Africa; 60
per cent of the items on its agenda relate to the
continent, and nearly half of the Council-mandated
United Nations peacekeeping operations are deployed
there.
We are satisfied to note that the AU has played an
increasingly important role in maintaining peace and
stability in Africa and in settling African conflicts,
serving as a beneficial and strong complement to the
work of the Security Council. It is therefore both the
widely shared aspiration of the African countries and a
practical need for the Council’s work to further
strengthen the cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union.
We are all in favour of a closer partnership
between the African Union and the United Nations.
This partnership should be built on a stable yet flexible
basis. While ensuring its own authority, the Security
Council should give priority consideration to
supporting the key role of the AU in conflict settlement
and should heed the views and suggestions of the
Union, including by paying more attention to African
Union voices on questions such as Darfur, the Sudan
and Somalia.
This partnership should be equal and mutually
complementary. The United Nations and the African
Union each have comparative advantages in addressing
African hot spot issues. If the two sides strengthen
coordination on the basis of mutual respect and mutual
complementarity, and if they make joint efforts to
respond to the various challenges faced by the African
continent, this will greatly enhance the overall
effectiveness of the international community’s efforts
to address African conflicts.
We support finding more reliable means of
funding for African Union peacekeeping operations as
part of our effort to provide predictable resource
guarantees. While the AU has the strong political will
to respond to conflicts in Africa, it finds it hard to play
its role fully and put to use its unique advantages,
because of logistical and financial constraints.
The recommendation in the report of the African
Union-United Nations panel of eminent persons on
establishing a new financing mechanism merits further
study by all parties concerned. In recent years, the
United Nations has worked to strengthen African Union
peacekeeping operations in places like Darfur, the
Sudan and Somalia; this has been broadly welcomed by

22

the international community. We support the
enhancement of capacity-building in the area of
peacekeeping for the African Union and hope that the
United Nations will scale up cooperation with the AU in
areas where the Organization has advantages, such as
personnel training, institution-building, informationsharing, resource management and logistics support, so
as to effectively implement the United Nations Ten-Year
Capacity-Building Programme for the African Union.
We also encourage other donors to continue to
commit themselves to strengthening the African
Union’s peacekeeping capacity. We support putting the
strengthening of the peacekeeping capacity of the
African Union on the list of priority areas in the United
Nations peacekeeping reform agenda.
Currently,
United
Nations
peacekeeping
operations are confronted with such daunting
challenges as overexpansion, low efficiency and
inadequacy of resources. Thus, strengthening the
African Union’s peacekeeping capacity will not only
increase the efficiency of peacekeeping and save
resources, but will also enhance Africa’s sense of
ownership and the capacity to take the destiny of the
continent into Africans’ own hands. It is necessary for
us to study ways to achieve the optimal combination of
the two, so that United Nations peacekeeping can be
advanced through strengthening the peacekeeping
capacity of the AU, and so that Africa can benefit from
United Nations peacekeeping reform and improve its
overall peacekeeping capabilities.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): Mr. President,
at the outset, I would like to extend to you my most
heartfelt congratulations on your appointment as the
new head of the Libyan delegation. I thank the Libyan
presidency for convening this important debate of the
Security Council. I welcome the participation of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; the Chairman of the
African Union-United Nations panel, Mr. Romano
Prodi; the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, Mr. Ramtane Lamamra; the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of South Africa, Ms. Nkosazana
Dlamini Zuma; and other distinguished individuals
from the African Union. I thank them for their
contributions. We align ourselves with the statement to
be delivered by Ambassador Abelardo Moreno
Fernández of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

09-27161

S/PV.6092

As the highest body of the United Nations
entrusted with the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security, the
Security Council has, for the past 60 years, played an
indispensable role in resolving international conflicts
and disputes, especially on the African continent. The
fact that half of the 63 United Nations peacekeeping
missions have been deployed in Africa since 1948 may
reflect the unique relationship between the United
Nations and Africa in the area of peacekeeping.
Endowed with their distinct knowledge of and
experience in tackling issues of their own region, the
African Union and African subregional organizations
have many comparative advantages in dealing with
conflict situations in Africa, while, as defined by the
Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council
plays a leading role in maintaining international peace
and security. In the face of the prevalence of threats to
peace and security in Africa, enhancing the partnership
and cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union has been and continues to be
imperative.
The transition from the Economic Community of
West African States Mission in Liberia to the United
Nations Mission in Liberia, the deployment of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, and the upcoming establishment of a United
Nations peacekeeping mission in Somalia as the
follow-on force to the African Union Mission in
Somalia, the Security Council’s adoption of resolution
1809 (2008), the meeting with the AU Peace and
Security Council last April (see S/PV.5868) and the
prompt establishment of the African Union-United
Nations panel last September all testify not only to the
necessity but also to the viability of this cooperation.
By unanimously adopting resolution 1809 (2008),
the Council demonstrated a strong determination to
elevate its partnership with the African Union to a
higher level. We strongly support the Council’s and the
African Union’s shared objective of enhancing the
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of financing
regional organizations operating under a United
Nations mandate. We also support the ongoing effort to
search for modalities to strengthen the relationship
between the Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council as well as between the United Nations
Secretariat and the African Union Commission.
Recent developments in conflict areas in Africa
have shown that much remains to be decided if lasting

09-27161

peace and stability are to be achieved on the continent.
Both the successes and failures of United Nations-led
peacekeeping operations in Africa have highlighted the
importance of enhancing the ability of the African
Union to carry out United Nations-mandated
peacekeeping operations. It is noteworthy that, while
peacekeepers in Africa account for 75 per cent of the
total number of United Nations peacekeepers deployed
worldwide, only 40 per cent are drawn from African
troop contributors. As the African Union-United
Nations panel report indicates, the principle of African
ownership should be further enhanced. To that end,
implementation of the 10-Year Capacity-Building
Programme for the African Union approved at the 2005
World Summit should be expedited.
We commend the United Nations panel for its
report issued last December, which contains many
useful recommendations, especially those relating to
capacity-building,
logistical
capacity
funding,
financing and division of responsibility. While
awaiting further assessment, we support the widely
shared opinion that, in defining the division of
responsibility, the creation of the perception that the
United Nations is subcontracting peacekeeping to the
African Union should be avoided. That is imperative in
order to bring into full play the African Union’s
comparative strategies, enhance its capacities, avoid
overlapping and ensure the sustainability of the
partnership between our two organizations.
Finally, as on any other continent, but more so,
the root causes of conflict in Africa are political and
social antitheses, violations of human rights, absolute
poverty and, very often, foreign interference and
aggression, which must be addressed in a coherent and
comprehensive manner.
It is the view of my delegation that the division of
responsibility among United Nations bodies in
cooperation with the African Union in order to
eliminate those root causes could also be clarified.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I join others
in welcoming you, Sir, to this Council, congratulating
you on becoming the Permanent Representative of
Libya and, in particular, on assuming instantly the role
of presidency of our Council. You are very welcome
here, Sir.
I also extend my thanks to Mr. Prodi and his
panel for the hard work they have put in to the report
(S/2008/813) we are discussing today. It is a particular

23

S/PV.6092

pleasure to welcome Mr. Prodi here today, as well as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa and
Ambassador Lamamra from the African Union.
Peacekeeping is central to the work of the United
Nations and in recent years we have seen a rapid
growth in the scale and complexity of the missions
undertaken by the international community. The United
Nations has been central to meeting this demand, but
the regional and subregional organizations have played
an increasingly important role within the framework of
Security Council mandates.
No organization has done more than the African
Union. I applaud its efforts, not only as a peacekeeper
in Burundi, the Sudan and Somalia, but also for
creating the conditions for recovery in Sierra Leone,
Liberia and elsewhere. In Kenya, the African Union
played a crucial role in supporting Kofi Annan’s
mediation following the post-election violence. Since
the Kenya crisis a year ago, Africa has faced a
disturbing number of examples — in Guinea, GuineaBissau, Zimbabwe and today Madagascar — where
power is decided by force and violence rather than in
accordance with constitutional requirements. Many
other African countries, not least the Sudan, face
serious problems of poor governance and lack of
respect for national and international law. Those cases
all increase the burden on the African Union to uphold
the rule of law and constitutionality in Africa, and it
deserves our support in its efforts to address those
problems.
The United Nations-African Union joint
Declaration of November 2006 and the AfricaEuropean Union Strategic Partnership, backed by the
European Union’s African Peace Facility, are important
contributions to building a better global peace and
security architecture. The United Kingdom is playing a
full part in that. We are helping to develop African
peacekeeping capability through assistance in training
thousands of troops and support to the African Standby
Force. We are also supporting African Union
operations in the field. The United Kingdom has
already provided some £5 million to the African Union
Mission in Somalia to support its crucial role in that
country, and we are working to ensure that the
peacekeeping mission receives further funding in the
weeks ahead. We are committed to supporting the
African Union and its growing peacekeeping role.

24

Security Council resolution 1809 (2008) stressed
the need for the United Nations to develop effective
partnerships, in particular with the African Union,
under Chapter VIII of the Charter. The Security
Council, of course, retains the primary role in
international peace and security and nothing can
detract from that, but we want to see the relationship
between the United Nations and the African Union
enhanced, and that includes further work on how best
to provide reliable and sustainable funding for African
Union peacekeeping.
As my Prime Minister Gordon Brown noted in
the debate which preceded the adoption of resolution
1809 (2008) (see S/PV.5868), all those involved need to
reach agreement on a way forward. A pragmatic
approach is necessary to assure that we find a workable
solution. The report of the panel led by Mr. Prodi
makes an important contribution to that work. I would
highlight the need for a shared strategic vision between
those involved in the maintenance of peace and
security, the need for increased African Union capacity
to manage operations at the headquarters level, the
need for more effective logistics support and the need
for a more coordinated approach to capacity-building.
Those important issues require further debate and
further work. We look forward to hearing the
Secretary-General’s views, taking into account the full
range of financing options, in particular the need for
start-up and early sustainment costs. One solution may
well be a multi-donor trust fund for African Union
operations, an idea that the United Kingdom has
advocated before. The voluntary nature of such a trust
fund would make it widely acceptable and encourage
new donors to play a part. It would also help provide
secure funding for an African Union rapid deployment
capability.
We welcome this debate today as another
important step forward for the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union. Once again, we
thank Mr. Prodi and his panel for their work and we
support the presidential statement that the Libyan
delegation has negotiated. We look forward to the
Secretary-General’s forthcoming report. I hope we will
also have an opportunity to consider these issues
during the forthcoming Security Council mission to
Africa.
Mr. Ripert (spoke in French): I wish at the outset
to welcome you, Sir, and to assure you of the full

09-27161

S/PV.6092

cooperation of my delegation, on which you may
count. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General and
Mr. Romano Prodi, Chairman of the panel, for their
statements, as well as all the other speakers. I am
grateful to the Secretary-General for having established
the panel and for having briefed us on the report
(S/2008/813), and to the Libyan presidency for having
organized today’s debate, at which the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of South Africa has
honoured us with her presence.

The report (S/2008/813) before us today
represents one phase of a process. In effect, the
Security Council will have to incorporate three
elements into its consideration. The first is a general
approach. The panel has presented guidelines on how
to ensure better support to African Union operations.
The Security Council must study in detail the
recommendations that the Secretary-General will
present to it in that regard. On issues of organization
and financing, its expertise is irreplaceable.

Nearly 18 months ago, the President of the
French Republic led a Security Council meeting at the
level of heads of State and Government on the topic of
Africa and challenges to international peace and
security. That meeting enabled us, inter alia, to
underscore the key role of the African Union in that
area. That role has since been further strengthened
through numerous interventions both to prevent crises
and to help resolve them. France and the European
Union are and have long been fully involved in helping
the African Union to enjoy the necessary resources to
meet those challenges.

The second element is how to implement the
support sanctioned by the Security Council to the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
Resolution 1863 (2009), which we adopted in January,
requested the Secretary-General to set up a trust fund
to support AMISOM and the joint Somali security
forces, and sanctioned the principle of a logistical
support package to AMISOM financed by the United
Nations. It is vital to concretely implement those
measures. The Secretary-General has started to do so.
We would hope that he also takes stock of that in his
next report to the Security Council.

Naturally, I fully associate myself with the
statement to be made by the representative of the
Czech Republic on behalf of the European Union,
which I would recall is the top financial partner of the
African Union. The African Peace Facility of the
European Union alone has allocated for €440 million
since 2004, and a further €300 million for the next
three years.

The third and last element is the need to take into
account the consideration that the Security Council has
just begun, at the initiative of France and the United
Kingdom, on peacekeeping operations in cooperation
with all other relevant actors of the United Nations
system. Earlier, the Secretary-General reminded us of
the United Nations system’s joint study of
peacekeeping operations that he has just undertaken.

We support the African Union in the operations it
leads. We endorse the strengthening of its structural
capacities, the building of an African Peace and
Security Architecture and the formation of an available
and trained African Standby Force, to which France,
together with Italy in particular, provides major
operational support. France supports nearly 20 African
regional training centres throughout the continent.

At a time when the number of United Nations
operations and troops is rapidly increasing, the
Organization must collectively consider how to
improve the efficiency of the peacekeeping operations
and to harmonize peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
development more effectively in the field.
Peacekeeping forces cannot do everything.

Moreover, the European Union has established
with the African Union a genuine strategic partnership
in the field of peace and security. I take this
opportunity to recall that the emergence of the
European Union’s foreign security and defence
policies, which has enabled it to become effectively
involved on the African continent in peacekeeping
missions, makes it a reliable and trustworthy partner
both for the United Nations and for the African Union.

09-27161

Our first step, therefore, is to consider in detail
the recommendations of the Secretary-General.
However, at this stage France would like to give some
general indications on how we could advance the
process together. We must reconcile the necessary
support to the African Union with the principle of the
universality of the United Nations and with the special
role that the Charter entrusts to the Security Council.
That has two types of consequences. First, in the
political field, there can be no sharing of a priori roles
that would lead to regionalization in maintaining

25

S/PV.6092

international peace and security. Clearly, the African
Union has a central role to play, but the Security
Council has the responsibility to act every time that it
deems it necessary. Moreover, we must be careful to
avoid a formalization or institutionalization that
paralyses our relations. It is in the field that we must
strengthen those relations.
With regard to financing, we share the objective
to achieve permanent financing for African Union
peacekeeping operations, but recourse to mandatory
contributions of the United Nations does not seem a
good solution to us. For reasons of effectiveness and
responsibility, the organization that finances the budget
of an operation must control it and head its chain of
command. Beyond that, we cannot ignore the severe
constraints on the financing of the United Nations
itself, which face a growing burden with an annual
budget of nearly $8 billion to finance peacekeeping
operations.
However, there are promising avenues, such as
the establishment of a global standing trust fund with
resources that can be readily mobilized, financed by
voluntary contributions and set up to attract additional
funds, in particular to meet needs not fully assessed at
this stage, such as those directly linked to military
equipment.
To conclude, I would like again to welcome the
efforts of the panel chaired by Mr. Romano Prodi.
Beyond the few differences noticeable today, it is
necessary to stress that we are debating not the
principle of how but the best way in which to support
African Union peacekeeping operations and the
African Union itself. France thanks the SecretaryGeneral for the first indications that he has given us
today, and we will study in detail and with great
interest the report that he will submit to the Security
Council on this issue in the coming months.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a few remarks in my national capacity.
At the outset, I would like to express my
gratitude to all speakers for their kind words to me and
my country, and to His Excellency the SecretaryGeneral for joining us at this important meeting. I also
wish to thank Mr. Romano Prodi for presenting the
report (S/2008/813) of his panel; Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, for his valuable contribution; and
Ms. Dlamini Zuma, Minister for Foreign Affairs of

26

South Africa, for her presence here today and for her
significant contribution to our debate.
Today, we are meeting to discuss the report of the
African Union-United Nations panel on modalities for
support to African Union peacekeeping operations.
This discussion is particularly significant in the light of
the specific recommendations of the panel chaired by
Mr. Prodi, and because peacekeeping operations in
general, and those of the African Union in particular,
face serious challenges that must be addressed quickly.
All of us here today agree that the greatest challenge
peacekeeping operations face is the growing demand
for those operations amid a significant shortage of
personnel and financing.
The first aspect — the shortage of personnel — is
in fact linked to the second, the shortage of financing.
We know that many African States are ready to
contribute troops to peacekeeping operations if they are
provided with the necessary financing, equipment and
weapons in compliance with United Nations standards.
Then there is the African Standby Force, which is
expected to be operational by the middle of next year.
This is a significant step for peacekeeping, and we
should begin now to provide it with steady support,
especially given the possible need for its rapid
deployment to address urgent events.
Africa suffers from conflict, poverty and disease.
It sorely needs the support of the international
community in achieving security and stability,
promoting development and combating poverty and
disease. The money spent on war throughout the world
is many hundreds of times the amount needed to enable
Africa to maintain and build peace and achieve
development.
We are disappointed that to date the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has been unable
to gain sufficient support from the international
community to ensure its full deployment. The forces
currently deployed have not received weapons and
equipment in accordance with United Nations
standards, despite the fact that promises have been
made. We regret that one AMISOM troop-contributing
country is seriously considering withdrawing its troops
because they are unable to protect themselves.
It is therefore our hope that the Security Council
will soon agree to transform the African Union Mission
in Somalia into a United Nations mission. The security
and humanitarian situation requires this, and, morally

09-27161

S/PV.6092

speaking, the United Nations cannot fail to engage in
peacekeeping in Somalia at a time when millions of
Somalis are suffering from homelessness, poverty and
disease.
The report before us today contains practical
recommendations for supporting peace in Africa. These
merit a Security Council consensus on the right
mechanisms to implement them. To our mind, it is
important that Mr. Prodi remain involved in the process
of implementing the panel’s recommendations, with a
view to strengthening the capacity of the African
Union to deploy peacekeeping forces, with reliable,
sustainable and predictable resources at its disposal.
We believe that the best way to achieve that is to
implement the recommendations set out in paragraph
90 of the report.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. Moreno Fernández (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to address the Security
Council on behalf of the 118 States members of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
First of all, Mr. President and my friend, I would
like to welcome you as you assume your
responsibilities as Permanent Representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations and to
express our appreciation to your country for organizing
this important debate and for its outstanding work in
the presidency of the Security Council. I wish also to
pay tribute to Their Excellencies Mr. Romano Prodi,
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra and Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini
Zuma for their statements, which were clearly of the
highest interest to the members of our Movement.
Today’s debate is a welcome endeavour in our
joint quest to advance cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union. I thank the African
Union-United Nations panel for its report on modalities
for support to African Union peacekeeping operations
(S/2008/813), which it submitted in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1809 (2008).
The non-aligned countries, which currently
provide more than 80 per cent of peacekeeping
personnel in the field, including personnel from
African countries, wish to reiterate their support for
continuing efforts to strengthen African peacekeeping
capacities. In that context, the Movement emphasizes

09-27161

the importance of implementing the Joint Action Plan
for United Nations support to African Union
peacekeeping in the short, medium and long term,
focusing primarily on collaboration in the areas of
conflict prevention and peacekeeping, in particular
assistance to the development of an African Standby
Force.
The Non-Aligned Movement takes this
opportunity to underline the need to enhance and
clarify the strategic relationship between the United
Nations and the African Union, specifically between
the United Nations Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council, and between the
United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission, as the basis for a more efficient
partnership in addressing issues of mutual interest.
We subscribe to the recommendation of the
panel’s report that in defining the division of
responsibility, it is important not to create the
perception that the United Nations is subcontracting
peacekeeping to the African Union. The objective
should be to maximize the African Union’s strengths in
terms of its contribution to conflict prevention and
mediation, and its capacity to undertake peacekeeping
operations in conformity with Chapter VIII of the
Charter.
The Movement shares the view that resources
should be made available to peacekeeping operations
carried out by African Union in a sustainable and
predictable manner without undermining the value of
the flexibility needed to respond quickly to crisis.
Non-aligned countries recognize the need to
support the African Union in developing the
institutional capacities which will enable it to
implement its mandate in a coordinated and
appropriate manner, in particular the need to build
integrated capacities to plan, manage and support
conflict-prevention and peacekeeping activities in
Africa in close cooperation with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.
The Movement would like also to underscore the
need to identify innovative financial and logistical
support mechanisms that focus on the requirements of
the African Union at the continental level. In this
regard, the Movement takes note of the financial
mechanisms proposed by the African Union-United
Nations panel and looks forward to receiving further
information on their implementation.

27

S/PV.6092

We stress the importance of close coordination
among all international partners and donors supporting
African Union peacekeeping capacity-building,
including the necessary support for the creation of
effective
and
appropriately
funded
training
programmes.
The Non-Aligned Movement strongly believes
that the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security rests with the United
Nations and that the role of regional arrangements
should be in strict accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter and should not in any way be a substitute for
the role of the United Nations or circumvent the full
application of the guiding principles for United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
In that connection, the Movement reiterates that
the establishment of any peacekeeping operation or
extension of the mandate of existing operations must
strictly respect the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as the basic
principles governing such operations: consent of the
parties, the non-use of force, except in legitimate selfdefence, and impartiality.
Peacekeeping operations must not and cannot be
used as a substitute for dealing with the root causes of
conflict, but should address them in a consistent, wellplanned, coordinated and comprehensive manner,
together with other political, social, economic and
development instruments.
The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
reaffirms the need to establish a logistics base to
support United Nations peacekeeping in Africa, since
most United Nations peacekeeping activities are
carried out there. That would further increase the
deployment of missions in Africa, thus ensuring costeffectiveness and supporting capacity-building of the
African Union in the area of peacekeeping operations.
Permit me to conclude by emphasizing that
Africa’s challenges are multidimensional and cannot be
addressed separately. The issues of conflict prevention
and resolution and peacekeeping are inextricably
linked
to
sustainable
social
and
economic
development.
Finally, we hope that this debate will contribute
to the adoption of concrete and appropriate measures to
strengthen the relationship between the United Nations
and the African Union.

28

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now call on
the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to extend our
greetings to you, Sir, as you assume your duties as
Permanent Representative of Libya to the United
Nations as well as in the presidency of the Council for
the month of March. I thank you for the initiative of
convening this timely debate, which is of great interest
to all of us. I appreciate the presence of and the
statements made by the Secretary-General, Minister
Dlamini Zuma and Mr. Lamamra, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union. This highlevel attendance only confirms the importance of the
matter before us today.
I wish to express my appreciation to Mr. Romano
Prodi for his leadership in conducting the work of the
panel on modalities for cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in support of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We appreciate the
extensive consultations with Member States, which
added to the already sharp perception of the panel. We
believe that the panel’s report (S/2008/813) is a
powerful instrument for building a shared strategic
vision on an enhanced partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union.
In recent years, the United Nations has faced an
increasing number of challenges in the field of peace
and security. Peacekeeping operations have become
more complex. African countries and regional
organizations have repeatedly stepped forward and
expressed their willingness to shoulder increased
responsibility in our common effort to keep peace.
Such was the case in Darfur, Somalia and Côte
d’Ivoire, among other places. That commendable
attitude must be met with an equal willingness on the
part of the United Nations to provide the necessary
support.
The importance of cooperation with the African
Union and with African subregional organizations was
reaffirmed at the level of heads of State and
Government when the Council met last April under the
South African presidency (see S/PV.5868) and adopted
resolution 1809 (2008). Before that, at the 2005 World
Summit, the heads of State and Government of the
entire membership of the Organization had supported
the idea of enhanced cooperation. The report before us
gives concrete form to that common objective.

09-27161

S/PV.6092

The cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union is an expression of the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the Charter, as recognized in the
panel’s report. The principles and purposes of the
founding document of the Organization, as well as the
primary responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security, are the
premises of such cooperation.
We fully endorse the view of the panel that
sustainable peace cannot be achieved through the
deployment of military forces alone. The cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
should focus not only on peace, but also on sustainable
development. The inclusion of a peacebuilding
dimension in the early stages of peacekeeping is most
relevant. The promotion of security goes hand in hand
with the consolidation of national institutions and the
creation of conditions conducive to sustained
development.
Brazil takes note with interest of the panel’s
proposal that a United Nations mechanism be
established to help fund African Union peacekeeping
missions. We believe that that important proposal
deserves thorough consideration not only in the
Security Council, but also in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and in the General Assembly.
Brazil concurs with the panel and the African Union
that one cannot expect peacekeeping missions to be
deployed in uncertain scenarios without the necessary
means. We agree with the analysis that in the absence
of the necessary capabilities, such an approach entails
not only the risk of failure, but also the risk of raising
expectations that will not be fulfilled, with serious
consequences for the credibility of the Organization.
The African Union is uniquely positioned to
provide expertise and ownership in the process of
resolving conflicts on the continent. We must draw on
its resources and knowledge, but we should also take an
active role in contributing to its success. Subregional

organizations — the Southern African Development
Community, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the Economic Community of West
African States, to name but a few — often go the extra
mile to ensure peace and act on behalf of the Council.
They need to be supported in such efforts.
Brazil is a traditional contributor of troops to
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We currently
have military and police in several missions in Africa —
those in Western Sahara, Côte d’Ivoire, the Sudan and
Liberia — and in the special political missions in
Guinea-Bissau and West Africa. In the past, we sent
troops to Angola and Mozambique in peacekeeping
operations that were essential for those fellow
Portuguese-speaking countries.
Our contribution to African peacekeeping is
focused less on financial resources and more on training
and the transfer of expertise. This modality of SouthSouth cooperation is based on a shared perspective
regarding conflict resolution as a holistic experience
resting on the three pillars of security, political
reconciliation and development. At this juncture, Brazil
is examining various ways to improve our cooperation
in the area of peacekeeping both with the African Union
and with individual African countries, taking into
account our budgetary limitations and the ability to
produce a significant impact on the ground.
Peacekeeping is a global responsibility as well as
a global asset. Cooperation with the African Union
represents an additional path to ensure peace and
security. It does not, however, diminish the duties of
the United Nations. Brazil is ready to participate in the
discussions following up on the recommendations of
the panel.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are still a
number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. I intend, with the concurrence of the members
of the Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

09-27161

29
