A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/113
20 January 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 101
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/53/616)]
53/113. United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 52/89 of 12 December 1997 and all other relevant resolutions,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General1 and further acknowledging the assistance rendered to
the United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
Bearing in mind the urgent need to establish effective crime prevention strategies for Africa, as well as
the importance of law enforcement agencies and the judiciary at the regional and subregional levels,
1. Commends the United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders for its efforts to promote and coordinate regional technical cooperation activities related to crime
prevention and criminal justice systems in Africa;
2. Reiterates the need to strengthen further the capacity of the Institute to support national
mechanisms for crime prevention and criminal justice in African countries;

1

A/53/381.

99-76339

/...

A/RES/53/113
Page 2

3. Urges the States members of the Institute to make every possible effort to meet their obligations to
the Institute;
4. Appeals to all Member States and non-governmental organizations to adopt concrete practical
measures to support the Institute in the development of the requisite capacity and implement its programmes
and activities aimed at strengthening crime prevention and criminal justice systems in Africa;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify efforts to mobilize all relevant entities of the United
Nations system to provide the necessary financial and technical support to the Institute to enable it to fulfil its
mandate;
6. Calls upon the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme to work closely
with the Institute;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to enhance regional cooperation, coordination and collaboration in
the fight against crime, especially in its transnational dimension, which could not be adequately dealt with by
national action alone;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to make concrete proposals to strengthen the programmes and
activities of the Institute and to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
