United Nations

S/PV.6478

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6478th meeting
Wednesday, 9 February 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Viotti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-22913 (E)

*1122913*

S/PV.6478

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I should like to invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Haile Menkerios, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan,
and His Excellency Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, Chair of the
Secretary-General’s Panel on the Referenda in the
Sudan. I wish to acknowledge the presence in the
Council Chamber of Mr. Antonio Monteiro and
Mr. Bhojraj Pokharel, the two other members of the
Panel.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Mahmoud Kane, head of the
African Union Liaison Office in the Sudan, who will
read a statement via videolink from Khartoum on behalf
of His Excellency Mr. Thabo Mbeki, Chairperson of the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel on the
Sudan.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I also invite Mr. Deng Alor Kuol,
Minister of Regional Cooperation of the Government
of Southern Sudan.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Haile Menkerios.
Mr. Menkerios: The day before yesterday, on
7 February, the final results of the Southern Sudan selfdetermination referendum were officially announced
by the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission. Out
of almost 4 million Southern Sudanese registered,
97.58 per cent voted in a process that has been
unanimously described by all observers — national,
regional and international, and the Panel of the
Secretary-General included — as free, fair and
credible. An overwhelming majority of voters — that,
is 98.83 per cent — voted for secession.
On the day of the announcement of these results
by the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission,
2

President Omar Al-Bashir signed a decree confirming
his Government’s acceptance of these results as the
legitimate expression of the will of the people of
Southern Sudan, this confirming the Government of the
Sudan’s readiness to recognize the formation of an
independent South Sudan at the end of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) period on
9 July 2011. In my most recent briefing to the Council
(see S/PV.6468), I reiterated the role played by
President Al-Bashir, who, one week before the
referendum, made a historic visit to Juba, which
completely changed the atmosphere and contributed to
making the referendum process very peaceful and
orderly.
I would like to take this opportunity to emphasize
the historical significance of these events. Against the
odds, not only did the national Government of the
Sudan contribute to the successful holding of the
Southern Sudan self-determination referendum, but
President Al-Bashir and the National Congress Party
have now formally recognized the validity and
legitimacy of its outcome. In doing so, they have most
likely ended, once and for all, one of Africa’s most
protracted and deadliest conflicts. Indeed, 7 February
2011 will have to be remembered and celebrated in the
Sudan’s and Africa’s history as a day when the longest
running civil war in the continent’s recent history came
to a definitive end, when the spirit of peace and
cooperation prevailed over the spirit of war.
This same spirit has also helped the CPA parties
to make significant progress, in negotiations facilitated
by the African Union High-level Implementation Panel
(AUHIP) chaired by President Mbeki, on a wide range
of post-referendum arrangements between their two
States. I applaud the leadership shown by Presidents
Mbeki, Buyoya and Abu-Bakr for their stewardship of
this important process.
Much of the groundwork has already been
completed. Both parties are engaging seriously and
making progress. A number of principles have been
agreed with respect to open borders, good-neighbourly
relations, non-interference in the affairs of the other
and recognition of economic interdependence. In the
area of security, the two parties have now defined a
broad framework for non-aggression and military
cooperation, and have decided to establish joint
mechanisms to manage their security relations,
including at their common border.

11-22913

S/PV.6478

The parties have also agreed on the broad outline
of citizenship arrangements, including rights of travel,
residency, property ownership and employment, as
well as protection against forced deportation or
relocation for each other’s citizens. In the economic
and oil cluster, the parties are working towards
mutually beneficial arrangements on oil revenuesharing and a range of bilateral economic relations. I
hope that the good will generated by the referendum
will translate into increased momentum and the
finalization soon of an agreement between the two CPA
partners on all these and other post-referendum
arrangements.
I would also like to commend the parties for their
efforts to prevent and contain violence in Abyei,
including the agreements reached in Kadugli on 1 and
l7 January, and their recent commitment to resolving
Abyei’s status by the end of March. Both President
Bashir and First Vice-President Kiir have reiterated
their intent to address the local communities’ concerns
and facilitate a peaceful migration, while opposing any
unilateral action in Abyei. At the parties’ request, the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS)
facilitated the transport of nearly 1,280 additional joint
integrated unit troops to an assembly point within the
Abyei Area, and the Joint Defense Board has agreed on
locations for their final deployment. I was told this
morning, shortly before I came to the Security Council,
that the deployment of those troops to their various
locations started yesterday.
As soon as the joint integrated units are fully
deployed to their designated posts in the Area, the
Abyei Administration has agreed to withdraw the
controversial Abyei police units from the field into
Abyei town, thus allowing the seasonal Misseriya
migration to commence, and the Misseriya have agreed
to remove roadblocks currently preventing traffic from
entering southern Abyei from the North.
Serious challenges remain, however. For the
moment, those roadblocks continue to choke off the
flow of food and other supplies into Abyei town.
Despite the tireless efforts of UNMIS to support
improved inter-tribal relations, tensions in the area
continue. Given the delicacy of the current
environment, I urge the parties to redouble their efforts
to keep the peace on the ground, while taking
advantage of the political momentum they have built in
other areas to conclusively address the deeper issues
driving the conflict in Abyei.

11-22913

While incidents that took place in Abyei and
Unity and Western Equatoria states cannot be
downplayed, the security environment in the UNMIS
area of operation was generally good during the
referendum period. In Southern Sudan, progress is
continuing on the integration of the forces which had
rebelled against the Government of Southern Sudan
following the April 2010 elections, and which had
subsequently been granted amnesty. The fighting that
occurred between members of the Sudanese Armed
Forces joint integrated units between 3 and 5 February
in Malakal and its vicinity, which caused up to 50
casualties among those units and civilians, was a
reminder, however, of how fragile the security situation
in Southern Sudan remains. It was easily destabilized
by the attempt for a rushed dissolution of the joint
integrated units, and I would like to urge the parties to
remain cautious, to continue working together and,
where appropriate, to utilize UNMIS in implementing
decisions related to the termination of joint CPA
institutions, such as the dissolution of the joint
integrated units.
I would also like to welcome the conclusion of
the popular consultation hearings in Blue Nile state.
Issues such as power- and wealth-sharing, the future of
Sudan People’s Liberation Army members from the
North, land allocation and cultural identity have been
raised during the consultations and will need to be on
the agenda of the discussions with the national
Government. Popular consultations in Southern
Kordofan are now expected to commence after the
elections scheduled for May. Voter registration in
Southern Kordofan started on 24 January and is
expected to last three weeks.
I mentioned in my last briefing that the impact of
the popular consultation process will be limited unless
it is matched by an accommodating national
dispensation. It is significant to note that since that
time, the National Congress Party has promised not
only to widen the base of the national Government, but
also to start broad consultations over the future
constitution of Northern Sudan. While the Northern
opposition is asking to discuss the basis on which this
broadening would unfold, such a political opening is
definitely welcome, and UNMIS stands ready to
support, in collusion with partners — particularly the
AUHIP, which has the mandate to facilitate such a
process — any political process that would permit the
consolidation of the democratic gains made during the

3

S/PV.6478

CPA, which are essential to the continued stability of
Northern Sudan.
The process for considering the United Nations
future presence and possible role in Northern and
Southern Sudan, and between the North and the South,
has now started. For the South, the Government of
Southern Sudan has indicated that it would welcome
United Nations engagement in support of peace
consolidation, capacity-building of the new State’s
institutions, and border management. A technical
assessment of those needs will start very shortly this
month. For the North, we are currently discussing with
the authorities the areas in which they seek future
United Nations cooperation. Possible United Nations
or other third-party engagement in the implementation
of post-referendum arrangements that the two States may
agree upon — such as Abyei, the border, et cetera —
are on the agenda of the current ongoing talks between
the two parties. We shall keep the Council regularly
informed of the decisions made by the parties on those
issues.
The Sudan has given us an example of how the
spirit of peace can overcome decades of war. The
National Congress Party and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement and their leaders — President
Omer Hassan Al-Bashir and Salva Kiir Mayardit —
deserve to be commended for that achievement, which
will need to be built upon. Both North and South must
now strive to consolidate peace and deliver on their
promises to their people — promises to ensure
effective and accountable democratic governance, to
drive economic development and provide social
services, to nurture their social and cultural diversity,
to protect sustainably democratic rights and freedoms
and to cooperate closely as neighbours in the pursuit of
all those goals. In a sense, their work has only just
begun, as has the work to effectively support them.
I encourage both Northern and Southern
Sudanese leaders to maintain the spirit generated by
the successful conclusion of the referendum in tackling
the tasks ahead. This is a new and historic moment for
the Sudan, a new dawn that, if built upon, can lead to
sustainable peace and progress in the Sudan and
contribute to the same in the immediate region and
throughout the continent.
The President: I thank Mr. Menkerios for his
briefing.

4

I now give the floor to His Excellency President
Benjamin Mkapa, Chair of the Secretary-General’s
Panel on the Referenda in the Sudan.
Mr. Mkapa: Thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to address the Council on the Southern
Sudan referendum process.
We just returned from Khartoum, where the
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission declared the
final result of the Southern Sudan referendum on selfdetermination. Almost 99 per cent of voters opted for
the South’s secession.
The referendum was a major milestone on the
road to lasting peace in the Sudan charted by the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, signed by the
Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement in 2005. The two parties wrote to
the Secretary-General in July last year, asking that the
United Nations provide the main monitoring mission
for the referendum in Southern Sudan. In September,
the Secretary-General established our three-member
Panel to monitor and assess the referendum process for
both Southern Sudan and the Abyei Area.
We were privileged to be asked to carry out that
task at a historic juncture in the history of the Sudan.
We undertook five visits to the country and we
established a support office, with field offices across
the country. The Panel concludes that the referendum’s
outcome reflects the will of the people of Southern
Sudan and that the referendum process was free, fair
and credible. We congratulate the people of the Sudan
for their commitment, dignity and patience, which
ensured that the process was peaceful and on schedule.
The last time the Panel briefed the Council (see
S/PV.6468), voting had just ended and the aggregation
of results in the North, South and out-of-country voting
locations had started. The Panel and its staff monitored
the counting and transmission of sensitive material
throughout the country, and also out-of-country. The
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission and Bureau
announced preliminary results in accordance with the
publicized timeline. The Supreme Court confirmed that
it had not received any appeals challenging the result.
The Panel assessed the referendum process based
on criteria stipulated in the Southern Sudan
Referendum Act. Those include an appropriate
environment and security conditions for the free
exercise of the right to self-determination; freedom of

11-22913

S/PV.6478

expression; the presence and participation of domestic
and international observers; freedom of assembly and
movement and voter education about the process.
The Panel is of the view that the referendum
process was conducted in a highly transparent manner.
Civil society organizations participated extensively.
Public statements by senior Government officials in the
North and South were increasingly encouraging and
freely transmitted through the media.
There were some problems. Lack of progress on
post-referendum arrangements meant that voters made
their decision in a situation of political uncertainty, and
voter education programmes were sometimes lacking.
A number of security incidents, not directly related to
the referendum, took place during the registration and
voting periods. There were a few instances of
intimidation of registrants, journalists and political and
human rights activists. However, those were isolated
incidents. In the view of the Panel, none of them
materially affected the credibility of the process.
The Panel commends the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission, its Bureau and all
referendum staff for overcoming numerous challenges
to administer the referendum successfully. We also
commend the United Nations Mission in the Sudan, the
United Nations Integrated Referendum and Electoral
Division and other international electoral advisers,
national and international observer groups and donors
for their assistance in achieving that goal.
The Panel recognizes and commends the decisive
role of President Omer Al-Bashir and First VicePresident Salva Kiir Mayardit. They demonstrated
courage and political commitment to ensure that a key
milestone in the peace process was reached.
The parties’ work is not over. We call on the
parties to the Peace Agreement to utilize the
momentum created by the successful completion of the
referendum to reach a lasting agreement on postreferendum arrangements, so that the peoples of
Northern and Southern Sudan can live together side by
side in cooperation, security and dignity. The Panel
also stresses the continuing importance of the
protection of all Sudanese citizens, both Northerners
and Southerners.
The Comprehensive Peace Agreement stipulated
that the Abyei Area referendum should be held
simultaneously with the Southern Sudan referendum.

11-22913

The Panel regrets that this did not take place. The
Abyei Area referendum commission has yet to be
established, and no agreement has been reached on
who would be eligible to vote. Deadly clashes took
place in the Area, further complicating the situation.
The Panel urges the two parties to the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement to seek a speedy and lasting solution
on Abyei. We call on the people of the Area to display
patience and tolerance until an equitable solution is
found.
The referendum is not an end in itself. If
implemented, this would herald a new political
dispensation for the North and the South. For that
reason, we urge the international community to
continue its political engagement, redouble its efforts
to assist the Sudan in the coming months and assist the
new entities that emerge in the post-interim period. It is
only with that kind of active engagement that this
dispensation can be a sustainable one.
The President: I thank President Mkapa for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Ambassador Mahmoud Kane, Head of the African
Union Liaison Office in the Sudan.
Mr. Kane: His Excellency Mr. Thabo Mbeki,
Chairman of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel on the Sudan, would have loved
to address today this important meeting of the Security
Council. Unfortunately, this morning he had to travel
to Ghana for a previously arranged engagement. He has
requested me to deliver, on his behalf, the following
remarks, which I am humbly pleased to do.
“The African Union (AU) High-level
Implementation Panel on the Sudan would like to
thank the Council for giving us the opportunity to
address it once again. Its meeting today provides
an opportunity for all of us once more to
commend and congratulate the people of the
Sudan on the success of the Southern Sudan
referendum.
“Our Panel had the privilege to observe first
hand the people of Southern Sudan as they cast
their votes. Given the historic significance of the
referendum, it was of the utmost importance that
it be conducted in a credible and peaceful
manner. Our own observations, which coincide
with those of the Secretary-General’s Panel on

5

S/PV.6478

the Referenda in the Sudan, led by President
Benjamin Mkapa and other national and
international observers, are that, indeed, the
referendum met all the criteria of legitimacy,
leaving no room for a challenge to its outcome.
“Happily, because of that, the Government
of the Sudan has duly accepted the result. With
the referendum, the people of Northern and
Southern Sudan have decisively put their history
of animosity and conflict behind them. We are
confident that they will never return to war. In
that regard, we once again commend and
congratulate the people of the Sudan, their
political parties and their leaders, including
President Omar Hassan Al-Bashir and First VicePresident Salva Kiir Mayardit in particular, for
their courage, steadfastness and unwavering
commitment to peace.
“We also reiterate our commendation of the
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission, the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS)
and Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Haile Menkerios for everything that they
did to ensure the success of the referendum. We
must also thank the rest of the international
community for the resources that it made
available to help finance the referendum.
“Ten days ago, the meeting of the African
Union Assembly of Heads of State and
Government
in Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia,
unanimously adopted a solemn declaration on the
Sudan. It included the following words:
‘Sudan has the utmost importance to
the African continent. It spans the diversity
of our continent, bringing our peoples
together in a great melting pot. The
achievement of peace, democracy and
development in northern and southern
Sudan promises to help lift the entire
continent. Sudan’s ability to overcome the
formidable obstacles in its path stands as a
testament to Africa’s capacity to resolve its
conflicts and achieve our common goals.
Conversely, Africa cannot afford to see
Sudan again plunge into turmoil…
‘We express Africa’s solidarity with
the entire Sudanese people, and welcome
equally North and South Sudan and the

6

emerging post-referendum situation, as
building blocks for the ongoing project of
African integration. Having achieved peace,
the Sudanese people are now able fully to
participate as effective actors and
beneficiaries in the common African
endeavour of shared prosperity and
continental unity.’
“As part of Africa’s commitment to
assisting the Sudanese people to achieve those
goals in the months ahead, our Panel will
continue to facilitate the negotiations to finalize
the outstanding issues in the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA). Those include Abyei,
the demarcation of the North-South border, the
resolution of disputed areas along that border, and
the completion of the popular consultations in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile. In all those
matters, we work in exemplary partnership with
UNMIS and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haile Menkerios.
“We also continue to facilitate the
negotiations between the parties on postreferendum arrangements, which include issues
of economic cooperation, the relief of the
country’s onerous and unsupportable debt,
security,
citizenship
and
people-to-people
relations within the context of two viable and
mutually supportive States. We are happy to
inform the Council that the Sudanese parties have
made significant progress towards a final
agreement on these matters.
“The Council will recall that, in December
2009, we spoke in this Chamber (see S/PV.6251)
and informed the Council that the report and
recommendations of the AU High-Level Panel on
Darfur had been adopted by the African Union
Peace and Security Council on 29 October 2009.
One of the most important of these
recommendations, which became African Union
policy for the resolution of the conflict in Darfur,
was that only an inclusive process of negotiations
in which all Darfur constituencies would be able
to participate would produce the necessary
comprehensive and lasting agreement. This
reflected very directly the demand presented to us
by the various Darfur constituencies.

11-22913

S/PV.6478

“The people of Darfur continue to demand
an inclusive political process that will allow them
to determine their own future, including through
negotiations with the Government of the Sudan.
Indeed, in successive meetings of the Sudan
Consultative Forum in May, July and November
2010, the African Union, the United Nations and
other international partners endorsed this
approach, without dissent. Accordingly, to
implement a decision taken by the African Union
together with the people of Darfur 15 months
ago, we will soon begin the political process,
working with the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), which
will lead to the holding of an inclusive
conference of Darfurians, who will then engage
the Government of the Sudan. In this regard, we
will fully take on board the outcomes of the Doha
peace negotiations.
“Furthermore, in this context, our Panel and
UNAMID have agreed and are working with the
Government of the Sudan to establish the
required environment for the success of the
Darfur political process, as happened when we
engaged the people of Darfur as we prepared our
report and recommendations in 2009. Together
with Joint Special Representative Ibrahim
Gambari, we are determined to do our best to
ensure that a Darfur global political agreement is
concluded before the end of the CPA interim
period on July 9. This is vitally important in
terms of the future of Northern Sudan, and indeed
of both States which will emerge in five months
after the secession of the South.
“Throughout the CPA period, President
Al-Bashir and First Vice-President Kiir have
demonstrated their personal and political courage,
statesmanship and good faith. We have every
confidence that they and their respective
Governments, and the Sudanese people as a
whole, will continue to do everything necessary
to address the various challenges which confront
the Sudan. In this context, we are pleased to
reassure the Council that these leaders and their
colleagues are fully conscious of and sensitive to
the challenges they face, enjoying greater
familiarity with the Sudan than we non-Sudanese
could ever have. Accordingly, our task is to assist
them to the best of our ability as they confront

11-22913

these challenges. We are very pleased with the
cooperation they have extended to us in this
regard.
“We trust that the Council will also continue
to extend its invaluable assistance to the
Sudanese people as they take their country
through the momentous few months ahead of us.
In addition, we are very pleased that Africa
stands ready to assist the two African States that
will emerge after 9 July as they confront the even
greater challenges of nation-building than those
they face today.
“We further trust that the Security Council
will use its influence to also encourage the rest of
the international community to continue to extend
its support to the peoples of Northern and
Southern Sudan in order to assist them in
establishing two viable States.”
The President: I thank Ambassador Kane for his
statement on behalf of President Mbeki.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan): The Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Sudan, Mr. Ali Karti, who was supposed
to be at our meeting this morning, conveys his regards
to the Security Council. Minister Karti could not be
here owing to a problem with his flight. I will deliver a
statement on his behalf.
(spoke in Arabic)
“At the outset, I would to extend our
warmest congratulations to our brothers in
Southern Sudan. With all pride, I would like to
state that the Sudanese leadership and people
yesterday set a wonderful example in fulfilling
our covenants when our leadership, represented
by our President, fulfilled our promises in
accepting the outcome of the referendum. This
was in implementation of the words of God,
“Thou shalt fulfil every covenant. Verily! The
covenant will be questioned about”. (The Holy
Koran, XVII: 34)
“Keeping the promise by the Sudanese
leadership on such a strategic question —
fulfilling the covenant — demonstrates the highest
degree of nobility, as President Omer Al-Bashir
has said. Should fulfilling that promise not be

7

S/PV.6478

rewarded by the Security Council and all members
of the international community? Should that not be
reciprocated by a new vision rewarding the
keeping of the promise, a new vision that would
reconsider the position vis-à-vis the hero of peace?
That hero is President Al-Bashir, as he has been
described by the leader Salva Kiir, the First VicePresident of the Republic and President of the
Government of the South. I am confident that the
Council will do so, and thereby will have
encouraged the pursuit of security, peace and
stability, which are the noblest tasks of the
Council.
“Yesterday, all members of the Council
followed the outcome of the referendum on the
self-determination of Southern Sudan. This was
one of the most important and precious elements
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. It was
the dowry of the self-determination of the South.
In other words, it was the unity of the Sudan,
which was sacrificed as the price of peace and
stability and out of respect for the desire of our
brothers in Southern Sudan. They have exercised
their right to self-determination, in consonance
with the Agreement.
“As the Council is aware, the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission announced the
outcome of the referendum on the morning of the
date that was specified, that of Monday,
7 February. There was an official celebration,
witnessed by our President, Mr. Omer Hassan
Ahmed Al-Bashir, who was the first to bless the
outcome. That outcome reflected clear support
for the option of secession, with 98.8 per cent of
the votes in favour.
“The Chair of the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission has submitted the
outcome to the President, his First VicePresident, Mr. Salva Kiir Mayardit, and the other
Vice-President, Mr. Ali Osman Taha. It was
subsequently ratified by the Cabinet in an
emergency session. The President, on behalf of
the Government of the Sudan, welcomed the
outcome and reiterated that the Sudan was
anxious to develop brotherly and sisterly relations
with the South on the basis of integration,
cooperation and a peaceful and stable coexistence
that would fulfil the aspirations of the South and
the North alike.

8

“The President also stated that the North
would extend help and assistance to the South in
establishing the nascent country. He specified that
it would help with training and the extension of
capacity-building in all areas. He added that
building the capacity of the South would also
enhance the capacity of the North. He affirmed
that the spirit that prevailed in dealing with the
referendum would also lead to a resolution of all
issues still outstanding between the two parties.
“For the past five years, we have reiterated
to the Council that we would continue to fulfil all
of our commitments under the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, including the referendum on
the self-determination of Southern Sudan. Today,
we announce here that we have fulfilled our
promise completely. We have done so in the
belief that unity cannot be imposed on the people
and that peace is the primary option. Peace
should take precedence over the option of unity,
as long as it is the desire of our brothers in the
South.
“It is in that spirit and with the same
commitment that I reaffirm to the Council that the
secession by the Sudanese South in no way
means that we would establish a geographic wall
that would separate the North and the South, or
sever the links and relations between the North
and the South.
“Entirely to the contrary, this means only a
new beginning for a new stage of close
cooperation and work between the North and the
South. That cooperation would reflect the linkage
of interests and the reciprocal needs of both
parties.
“From this rostrum, I would like to offer my
congratulations to the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission. This national mechanism has carried
out its duty in an exemplary manner, as certified
by all the regional and national observers
monitoring the registration and referendum
processes, despite all the difficulties it faced,
particularly the short period of time available.
“We would also like to thank all our
international
partners:
the
international
community and this Organization, represented by
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan; the
Secretary-General’s Panel on the Referenda in the

11-22913

S/PV.6478

Sudan, led by Mr. Benjamin Mkapa; and the
Security Council, which has continued to closely
monitor all phases of the referendum to see the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement implemented.
We also thank the African Union panel of wise
men, led by President Thabo Mbeki, for its efforts
and initiatives to narrow the differences between
the two partners on the remaining issues.
“We affirm to the Council that we will
continue with the same resolve, credibility and
transparency to seek an objective settlement for
all outstanding issues, including the situation in
the Abyei region. Needless to say, the Abyei issue
is not merely a question of the demarcation of
administrative borders on the ground or of the
division of resources or wealth. It is about
addressing the future of the two largest ethnic
groups in the region, the tribes of the Dinka Ngok
and the Misseriya.
“This region has always been a bridge
between North and South. In view of its history
of coexistence and tribal interaction, addressing
this question requires us to adopt a
comprehensive approach of wisdom and reason in
order to achieve sustainable peace and stability.
We also affirm that continued negotiations
between the two parties, and their resolve to
achieve a settlement, represent the only assurance
of ending tensions in that region so that it does
not become an area of confrontation.
“As for Darfur, the Government of the
Sudan has always sincerely affirmed that its
policy is about resolving the conflicts there, not
managing them. This requires negotiations aimed
at achieving a comprehensive political settlement,
as we have done with Southern Sudan. Let me
reiterate our position of strong support for all the
efforts of the mediation in Doha, under the aegis
of our sister Government of Qatar and with the
support of the African Union and the United
Nations.
“However, and in order to guarantee the
participation of the majority of citizens of Darfur
in a peaceful settlement to achieve a sustainable
piece, the Government has adopted a Darfur
peace strategy. That is now being steadily
implemented in close coordination with the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation

11-22913

in Darfur (UNAMID). As Council members are
aware, the most important focus of the strategy is
to promote the peace process from the inside so
that it functions in parallel and in a
complementary manner to the Doha negotiations
through the completion of the Darfur dialogue
process.
“To that end, we have established a joint
working group to include the Sudanese
Government and UNAMID. In this connection,
preparations and coordination continue through a
joint working group so that the whole of Darfur
can take part in the political process from within,
especially in April the people of Darfur elected
their representatives for the National Assembly
and the assemblies of the three states of Darfur.
Those who were elected enjoy legitimacy as the
genuine representatives of the people of Darfur.
We thus reaffirm the importance of the DarfurDarfur dialogue as one of the most important
pillars supporting the achievement of a
sustainable peace in Darfur.
“Before I conclude, I would like to appeal
to all members of the Council and all donor
countries to extend economic assistance to both
parts of the Sudan, North and South, and to
forgive the country’s debts so that we may enable
our brothers in the South to build their nascent
State and compensate the North for the
consequences of economic separation from the
South. In this regard, I also make a strong appeal
for the economic sanctions that have been
imposed on the Sudan to be reconsidered,
reviewed and lifted. The economic stability of the
North also means stability for the South. As the
First Vice-President of the Republic and the head
of the Government of the South, Mr. Salva Kiir
Mayardit, said on Monday at the Cabinet’s
session in Khartoum, any threat to the North is a
threat to the South, and vice versa. There is no
greater
threat
than
difficult
economic
circumstances in either part of the Sudan.
“In conclusion, we again congratulate our
brothers in Southern Sudan on their choice.
Meanwhile, we reaffirm that peace is a single
entity that cannot be divided. The Government of
Sudan looks forward to the prospect of a sisterly
country, stable and safe, in the South. We will do
all in our power and resolve to achieve that.

9

S/PV.6478

“We are confident that our brothers in the
South share our understanding of the need for
cooperation and integration at this juncture.
These have become requirements in the age of
globalization, an age fundamentally characterized
by the need for small entities to integrate in order
to draw on the opportunities and face the
challenges of globalization. There is no doubt
that integration would reinforce the social and
economic links between our two countries and
realize the interests of our peoples, which in turn
would only benefit have positive effects for our
region and more broadly for the continent of
Africa.”
The President: I thank the representative of the
Sudan for his statement on behalf of His Excellency
Mr. Ali Karti, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Deng Alor Kuol,
Minister of Regional Cooperation of the Government
of Southern Sudan.
Mr. Deng Alor Kuol: I am very grateful for the
opportunity to address the Council following the
official announcement of the final results of the
referendum in Southern Sudan, and to put forward the
views of the Government of Southern Sudan on behalf
of all of our people.
I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
calling this meeting immediately following the
announcement of the final results. This is an indication
of the Council’s continued support for the full
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) and its determination to remain fully
engaged in the maintenance of peace and stability in
the Sudan.
I would like to thank the members of the Council
for their tireless and continued efforts in this regard. I
would also like to express my Government’s gratitude
for the significant contributions made by the United
Nations, and by the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan and the Secretary-General’s Monitoring Panel in
particular, to the safe and peaceful holding of the
Southern Sudan referendum.
The fact that the referendum was held on time
and conducted peacefully is a major and historic
achievement, of which we can all be proud. It is a
testament both to the capability of the United Nations,

10

as well as that of the Government of Southern Sudan.
Most important, it is a manifestation of the maturity
and commitment of all of our citizens to exercise their
right to self-determination. The Government of
Southern Sudan is satisfied that the conduct of the
referendum was peaceful and that the referendum
outcome reflects the true democratic will of the people
of Southern Sudan. We can now say with confidence
that the people have spoken, and they have clearly
voted to establish an independent State in South Sudan.
With this in mind, the Government of Southern
Sudan calls on the Council and on the international
community to recognize the results of the referendum
in a timely fashion, to support the emergence of an
independent South Sudan on 9 July and to recognize
and accept the independent State immediately
thereafter. In this context, we welcome the formal
acceptance of the final results of the referendum by
President Omer Hassan Al-Bashir and the Government
of the Sudan, and the commitment to establish two
mutually supportive States, at peace with one another,
following the end of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement interim period. We also wish to
acknowledge the contribution of the people of
Northern Sudan to the successful conduct of the
referendum, as well as their support for the acceptance
of the results. We also note and welcome initial moves
being made by members of the international
community to provide debt relief for the Republic of
the Sudan.
Our challenge now is to finalize the full
implementation of the remaining provisions of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, to which we remain
completely committed. Building a sustainable and
lasting peace for all of the people of the Sudan remains
our top priority. We are therefore ready to re-engage
vigorously with our partner the National Congress
Party (NCP) on critical post-referendum issues,
including oil revenue flows, citizenship, protection of
our populations and border security. Clarity on all
outstanding issues is essential to maintaining stability
and progress throughout the region, although in
accordance with the provisions of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, the resolution of those issues is not a
precondition for the emergence of an independent State
in South Sudan, which will become a reality at the end
of the interim period.
While we will proceed along separate paths, both
parties have a joint responsibility to all the peoples of

11-22913

S/PV.6478

the Sudan to guarantee a peaceful and prosperous
future. We believe that this will be achieved by
establishing mutual respect and cooperation between
Northern and Southern Sudan. We have no interest in
returning to the hostilities and divisions of the past. It
is our most sincere wish to achieve peaceful
coexistence between North and South, to enable all of
our peoples to live in security and prosperity. We
welcome the Security Council’s continued support of
this process.
The Government of Southern Sudan, on behalf of
the people of Abyei, would like to express its deep
disappointment that the referendum required by the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement on Abyei did not
take place. The terms of the Abyei Protocol, as well as
those of the award of the Permanent Court of
Arbitration, have very clearly set out the legal
obligations of both parties to the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement with respect to Abyei. Although the recent
regrettable security incidents have been addressed, it is
clear that a final and lasting solution on Abyei must be
found, and found quickly.
During the last meeting of the presidency, North
and South Sudan committed to reaching an early
agreement on Abyei. We remain ready to start work
immediately with the National Congress Party to
resolve the impasse. We continue to see two possible
outcomes: either the holding of a referendum
consistent with the provisions of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement or a transfer of Abyei by presidential
decree to the South.
Separately, the South is fully committed to
respecting and protecting the grazing rights of
Misseriya nomads and other livestock-keepers in
Southern Sudan. Those rights will be protected
irrespective of the status of Abyei. Despite the
challenges we face on this issue, we are optimistic that
with the continued support of President Thabo Mbeki,
the United States Special Envoy General Scott Gration
and the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel, the Abyei issue shall be resolved definitively.
The Government of Southern Sudan welcomes
the start of the popular consultation process in Blue
Nile and calls for such a process to be started in
Southern Kordofan as well. We are committed to
assisting our partners in the NCP to find a just and fair
political settlement for Darfur. We believe that all
parties should come to the negotiating table. We do not

11-22913

support a military solution. It is not in the interest of
Southern Sudan to encourage war in any area of the
Sudan, since we are now enjoying the fruits of a peace
that we would like our brothers and sisters in Darfur
and all other parts of the country to enjoy as well.
Now that the formidable burdens associated with
preparing for the referendum have passed, the
Government of Southern Sudan is actively preparing
for the responsibilities of statehood by continuing our
work on good governance, institution-building and the
establishment of a multiparty democracy. The peaceful
conduct of the referendum serves as a demonstration of
our capabilities and of the maturity of our citizens.
We have already established a technical
committee to review the interim constitution of
Southern Sudan. This will be followed by the
establishment of a constitutional conference. Following
independence, the Government of Southern Sudan will
establish a broad-based Government of national unity
in the South, promulgate a new constitution, and
schedule national elections.
Also following independence, the Government of
Southern Sudan will apply for membership in the
relevant regional and international organizations and
international financial institutions. South Sudan shall
undertake a review of international treaties,
conventions and agreements with a view towards
acceding to such agreements upon achieving statehood.
We will pay particular attention to the international
human
rights
instruments
and
international
humanitarian law. Of course, regardless of the status of
its accession to treaties, the new State shall uphold the
principles of the United Nations Charter and the rights
and duties affirmed in all relevant international human
rights instruments.
The Government of South Sudan will vigorously
continue the fight against corruption and will institute
all necessary measures to stamp it out. We are also
committed to reflecting international human rights
norms in our national structures and Government
institutions. South Sudan will be not just the world’s
newest State, but its newest democracy, and we are
committed to Government that reflects the will of the
people.
We very much welcome the support of the
international community in these efforts. The
Government of Southern Sudan particularly appreciates
the critical role that the United Nations Mission in the

11

S/PV.6478

Sudan has played in support of the referendum and in
the provision of security in the border areas. The
Government of Southern Sudan wishes to see a
continued United Nations presence in South Sudan
after July 2011. The Government of Southern Sudan
looks forward to participating in all relevant
discussions, both formal and informal, on the mandate
for the continued United Nations presence.
We believe that, after July, the United Nations
peacekeeping presence should have a strong focus on
maintaining peace and security in the border regions.
The United Nations presence should also provide
humanitarian assistance for Southerners returning from
the North. While we believe that South Sudan itself
should have the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians, we envisage that the United
Nations and the international community could play a
supporting role in this regard, particularly in relation to
the risk of insecurity in the border areas and the
protection of returnees.
The Government of Southern Sudan’s primary
focus will be to achieve peace and security through the
economic development of South Sudan, and it will
work to build the necessary human and physical
infrastructure to achieve this. We welcome the
continued international support for the implementation
of South Sudan’s national development strategy.
We support calls for the convening of a donors’
conference to promote a coherent and coordinated
effort among prospective donors. The Government of
Southern Sudan would welcome additional efforts on
the part of donors to coordinate such assistance as far
as possible. The Government of Southern Sudan is also
considering the possibility of our inclusion on the
agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission. We will
consider this in the context of a coordinated and
comprehensive approach to the issues of security,
peace and development in Southern Sudan. Separately,
the Government of Southern Sudan would also
welcome early international action on the issue of the
Sudan’s international debt.
Of course there will be challenges ahead, and our
people will need to be reminded that raising the
Southern Sudanese flag on 9 July does not mean that
the hard work is over. But their future is in their hands,
their triumphs shall be theirs, and the success they have
achieved thus far will continue to move us forward. We
are confident that, with the continued support of the

12

international community, the new independent
Southern Sudanese State that will emerge on 9 July
will be one that grows in strength and capacity with
every passing year.
This is a decisive moment for Sudan. We are
conscious that the referendum is not the end point, but
rather provides for a new beginning, and that much
work remains to be done. It is my hope that, as
Northern and Southern Sudan embark on a new
journey, we will have the chance to convey important
lessons to the rest of our continent about establishing
genuine and lasting peace after a period of war, and
about building successful States that provide peace,
stability and prosperity for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representatives of Council members.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Menkerios, President Mkapa,
Ambassador Osman on behalf of Foreign Minister
Karti, Minister Deng Alor Kuol, and the representative
of President Mbeki for their very encouraging
comments here today. We deeply appreciate their
ongoing dedication to the cause of peace in the Sudan.
After decades of conflict, the images of millions
of Southern Sudanese voters deciding their own future
was an inspiration to the entire world and another step
forward in Africa’s long journey towards justice and
democracy. Now all parties have a responsibility to
ensure that this historic moment of promise becomes a
moment of lasting progress. On behalf of the people of
the United States, let me again congratulate the people
of South Sudan on a successful and historic referendum
in which the overwhelming majority of voters chose
independence.
We welcome the announcement of the final
referendum results and the Government of the Sudan’s
acceptance of that outcome. We thank the SecretaryGeneral’s Panel on the Referenda in the Sudan, led by
President Mkapa, for its crucial role in the process. We
are grateful that the entire process was peaceful, and
we commend both parties. Respecting the referendum’s
outcome is our best hope for preventing renewed
conflict, and we appreciate the positive statements
made thus far by the Sudan’s leaders and by
international actors.
We call special attention to the African Union’s
intention to recognize the referendum’s outcome and

11-22913

S/PV.6478

its call on all States to do likewise. Official recognition
of the new State will be crucial and, as President
Obama has announced, it is the intention of the United
States to formally recognize Southern Sudan as a
sovereign, independent State in July 2011.
By summer, the international community will
welcome a new nation — the Republic of South Sudan.
That nation will face the task of providing security and
stability for its people after decades of war. The
international community came together in support of
the referendum, and this broad multilateral unity was
essential to the process’ success. It is now time to
support the people of the Sudan as they move into a
new phase of their history. The people of all parts of
the Sudan need to know that they have our full support
during this critical period.
With the referendum process completed, it is
more important than ever that outstanding issues, such
as the status of Abyei, be resolved as quickly as
possible. We are pleased to note the 21 January
meeting of the presidency, at which the Sudan’s leaders
agreed to continue to discuss ways to swiftly resolve
the Abyei impasse. We urge that these negotiations
continue at the highest level. We appreciate the parties’
efforts over recent weeks to maintain calm on the
ground in Abyei, and it is imperative that a
compromise be found to break this impasse and
maintain peace in that very tense region.
We are deeply grateful to Special Representative
Menkerios for his leadership, and we look to him and
the United Nations to continue to play a very active
role. As long as Abyei’s status remains unresolved, it
could indeed trigger further instability across the
Sudan, so his work and that of others in that regard is
very important. We also consider peaceful and
inclusive popular consultations in Blue Nile and
Southern Kordofan states that reflect the will of the
people to be essential components of implementing the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). We urge the
parties to ensure that these processes are completed
before the interim period ends.
Beyond resolving outstanding CPA issues, we
hope that the parties will also work to quickly complete
post-referendum arrangements. We urge the parties to
swiftly resolve the remaining issues of citizenship,
security, water, debt and assets, currency, oil
management and wealth-sharing. Resolving these
issues will facilitate international assistance to the

11-22913

Sudan, both North and South, and help to ensure a
peaceful post-CPA transition. Alternatively, leaving
them unresolved is but an invitation to trouble.
We believe that the United Nations should
continue to play an important role in assisting the
parties
to
implement
their
CPA-mandated
responsibilities, and we urge the parties to consider
ways that a United Nations peacekeeping presence
might help their peace efforts and support post-CPA
agreements, especially on security. The African Union
(AU) is also actively engaged on these issues, and we
fully support the work of the AU High-Level
Implementation Panel and its Chair, President Thabo
Mbeki, including his engagement in Darfur.
The United States remains strongly committed to
ensuring lasting resolution of the Darfur conflict, and
we are deeply concerned about the region’s
deteriorating security situation. United States Senior
Adviser for Darfur, Ambassador Dane Smith, will work
with all parties to ensure justice and accountability, and
to reach a comprehensive political solution. We will
also persist in our efforts to improve security and
humanitarian conditions for the people of Darfur.
We continue to condemn in the strongest possible
terms the Government of the Sudan’s use of aerial
bombardment, and we also ask Council members to
join us in doing so. Ending aerial bombardment and
ensuring full freedom of movement for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and humanitarian aid workers are essential
steps that would clearly demonstrate the Government
of the Sudan’s commitment to ending the violence in
Darfur.
The renewed fighting in December, chiefly
between the Government of the Sudan and the Minni
Minnawi faction of the Sudan Liberation Movement,
displaced tens of thousands of civilians. Regrettably,
the Government of the Sudan continues to refuse
UNAMID full freedom of movement. This Council has
had numerous discussions on this issue, including last
week with Joint Special Representative Gambari. We
have a responsibility to the civilians of Darfur who live
under the continual threat violence to press UNAMID
to fully implement its Chapter VII mandate. We call on
the Government of the Sudan and rebel movements to
reach an immediate ceasefire agreement and to engage
seriously to find a political solution to a conflict that
has lasted far too long. The United States has

13

S/PV.6478

repeatedly made clear that if its relationship with the
Government of the Sudan is to reach its full potential,
as we fervently hope it will, the Government of the
Sudan must bring peace to Darfur, fully cooperate with
UNAMID, provide unrestricted humanitarian access to
Darfur, implement a comprehensive peace agreement
and contribute to efforts to achieve accountability,
justice
and
reconciliation,
while
upholding
international law and complying with all Security
Council resolutions.
This is, at its essence, a moment of hope after a
long time of trial. The Sudan has suffered far too much
for far too long. Now that the referendum has passed,
we will continue to work closely with the Sudanese
people in the North and the South to ensure that the
referendum is not the end of a process but the
beginning of a better future for both nations.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to begin by welcoming Ambassador Osman
and Minister Deng Alor Kuol to the Security Council
today. I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Menkerios, President Mkapa
and the head of the African Union Liaison Office in the
Sudan for their briefings, for the support that the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) has
provided to the Southern Sudan referendum process,
and for the work that the Secretary-General’s Panel on
the Referenda in the Sudan has done to monitor that
process.
The Panel’s assessment that the process as a
whole was free, fair and credible confirms that the
results announced by the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission on 7 February reflect the will of the
people of Southern Sudan, freely expressed. I welcome
this. Above all, I warmly welcome the statements that
we have heard today from Ambassador Osman and
Minister Deng Alor Kuol, which echo the positive
reaction of both President Al-Bashir and First VicePresident Salva Kiir to the results of the referendum.
As the United Kingdom Prime Minister David
Cameron said on 7 February, this moment is a
testament to the leaders in both North and South Sudan
who ensured a credible and peaceful process. I echo his
sentiment today. This is indeed an historic moment,
and great credit is due to all those who helped to bring
it about.
Courageous political leadership, underpinned by
the hard work and dedication of the Southern Sudan

14

Referendum Commission and Special Representative
Menkerios, has enabled the people of Southern Sudan
to make their voices heard and to determine their
future. The Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA)
gave them the confidence that their choice would be
respected. It is worth reflecting for a moment on the
significance of this achievement.
But there remains much to be done before the end
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. The violence
in Upper Nile state on 3 to 5 February underlined the
urgency of reaching agreement on all outstanding CPA
issues, including Abyei, the border, citizenship and
wealth-sharing. We welcome the commitments made at
the 27 January presidency meeting to resolve these
issues, and urge the parties to make the compromises
necessary to securing long-term peace and stability. We
welcome also the invaluable work of President Mbeki
and the African Union High-Level Implementation
Panel in supporting these negotiations.
If we look to the future, it is clear that the peace
and prosperity of all Sudanese people will depend on
sustained cooperation between North and South. The
community of nations, which the people of Southern
Sudan will soon join, must work with both North and
South to support their development and to help
strengthen friendly relations between them. As my
Foreign Secretary told this Council on 16 November,
“[t]he United Kingdom stands ready to play its part,
based on our historic and enduring commitment to all
the people of the Sudan” (S/PV.6425, p. 15).
The United Kingdom is working with others on
the handling of the Sudan’s international debt. We are
supporting the CPA parties on the demarcation of the
border, and we are providing $60 million to the United
Nations Common Humanitarian Fund for the benefit of
the people of the Sudan, both North and South.
That commitment of course also extends to the
people of Darfur. I therefore cannot conclude without
addressing the situation there, which remains of deep
concern. The displacement of thousands of civilians
highlights the impact of the ongoing violence on the
most vulnerable. We call on all parties to cease
hostilities and to ensure full and unhindered access for
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and humanitarian workers.
With concerted political will, we believe that
peace in Darfur can be achieved. We continue to
support the work of African Union-United Nations

11-22913

S/PV.6478

Joint Chief Mediator Djibrill Bassolé in his efforts to
negotiate a peaceful settlement in Darfur. We call on all
rebel groups that remain outside the negotiations to
join the peace process without delay or preconditions.
Those that refuse can expect to be sanctioned by the
Council. A lasting peace can only be based on the
consent of, and justice for, the people of Darfur. We
therefore recognize the contribution that Darfur-based
consultations could make once a genuine enabling
environment has been created in the region.
As we reflect on the historic achievement of the
parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in
holding a peaceful and credible Southern Sudan
referendum, all the people of the Sudan can be assured
of the commitment of the United Kingdom to support
them in building a peaceful and prosperous future.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Menkerios and
Mr. Mkapa for their briefings and the work they have
done. We also welcome the statements by the
representatives of the Sudanese parties.
The exercise in expressing the will of the people
was a success thanks to the commitment of the
leadership in North and South Sudan to implement the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. Russia respects the
outcome of the voting, which reflects the choice of the
people of South Sudan. The issue now on the agenda is
to resolve the main issues of contention between the
Sudanese parties during the transition period, such as
the status of Abyei, the demarcation of the borders, the
distribution of oil revenues and the questions of
citizenship and external debt.
It is fundamentally important that the parties
continue to express their readiness to resolve those
problems and, more generally, to build their relations
in a spirit of constructive cooperation. That is the only
valid choice in meeting the interests of the people of
the Sudan and addressing the challenge of ensuring
long-term peace in the territory of this country and the
region as a whole. We hope that the leaders in
Khartoum and Juba will live up to their responsibilities
in this fundamentally new emerging phase of Sudanese
history.
There is of course a need for significant
international assistance in establishing effective
statehood in South Sudan, which will gain its
sovereignty on 9 July. The activities of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan continue to be an

11-22913

important factor in supporting stability during the
upcoming transition period. Any changes in the
configuration and mandate of the United Nations
presence should be agreed with the Sudanese sides.
A key task in the coming period will be to settle
the conflict in Darfur. That will be possible only by
reaching comprehensive political agreements by all
parties in Darfur. We support the focus of the current
mediation mechanism in Doha to conclude a
framework agreement for a settlement in Darfur in the
near future. We hope that the Doha process, which
continues to be the main platform for reaching peace
agreements with the Darfur rebels, as well as other
initiatives on a political process in Darfur, will be
carried out on a mutually complementary basis.
We welcome the readiness of the Government of
the Sudan to continue its constructive participation in
the Darfur political settlement process. A priority task
today is to ensure that all the main rebel groups in
Darfur join the process without preconditions. The
international community should put pressure on those
rebel leaders who obstinately refuse to participate in
the negotiations.
Russia will continue to actively support the
establishment of lasting peace, stability and
development in the Sudan, in cooperation with the
United Nations, the African Union and other interested
partners.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We meet today on a
historic occasion to celebrate the remarkable and
successful outcome of the Southern Sudan referendum.
We are pleased to be joined by His Excellency
Mr. Deng Alor Kuol, Minister of Regional Cooperation
of the Government of Southern Sudan, as well as
Ambassador Osman, Permanent Representative of the
Sudan, who is here on behalf of his Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Ali Ahmed Karti. Allow me also to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary General
Haile Menkerios, former President Benjamin Mkapa
and His Excellency Ambassador Kane, on behalf of the
High-Level Panel on the Sudan, for their encouraging
briefings to the Council today.
At the outset, South Africa wishes to join in
congratulating the people and Government of the
Sudan on the conclusion and announcement of the
results of the Southern Sudan referendum. In that
regard, we wish to reiterate the sentiments expressed
by President Jacob Zuma in which he “lauded the

15

S/PV.6478

efforts of both President Al-Bashir and First VicePresident Salva Kiir on delivering a peaceful and
credible referendum for the people of Southern Sudan”.
During its recent Summit in Addis Ababa, the
leadership of the African Union adopted a solemn
declaration on the Sudan in which it recalled that, as a
result of the exceptional challenge inherited from its
colonial past and the unique nature of its national
question, in 2005 Sudanese leaders resolved to grant
the right of self-determination to the people of Southern
Sudan. The results announced by the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission on 7 February 2011 therefore
bear testimony to the collective desire of the people of
Southern Sudan to exercise their inalienable right to
self-determination in accordance with the provisions of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), thus
expressing their commitment to turn their back on war
and to embrace a future path of peace, dignity,
democracy and development.
On behalf of the people and Government of South
Africa, President Jacob Zuma welcomed
“the immediate acceptance of the results of the
referendum by the Government of the Sudan and
its expression of willingness to support and
conclude all necessary procedures to ensure the
establishment of an independent, viable State of
South Sudan”.
He further said that the acceptance of the results
by President Al-Bashir demonstrated the strong
political will for peace that exists among the leaders in
the Sudan and set the foundation for harmonious
coexistence between the people of North and South
Sudan.
The African Union Summit also hailed
“the courage, vision and steadfastness of the
Government of the Sudan, under the leadership of
President Omer Al-Bashir and First VicePresident and President of the Government of
Southern Sudan Salva Kiir Mayardit, which has
made possible this momentous achievement”.
The Summit also pledged Africa’s support as they
fulfil their historic responsibility.
We must also congratulate the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission and the Southern Sudan
Referendum Bureau which, in four months and with
little resources, achieved such astonishing success by

16

competently facilitating a timely referendum process.
We also pay tribute to the thousands of volunteers who
worked under trying circumstances, sometimes without
food or water, to ensure the historic success of the
referendum.
The successful referendum in the Sudan has
demonstrated that national ownership accompanied by
the support of the international community is critical in
ensuring the full implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. My delegation therefore pays tribute
to the work of the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan, under the leadership of Mr. Menkerios; the
African Union and its High Level Implementation
Panel on the Sudan, chaired by former President
Mbeki; the Chairperson of the Secretary-General’s
Panel on the Referenda in the Sudan, former President
Benjamin Mkapa; and the countless bilateral and
regional partners that contributed to the success of the
referendum.
The success of this referendum constitutes an
important and critical contribution towards the full
implementation of the CPA. The journey ahead will be
challenging. However, South Africa is encouraged by
the commitment of the parties to the CPA to
speedily deal with all outstanding issues, such as the
status of Abyei, as well as post-referendum issues —
which include border demarcation, natural resources
and economic issues, citizenship, security and other
issues — as they have promised. In that regard, South
Africa is in full support of the African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel, led by former President
Thabo Mbeki, in its work of facilitating the
negotiations between the parties on post-referendum
issues.
My delegation remains concerned about the
deteriorating security situation in Darfur and its
devastating humanitarian impact on the region. We
reiterate the call on the armed movements by the
Security Council and the African Union (AU) to
immediately cease all hostilities. We welcome the joint
communiqué signed by the Justice and Equality
Movement and the Liberation and Justice Movement
on 29 January, in which the parties demonstrate a
common commitment to peace and justice. It is vital
that those commitments translate into the signing of a
peace agreement and an end to the violence and
hostilities in Darfur.

11-22913

S/PV.6478

South Africa calls on those outside the process,
especially the Abdul Wahid al-Nur faction of the Sudan
Liberation Movement, to join peace negotiations in
Doha, as there can be no military solution to the
conflict in Darfur. We look forward to an early
conclusion of the Doha process so as to lay a strong
foundation for the equally important, all-inclusive
constituency negotiations based on the Darfur political
process as mandated by the African Union.

and the League of Arab States. Thus, they were able to
conduct a referendum in a peaceful and honest
atmosphere in Southern Sudan so that the people could
take charge of their own future in a free and democratic
manner. They have honoured their commitments and
respected the will of the people of Southern Sudan to
live in independence, in accordance with the official
results of the referendum, which were announced
yesterday.

As we look to the parties in the Sudan to fully
implement their commitments under the CPA, we are
again reminded of the AU solemn declaration on the
Sudan, in which the AU renewed Africa’s solidarity
with the entire Sudanese people and welcomed equally
North and South Sudan and the emerging postreferendum situation as building blocks for the ongoing
project of African integration. Having achieved peace,
the Sudanese people are now able to fully participate as
effective actors and beneficiaries in the common
African endeavour of shared prosperity and continental
unity.

That does not mean, however, that the North and
the South have reached the end of the path between
them, as indicated by the Prime Minister of the Sudan.
The Prime Minister stated that there would be no
hostility between the North and the South, but instead
strong ties between the two parties and the two
countries. In that context, we applaud the initiative of
the Sudanese President, who issued a presidential
decree announcing the results of the referendum and
making further commitments to work on the various
pending matters related to the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement.

We call on the international community to ensure
that we live up to the expectations of North and South
Sudan alike in making their continued journey
mutually rewarding. South Africa, for its part, will
continue with the projects that it has launched in the
Sudan since the signing of the CPA and will support,
where necessary, ongoing peace and good
neighbourliness between North Sudan and South
Sudan.

Those principles and actions strengthen the
atmosphere of optimism that currently prevails and will
create closer ties between the North and the South,
with a view to increasing coordination and
cooperation. That coordination will be undertaken in a
new political context in the service of their mutual
interests. It goes without saying, however, that we must
monitor pending issues very closely. Those issues
include the situation in Abyei and post-referendum
matters, such as citizenship, wealth-sharing, oil and
water revenues, debt and others. We hope that the
agreement will have a positive impact on the situation
in Southern Sudan. We believe that the adoption of a
Darfur peace agreement will have a positive impact on
the overall situation in the Sudan.

Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): It is my
pleasure to express my appreciation to President
Mkapa, Chairperson of the Secretary-General’s Panel
on the Referenda in the Sudan, and Mr. Mahmoud
Kane, Head of the African Union Liaison Office in
Khartoum. I would also like to thank Mr. Haile
Menkerios, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sudan, as well as the head of regional
cooperation office in South Sudan for their opening
remarks.
It is worth recalling today the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, which was signed in 2005 and
helped our brothers in Southern Sudan and Northern
Sudan to overcome an atrocious war that left countless
victims over many years. Despite the events of the
past, the parties were able to initiate cooperation,
which helped them to implement the Agreement, with
assistance from the United Nations, the African Union

11-22913

The Doha process requires the participation of all
parties in Darfur. We agree with the call for the
Council to strengthen that participation by way of the
sanctions list, among other means. We would
encourage the Sudanese Government to pursue positive
measures so as to create an environment conducive to
talks and cooperation, including between the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the Government of the Sudan. It would be best to not
set definitive dates for talking about the end of Doha,
nor create parallel or competing portfolios; rather, they
should be complementary.

17

S/PV.6478

Returning to the situation in Darfur, I would like
to congratulate Mr. Haile Menkerios and Mr. Ibrahim
Gambari on their respective roles in that regard.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to express my gratitude for the
statements delivered by Mr. Menkerios, Mr. Mkapa,
Mr. Kane, Mr. Osman and Mr. Deng Alor Kuol.
Today, we are recognizing a historic event for the
Sudanese people, for the African continent and for all
of those who are convinced that conflicts can and must
be settled through peaceful and democratic means. The
outcome of the referendum is a testament to the will
for independence of the people of Southern Sudan. Its
importance has been emphasized by the massive voter
turnout. Colombia would like to congratulate the
Sudanese people for their genuine expression of
democracy and the leaders of the Sudan for
demonstrating their commitment to and acceptance of
the referendum results. I should also like to highlight
the work of all of those who participated in the
preparation, financing and conduct of the process.
Although the outcome of the referendum marks a
milestone in the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, we must not lose sight of the fact
that the full implementation of the Agreement is
essential to fully resolve the situation. Pending
substantive issues must be addressed in order to ensure
peaceful and mutually beneficial relations between the
North and the South.
Unless
outstanding
issues
are
resolved
definitively — such as those pertaining to citizenship,
wealth-sharing, security, natural resources management
and border demarcation — serious reversals could
occur, leading to endless difficulties. It is therefore
important that the parties be encouraged to commit to
the effective advancement of negotiations and to
support the efforts of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel responsible for implementing the
recommendations on the Sudan.
We echo and share the concerns of the other
Council members at the situation in Abyei, which we
have discussed on numerous occasions. The parties
need to make a firm commitment and demonstrate
brave political will so as to overcome, with assistance
from the African Union High-Level Implementation
Panel, the current impasse in the negotiations.

My delegation is confident that the willingness
expressed by President Al-Bashir and First VicePresident Kiir at their recent meeting will pave the way
for achieving concrete results on all pending issues.
As the interim period ends, the Security Council
in particular and the United Nations in general should
commit to supporting development and institutional
capacity-building of the new State structures, and to
encouraging peaceful coexistence between the North
and the South. My delegation believes that, with the
successful conduct of the referendum and the
commitment to respecting its results, it will be possible
to achieve an inclusive, adequate agreement that
responds to the needs of the people of Darfur and
addresses all the roots of the conflict. We reiterate our
commitment to the negotiation process evolving in
Doha, and we welcome the work of the United
Nations-African Union Joint Chief Mediator,
Mr. Djibril Bassolé, and the Government of Qatar.
In this regard, we welcome the participation in
the negotiations of the Liberation and Justice
Movement and the Justice and Equality Movement, and
we once again urge all rebel groups to join them
immediately and without preconditions, and to
cooperate fully in the process. In the view of my
delegation, the political process in Darfur should be
based on the results achieved in Doha and conducted in
an environment that ensures its functionality and
inclusiveness. It is important to guarantee the
coordination of all stakeholders interested in achieving
a peaceful solution in the region.
The situation and security in Darfur continue to
be of great concern. An agreement leading to a
ceasefire between the parties should be a key and
immediate objective. Finally, let me reiterate that the
international community and our Organization in
particular must maintain their commitment to this and
future generations in the quest for peace and prosperity
for the Sudanese people.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Let me start by
commending the peaceful way in which the Sudan has
started a new chapter of its history. This is indeed a
historic achievement. Portugal looks forward to
continuing working with the North and the South to
build a peaceful and prosperous future for both
countries.
I thank Special Representative Menkerios and
President Benjamin Mkapa for their comprehensive

18

11-22913

S/PV.6478

briefings, as well as for the significant work the
Special Representative and the Secretary-General’s
Panel have undertaken. Allow me also to extend a word
of appreciation to Minister Deng Alor Kuol and
Ambassadors Kane and Osman for their statements.
What we heard from all of them today is indeed very
encouraging.
Portugal welcomes the official announcement on
7 February of the final results of the referendum on
self-determination for the people of Southern Sudan,
and congratulates them once again on their peaceful
determination and the orderly way in which they
expressed their democratic will. We commend the two
parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA)
for living up fully to the political commitment required
to ensure that the peace process moves forward. We
also commend the work of the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission in Khartoum and Juba, and
of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan.
The Southern Sudanese people have clearly
expressed their determination to establish an
independent State. But as we have underlined before,
despite the remarkable operational and political
achievement that the referendum represents, the work
to complete implementation of the CPA is not over. It
requires further, complex negotiations led in a spirit of
continued compromise and cooperation on the part of
both parties. We are encouraged by the willingness
reiterated by President Bashir and First Vice-President
Kiir to continue implementing the CPA and seeking an
agreement on the key post-referendum arrangements
that are essential to ensuring a peaceful future and a
mutually beneficial relationship between two viable
States.
In this regard, we welcome the start of the
popular consultation process in Blue Nile state and
urge the parties to once again ensure inclusive, timely
and credible popular consultation processes there and
in Southern Kordofan state. Another question of
paramount importance is reaching a comprehensive
agreement on the status of Abyei, encompassing all the
issues at stake. The lack of such an agreement will only
tend to keep fuelling tensions in the region. We
therefore reaffirm our support for the ongoing
mediation work of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel and its Chair, President Thabo
Mbeki. While leaders of the North and the South
continue to work together, it is also essential that both

11-22913

parties protect the rights of Sudanese civilians, whether
Northerners or Southerners.
Peace and hope should extend to all Sudanese,
including those in Darfur. Continued violence against
civilians and violations of their human rights are
unacceptable and must cease forthwith. Portugal
wishes to voice its appreciation for the efforts so far
undertaken within the African Union-United Nationsled peace process for Darfur, and to acknowledge the
added value that the Darfur-based political process can
represent as a complement to the Doha process once
the enabling environment throughout Darfur has been
established.
But, as many of us have stressed, a peaceful
solution to the crisis in Darfur can be found only if
there is real commitment from all parties to laying the
foundations for an inclusive and comprehensive peace
agreement. We are therefore encouraged by the
willingness to negotiate within the Doha framework
recently shown by the Government of the Sudan and by
the Justice and Equality Movement and the Liberation
and Justice Movement. Nevertheless, we urge all the
other groups to join and actively engage in the peace
process without further delay or preconditions, and to
cease hostilities immediately. We also call on the
parties to ensure full and unhindered access for the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur throughout the Mission area, and to allow
humanitarian workers to provide assistance to all
populations in need.
To conclude, let me underline again that the
continuing commitment, engagement and close
cooperation of all parties will be necessary to achieve a
peaceful and prosperous future for the North and the
South alike. Likewise, the international community
must continue to show its unity and act in a concerted
manner under the leadership of the United Nations,
affording the two States the support and
encouragement they will need in the still difficult times
ahead. Portugal will continue to support along these
lines, and with the objective of supporting all efforts
that can contribute to making this new chapter of the
Sudanese people’s life, in the South and in the North,
an effective success.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I, too, would
like to thank Special Representative Haile Menkerios
and
President
Benjamin
Mkapa
for
their
comprehensive and useful briefings on the current

19

S/PV.6478

situation in the Sudan. I would also like to join others
in thanking the representatives of the African Union,
the Ambassador of the Sudan and the Minister from the
Government of Southern Sudan for sharing their
perspectives on the situation with us.
As other colleagues have mentioned, we have
witnessed events that have far-reaching significance, not
only for the people of the Sudan but also for the region
and, indeed, for the entire African continent. A very
large number of eligible voters — 97.58 per cent —
participated in the referendum, and an overwhelming
number of those voters — 98.83 per cent — raised their
voice in favour of separation. For the organization of a
fair and transparent referendum, our thanks are due to
the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission and to the
international organizations involved, in particular the
United Nations — as well as, of course, the European
Union, the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and others partnering the
Commission.
Most importantly, the leadership shown by
President Al-Bashir and First Vice-President Salva Kiir
is to be complemented, because without their political
will and cooperation the process could not have run as
smoothly and peacefully as it did. We are glad that
President Al-Bashir welcomed the results on 7 February
as the will of the Southern Sudanese people. We also
welcome First Vice-President Salva Kiir’s statement that
the referendum was not the end of the road, and that he
will cooperate with Khartoum to build strong relations.
The conclusion of the referendum process is only
a milestone, albeit an important one, on the road to the
full implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) in the Sudan.
Enormous challenges lie ahead. A number of
issues remain to be resolved, including citizenship, the
status of Abyei, popular consultations in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states, border delineation and
demarcation, the division of resources and security
arrangements. In this context, we are encouraged by
the meeting held in Khartoum on 27 January between
President Al-Bashir and First Vice-President Salva
Kiir, along with President Thabo Mbeki. Their
agreement to promote sustainable peace and stability
between the North and the South, to let the CPA
institutions continue their work until the end of the
interim period, to continue with the work of the

20

Technical Committee on Border Demarcation, and to
resolve the status of Abyei is most welcome.
The efforts of the Sudanese parties need to be
supported by the international community. We should
look beyond the referendum and assist the parties in
their nation-building exercise. Sustainable peace and
stability can be firmly established only when the
development needs of all of the people of the Sudan
are met. The fragility of the situation was demonstrated
once again during the past week. More than 50 people,
including a United Nations staff member, were killed
in clashes between Southern and Northern soldiers
from the joint integrated unit from Malakal in Upper
Nile state.
There are also several fault lines in Southern
Sudan. Indeed, even as we deliberate here today, we
have received news of the killing of a minister of the
Government of Southern Sudan. While this was
reportedly due to an issue between the personalities
concerned, it does point to the security challenges in
the region. We therefore believe that unless the
pending issues are resolved expeditiously and the
process of building governance and economic
development institutions is accelerated, conflicts along
those fault lines remain a real danger.
India has some 3,000 troops in the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan and has contributed six
Mi-17 helicopters. The Sudan is the largest recipient of
lines of credit from India, with projects totaling nearly
$1 billion. India is the second largest investor in the
Sudan. For capacity-building in civilian sectors, India
offers more than 150 slots every year under the Indian
Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme and
20 post-graduate and doctoral scholarships for student
from both North and South Sudan. In July last year, we
offered fellowships in Indian agricultural universities
for four PhD and six MSc courses to the Sudan under
the India-Africa Action Plan.
India stands ready to further enhance its
assistance to the Sudan, as may be required by the
Governments of the Sudan and Southern Sudan. We
urge the international community to increase its
support to the Sudan in the areas of debt relief,
economic investment and assistance so that Sudanese
leaders have material resources as well as public
support for dealing with and surmounting the
challenges they face.

11-22913

S/PV.6478

Last but not least, the situation on the ground in
Darfur is not much better than the last time the Council
discussed the issue. While there has been some
encouraging news about the two rebel groups deciding
to send their teams to Doha, we have yet to see a
breakthrough. The Council should therefore reiterate
its demand that all armed groups agree to an immediate
ceasefire and participate in the Doha peace process
without delay or conditions so that the process may
reach its successful conclusion. We commend the
Government of Qatar for its sustained efforts in favour
of the success of the Doha peace process for
sustainable peace in Darfur, which includes all sections
of society. We welcome the efforts of the Government
of the Sudan to start a Darfur-based political process
that would build on the outcomes of the Doha peace
process. In this context, we commend the efforts of the
High-Level Implementation Panel led by President
Mbeki, and welcome the 31 January declaration of the
African Union on the complete normalization of
relations between the international community and the
Sudan.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I thank
Mr. Menkerios, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General; President Mkapa, Chair of the
Secretary-General’s Panel on the Referenda in the
Sudan; and Ambassador Mahmoud Kane. We also
welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan and the Minister of
Regional Cooperation of the Government of Southern
Sudan.
We welcome the announcement of the final
results of the referendum on Southern Sudan and
commend the parties for their constructive cooperation
in the referendum process. Bosnia and Herzegovina
supports the full and timely implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). In that
regard, we urge the parties to redouble their efforts to
find solutions for Abyei and other outstanding CPA
issues — including wealth-sharing, management of
assets and debts, citizenship and border security
arrangements — before the end of the interim period.
We praise the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel and other international partners
for their roles in assisting the CPA parties in this
important endeavour. We are encouraged by the
activities of the international community and the
United Nations in anticipating the future engagement
of the United Nations in Southern Sudan. Special

11-22913

attention should be given to capacity-building,
economic development and efforts to develop
cooperation between the North and South as a crucial
component of long-term stability in the region.
We are concerned by the fact that the parties have
not yet reached an agreement on Abyei. We urge them
to reconcile their differences and find an acceptable
solution regarding this important part of the CPA as
soon as possible.
We commend the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan (UNMIS) for its efforts in Abyei at this critical
time. With regard to restrictions on the freedom of
movement of UNMIS, we call on the Sudanese
authorities to ensure the Mission’s unhindered access.
A just, comprehensive and inclusive solution
must be found for Darfur. It is high time to end the
vicious cycle of violence and bring peace to the people
of that region. We reiterate our full support for the
United Nations and African Union-led peace process in
Doha and the efforts of the Joint Chief Mediator,
Mr. Bassolé. We urge all parties to join the Doha peace
process without preconditions or further delays.
We are concerned by the upsurge of violence in
Darfur and call upon all parties to cease hostilities and
ensure unrestricted access to personnel of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and humanitarian workers to the affected
areas and population in need. We strongly condemn the
continued attacks on and kidnapping of UNAMID and
humanitarian personnel. We urge the Government to
ensure law and order in Darfur and to bring the
perpetrators of such acts to justice. Ending impunity is
a critical factor for ensuring lasting peace and stability
in Darfur.
Finally, we commend UNMIS and UNAMID
personnel for their tireless efforts in carrying out their
mandates in difficult circumstances.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I, too, would like to thank Mr. Menkerios and
President Mkapa for their statements and for their
important work in the Sudan. I also thank Ambassador
Osman and Mr. Deng Alor Kuol, Minister of Regional
Cooperation of the Government of Southern Sudan, for
their statements.
The announcement of the final results of the
referendum on 7 February marks the conclusion of a
long political process throughout which the authorities

21

S/PV.6478

of both the North and the South showed great restraint
and commitment to peace. I would therefore like to pay
a warm and well-deserved tribute to them here.
The statement made by President Al-Bashir
recognizing the results announced by the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission and thereby
committing to respect the choice of independence made
by the Southern Sudanese should be commended.
Likewise, I welcome the commitments made by First
Vice-President Salva Kiir to work alongside the
Sudanese Government in the mutual interests of the
North and the South. The Council should therefore
encourage the two parties to keep up this momentum of
cooperation and spirit of openness in order to conclude
discussions on post-referendum arrangements and the
status of Abyei as soon as possible. We call on the two
parties to make the necessary courageous concessions
to bring about a successful conclusion to the political
process. We welcome the leadership of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel, chaired by
President Thabo Mbeki.
In addition, the parties to the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement must also agree on a framework to
determine the future of the millions of Southerners
who live in the North and Northerners who live in the
South. To that end, they must provide essential
guarantees to reassure the civilian population.
The clashes near the border town of Malakal,
which have caused almost 50 deaths, including one
United Nations staff member, remind us that the future
of friendly relations and peaceful coexistence between
the North and the South, aimed at achieving stability in
the Sudan, requires the full implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and an early
conclusion of the suspended talks.
The success of the referendum in Southern Sudan
must not obscure the precarious nature of the situation
in Darfur and its impact on the civilian population and
humanitarian workers. We must therefore maintain
pressure on the parties, in particular to encourage
armed groups that have not yet joined the peace
process to do so without conditions or delay.
We welcome and support the efforts by the
Government of Qatar and African Union-United
Nations Chief Mediator Djibril Bassolé. We also
welcome the presence in Doha of the Justice and
Equality Movement and the Liberation and Justice
Movement.

22

Establishing and building the new State of
Southern Sudan will require an enhanced mobilization
of efforts and substantial support by the international
community, in particular in the economic sphere. This
support must also be provided to the Government of
the Sudan, whose cooperation was a decisive factor in
the holding of the referendum in the South.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Haile Menkerios for his briefing and his
outstanding work at the head of the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS). I also thank President
Mbeki and President Mkapa for their decisive work
alongside UNMIS in the past few months. I should also
like to thank Mr. Deng Alor Kuol and Mr. Osman, the
representative of the Sudan, for their statements. I also
welcome the commitment shown by the two parties
throughout the referendum process. Finally, on behalf
of the French authorities, I congratulate the people of
Southern Sudan on the maturity they have shown on
this historic occasion.
The immediate recognition by the parties of the
official results announced Monday by the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission shows the significant
progress that has been achieved since the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement was signed in 2005.
The authorities in Khartoum and Juba have chosen the
path of peaceful cooperation to achieve a successful
conclusion to the referendum and acceptance of its
results. We welcome this common will to overcome the
past.
However, as previous speakers have said, much
remains to be done before the end of the interim period
in July. First of all, a solution must be found to the
issue of Abyei. A temporary agreement has allowed for
the cessation of violence between the parties. A lasting
solution must be found in order to determine once and
for all the status of the province and the terms on which
the populations there can coexist. We would request
that the two parties find a solution before March, as
they agreed at the presidential level on 27 January.
In addition, the pending post-referendum
questions must be resolved. The future of the
relationship between the North and the South depends
on a common understanding of the border demarcation
and of issues of security, citizenship and wealth
sharing. As the clashes last week in the Upper Nile
region have shown, a solution must be found for the

11-22913

S/PV.6478

Southern forces that are there as part of the Sudanese
Army, as well as for the Northern forces in the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army stationed in Blue Nile and
Kordofan. We encourage the continued mediation by
the Mbeki Panel on these subjects and call on the
parties to spare no effort and make the necessary
concessions to allow for the establishment of a lasting
peace.

We also support the efforts undertaken by the
African Union for peace in Darfur. As highlighted
recently by the solemn declaration made by the heads
of State and Government of the African Union on the
Sudan, a political process in Darfur will be able to
complement the efforts in Doha once those efforts have
created an environment that allows for such talks to be
held.

For its part, the United Nations will now start the
important task of adapting its presence and work, with
the participation of the Sudan, in two distinct
countries. A new mission will have to be re-established
in Southern Sudan in order to carry out the task of
peacebuilding there. Its mandate will have to take into
account the decisive role that the United Nations team
established in Juba will be called to play in
coordination with bilateral donors.

We also continue to support the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and firmly
condemn the hindrances it faces. The mission must
redouble its efforts to protect civilians, as required by
its mandate. Progress must still be made in this respect.

In North Sudan, retaining a cell from UNMIS
would be a valuable step to take in terms of providing
follow-up to the implementation of post-referendum
issues and supporting the final stages of the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, that is, the conclusion of the popular polls
in the Blue Nile, where they have begun, and in
Southern Kordofan, where they have not yet been
organized. This would provide support to the two new
neighbours in the early stages of their bilateral
relations. We are at the Secretariat’s disposal in terms
of contributing to the consideration under way on the
reconfiguration of the United Nations presence in the
North and the South.
While we welcome the successful holding of the
referendum, we cannot ignore the current deterioration
in the situation in Darfur. The number of displaced
persons has increased. Humanitarian access is not
always possible. We are therefore left to wonder
whether some have not indeed chosen the military
option. We know that this is not a viable option. The
Sudanese Armed Forces and the rebel groups must
reach a ceasefire with delay, followed by a lasting
peace agreement.
The developments we have seen in recent weeks
in the context of the Doha negotiations are
encouraging. The Sudan People’s Liberation Army,
headed by Abdul Wahid al-Nur, must, from now on and
without delay or preconditions, join the talks, as have
the Liberation and Justice Movement and the Justice
and Equality Movement.

11-22913

I would like to conclude by recalling that there
can be no peace without justice in Darfur.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Let me to join others in
thanking His Excellency President Mkapa, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haile
Menkerios and Ambassador Mahmoud Kane for their
illuminating and inspiring statements today. Their
invaluable input throughout this historic process has
without a doubt contributed to the successful outcome
of the South Sudan referendum. I would also like to
welcome the representatives of the Governments of the
Sudan and South Sudan and thank them indeed for
their contributions to this meeting.
On behalf of my Government, I want to welcome
the final result of the South Sudan referendum, which
represents the true and valid wish of the people of
South Sudan, expressed in a free, fair and transparent
process.
In that connection, we want to once again
commend President Omer Al-Bashir and First VicePresident Salva Kiir for leading the challenging
process to a successful conclusion. Their statements of
mutual support and timely acceptance of the outcome
of the referendum, reaffirmed here today by their
representatives, demonstrate their exemplary courage,
leadership, goodwill and dedication to the peace
process. The people of the Sudan and the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan also deserve our
commendation.
The announcement and acceptance of the
referendum results by all parties in the Sudan have
paved the way for a new State to emerge through a
peaceful process, and we look forward to welcoming
South Sudan into the United Nations and African

23

S/PV.6478

Union families in July. We hope that the parties in the
Sudan will seize the current moment to pursue sincere
negotiations on the remaining CPA and postreferendum issues. It is possible, in our view, for both
parties, inspired by the success of the referendum to
work tirelessly between now and July to complete the
key outstanding tasks under the CPA.
We share the concerns expressed by Member
States today over the status of Abyei. We believe that it
is necessary to reach workable compromises on the
Abyei question, the North-South border, popular
consultations in Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan
states, and security arrangements between the North
and South. Undoubtedly, the successful determination
of these issues will engender a stable partnership
between North and South Sudan in the long term.
There is no doubt that South Sudan will face
formidable challenges on the road to achieving a stable
and effective Government. Indeed, the challenges of
State-building will be exacerbated by the rising
expectations of independence and statehood. The truth,
however, is that attaining economic, political and
social transformation is always an arduous process.
The leaders of South Sudan must therefore stay
focused on and remain committed to developing a
transparent and inclusive political process that
incorporates all segments, guarantees freedoms and
protects all people, particularly women and children.
We welcome in this regard First Vice-President
Salva Kiir’s convening of a constitutional panel to
review the South’s legal institutions. Nigeria
recognizes that Southern Sudanese leaders cannot
overcome the major challenges facing the territory on
their own. Now more than ever, this Council and the
international community must stand in solidarity with
Southern Sudan. Our solidarity will indeed be put to
the test in the quality and quantity of the assistance that
we provide to the Government and people of South
Sudan.
This Friday’s Security Council debate on the
interdependence between security and development
will provide an opportunity for the Council to clarify
its role in that regard. It is important for the Council to
remain as united, resolute and committed as it has been
in the past. We implore the African Union, the
European Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, neighbouring countries and other

24

bilateral partners to join hands in assisting Southern
Sudan.
On Darfur, we welcome Joint Chief Mediator
Djibrill Bassolé’s extensive consultations within the
Sudan and in the region. We also welcome the
substantial progress in the Doha talks, and commend
the Joint Chief Mediator for his perseverance and the
Qatar Government for its enduring support. Once
again, we urge the Justice and Equality Movement, the
Sudan Liberation Movement-Abdul Wahid and the
Government of the Sudan to seize the opportunity to
engage fully in the Doha talks without preconditions.
Nigeria firmly believes that an internal political
process is indispensable to inclusiveness and
consensus-building in intercommunal relations in
Darfur. We therefore welcome the prospect of an open
and credible Darfur-based political process to support
and strengthen the Doha talks.
We would like to seize this opportunity to express
once again our unalloyed support for the work of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) under the leadership of Mr. Ibrahim
Gambari. I should note here that UNAMID is working
in a challenging environment in Darfur.
Nigeria takes this opportunity to reiterate its
commitment to the Sudanese peace process. We believe
that our collective support will be crucial as the people
of the Sudan, in the North and the South alike, make
the necessary adjustments and transform their fortunes.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Allow me to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haile Menkerios, President Mkapa
and Ambassador Mahmoud Kane, speaking on behalf
of President Mbeki, for their respective briefings. We
welcome the presence of representatives from Northern
and Southern Sudan at today’s meeting.
Thanks to the joint efforts of Northern and
Southern Sudan, the referendum in Southern Sudan
was held smoothly and its final results were announced
two days ago. China respects the will and choice of the
Sudanese, and appreciates the unremitting efforts made
by Northern and Southern Sudan to promote the peace
process between them. The referendum is a crucial step
in the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA), but it is not the end of the road.
The Security Council should pay close attention
to the new situation, new challenges and new tasks that

11-22913

S/PV.6478

have emerged following the referendum. It must also
formulate corresponding strategies in a timely manner.
We also hope that Northern and Southern Sudan will,
in the spirit of mutual understanding and compromise,
continue to seek solutions to the outstanding issues
through dialogue and consultation, and see the
implementation of the CPA through to its culmination
in order to maintain peace and stability in the Sudan
and the region.
China appreciates the assistance and support
provided by the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS) and the Secretary-General’s Panel on the
Referenda in the Sudan towards the orderly holding of
the referendum. We welcome their ongoing assistance
to Northern and Southern Sudan in the comprehensive
implementation of the CPA. The mandate of UNMIS
will expire at the end of April. At that time, the
Security Council will need to make a decision on the
future of the Mission. In that regard, China believes
that the views of the parties should be taken into full
consideration.
The African Union (AU) is a major strategic
partner of the United Nations in addressing the issue of
the Sudan. The AU and its High-Level Implementation
Panel on the Sudan, led by Mr. Mbeki, played an
important role in promoting the smooth holding of the
referendum in the Southern Sudan. China welcomes the
declaration on the Sudan issued at the recent AU
Summit.
In order to achieve lasting peace in the Sudan, it
is imperative that a comprehensive peace agreement be
reached in Darfur as soon as possible. China has
always been closely attentive to and supportive of the
Doha talks, in which we welcome the recent progress.
We urge all parties in Darfur that have yet to join the
Doha talks to do so immediately and without condition.
China supports the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and its positive
contribution, under resolution 1935 (2010), to
promoting the political process in Darfur.

over recent weeks. Again, we extend our gratitude to
the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission and its
Bureau. We commend the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan and Special Representative Menkerios for
their crucial contribution, as well as the Panel under
President Mkapa.
After the pronouncement of the official results,
all parties in the Sudan and the international
community now need to focus on the future, the
consolidation of peace, good relations and coexistence
between the North and the South, and capacitybuilding for a wholly new State. In this enormous
endeavour, all parties need to continue to cooperate in
good faith.
The forthcoming creation of an independent State
in South Sudan will redraw the political and economic
landscape of Africa. At the same time, we see the
opportunity for the development of peaceful
neighbourly relations. Many serious challenges remain.
In particular, there is a need for a durable solution to
the question of Abyei. We urgently call upon the
parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement to
complete the popular consultations in South Kordofan
and Blue Nile and to reach an agreement on Abyei. The
other remaining post-referendum issues — such as
citizenship, the rights of northerners in the South and
of southerners in the North, wealth sharing, border
demarcation and security arrangements — must be
addressed without further delay.
The Council’s decisions have been crucial for the
peaceful referendum process. But the Security Council
will have to continue to assume responsibility and
extend its support to institution-building in the soon-tobe new independent State in South Sudan. Germany
stands ready to contribute.

Mr. Wittig (Germany): I will be brief. Most of
the things I want to say have been said before, so I will
focus on a very few points.

Finally, we must not divert our attention from the
situation in Darfur. We are very concerned about the
continuing violence in the region and the displacement
of thousands of people. We urge the Government of the
Sudan and all groups in Darfur to provide for the safety
and security of the civilian population and to ensure
unhindered access for the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and for
humanitarian aid.

Germany warmly welcomes the peaceful voting
during the referendum and joins others in
congratulating the parties to the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) and, above all, the people
everywhere in the Sudan. We are encouraged by the
responsible behaviour of the Government in Khartoum

We are encouraged to hear that the peace talks in
Doha are about to gain new momentum. We continue to
urge all parties to the peace talks to conclude a
comprehensive ceasefire and agreements on all other
outstanding issues. The people of Darfur deserve peace
and they deserve it right now.

11-22913

25

S/PV.6478

The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Brazil.
It is a great honour to preside over this historic
meeting. The last time Brazil held the Council’s
presidency, almost six years ago, the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA) had just been signed. Since
then, the parties to the CPA and the Sudanese people
have come a long way on the path towards the
democratic transformation of the Sudan.
Brazil warmly congratulates all Sudanese for the
peaceful and transparent conduct of the referendum.
We also commend Sudanese leaders for displaying
statesmanship and for their determination to pursue
dialogue and mutual understanding. We applaud the
CPA parties for having accepted the results of the
referendum
and
for
committing
to
their
implementation.
Brazil also commends the excellent work of the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan, under the
leadership of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Haile Menkerios. We also reiterate our
appreciation for the contribution of the Panels led by
Presidents Mkapa and Mbeki.
However momentous this achievement is, the
holding of the Southern Sudan referendum is but
another step towards peace, stability and development
in the Sudan. We encourage the parties to the CPA to
continue to address the remaining issues and postreferendum arrangements in the same atmosphere of
cooperation that prevailed during the holding of the
referendum.
It is important that the popular consultations in
Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan states be completed
and that a solution is found concerning the status of
Abyei.
The United Nations must continue to provide
assistance, as requested, to ensure a smooth transition
in the post-referendum period. Options for the future
presence of the United Nations in the Sudan must take
into account the interdependence between security and
development, which so clearly manifests itself in the
Sudanese conflicts. Institution-building and strong
support for development will be necessary in Southern
Sudan. The Peacebuilding Commission could play an
important role in that regard.
The time has also come for the long-awaited
peace in Darfur. The Doha peace process must come to
a conclusion soon. Conditions must be reached for the
launching of the Darfurian political process. We are

26

encouraged by the announced intention of the
Liberation and Justice Movement and the Justice and
Equality Movement to participate in the Doha peace
negotiations. Brazil deplores, nevertheless, the recent
upsurge in hostilities and the continuation of attacks on
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and on humanitarian agencies.
Bilaterally, Brazil looks forward to strengthening
its ties to both North and South Sudan. Our bilateral
trade has been increasing in recent years. New
partnerships are being forged in the areas of agriculture
and biofuels. Cooperation initiatives are yielding
results. With peace and stability in the Sudan, those
initiatives will certainly thrive and be followed by
many others.
We hope this momentous occasion marks the
beginning of a future for all Sudanese that fully
realizes their aspirations for stability, peace and
development.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
As agreed by Council members, I shall now
suspend the meeting, with the intention of resuming
shortly.
The meeting was suspended at 12.45 p.m. and
resumed at 2.00 p.m.
The President: I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the
7 February announcement by the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission of the final results of
the referendum on self-determination for the
people of Southern Sudan, which showed that
98.83 per cent of voters chose independence. The
Council calls on the international community to
lend its full support to all Sudanese people as
they build a peaceful and prosperous future.
“The Council congratulates the parties to
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) and
the people of the Sudan for a peaceful and
successful referendum, and commends the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan for its contribution
to the process.
“The Security Council warmly welcomes
the statements of President Omer Al-Bashir and
Vice-President Salva Kiir on 7 February, in which
they accepted the final results of the referendum.
The Council calls on all Member States to respect

11-22913

S/PV.6478

the outcome of the referendum, and looks
forward to welcoming an independent South
Sudan as a new member of the international
community after 9 July.
“The Security Council welcomes the work
of the Secretary-General’s Panel, led by former
President Benjamin Mkapa. The Council praises
the CPA parties for their commitment to the CPA,
as illustrated by their support for a timely and
credible referendum process. The Council
underlines that full and timely implementation of
the CPA is essential to peace and stability in the
Sudan and the region and to future cooperation
between Northern and Southern Sudan and the
international community.
“The
Security
Council
further
acknowledges that the process mandated by the
CPA represents an exceptional case and does not,
by itself, set a precedent.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the work of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel and its Chair, President
Thabo Mbeki, and notes the commitments made
by the CPA parties in the 27 January presidency
meeting and encourages them to continue to
strive for a timely agreement on the
implementation of outstanding CPA issues. The
Council urges the parties to reach quickly an
agreement on Abyei and other critical issues,
including
border
demarcation,
security
arrangements, citizenship, debts, assets, currency,
wealth-sharing and natural resource management.
The Council welcomes the start of the popular
consultation process in Blue Nile state and
stresses the importance of inclusive, timely and
credible popular consultations processes in Blue
Nile and Southern Kordofan states, in accordance
with the CPA.
“The Security Council deeply regrets the
loss of life in violence in Upper Nile state from
3 to 5 February. The Security Council underlines
the need for the CPA parties to prevent further
clashes and promote calm, including by providing
immediate and ongoing reassurance to people of
all nationalities in the Sudan, including
Southerners in the North and Northerners in the
South, that their rights, safety and property will
continue to be respected. The Council urges the
CPA parties to respect their obligations.

11-22913

“The Security Council reiterates its deep
concern over the increase in violence and
insecurity in Darfur, including ceasefire
violations, attacks by rebel groups and aerial
bombardment by the Sudanese Armed Forces,
which recently displaced approximately 43,000
civilians, and the kidnapping on 13 January of
three members of the United Nations
Humanitarian Air Service. The Security Council
recalls the importance that it attaches to an end to
impunity and to justice for crimes committed in
Darfur. The Security Council reaffirms its support
for The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), and urges all
parties to ensure full and unhindered access for
UNAMID throughout the mission area and to
allow humanitarian workers to provide assistance
to all populations in need.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the African Union-United Nations-led peace
process for Darfur, hosted by the State of Qatar,
the work of Joint Chief Mediator Djibril Bassolé,
and the principles guiding the negotiations. The
Council welcomes the presence of the Justice and
Equality Movement and the Liberation and
Justice Movement in Doha, and strongly urges all
other rebel movements to join the peace process
without further delay or preconditions, and all
parties to engage with a view to concluding
urgently a comprehensive agreement.
“The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to report to the Council by the
end of February on issues related to the Darfurbased political process, including an assessment
of the enabling environment.
“The Security Council reiterates the
importance of increased participation of women
in the Sudanese peace processes.
“The Security Council will continue to
follow developments in the Sudan, including in
Darfur, closely.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2011/3.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.
The meeting rose at 2.05 p.m.

27
