48

General Auembly-Twenty-ninth Se111ion

3250 (XXIX). United Nations Children's Fund
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Executive Board
of the United Nations Children's Fund2º and the section of the report of the Economic and Social Council
dealing with the Fund, 21
Noting with approval the continuing efforts of the
United Nations Children's Fund to help developing
countries enlarge and improve basic services for their
children,
Deeply concerned about the dangers Qf a further
deterioration in the conditions of life for children in
many developing countries, especially those most adversely affected by the current economic crisis,
Convinced that a substantial expansion of the activities of the United Nations Children's Fund would contribute significantly towards alleviating the plight of
millions of children,
Recalling its resolution 3124 (XXVIII) of 13 December 1973, in which it, inter alía, requested the Secretary-General to . convene, during the twenty-ninth
session of the General Assembly, a special pledging
conference for voluntary contributions to be made to
the United Nations Children's Fund, and Economic
and Social Council resolution 1880 (LVII) of 31 July
1974 on the Fund,
1. Fully endorses the decision of the Executive
Board of the United Nations Children's Fund entitled
"Declaration of an emergency for children in developing countries as a result of the current economic
crisis";22
2. Appeals, with a sense of urgency, to all Govemments, especially those of the industrialized countries,
and other potential contributors to increase their contributions to the United Nations Children's Fund so
that it may enlarge its assistance to children in developing countries and respond effectively to the emergency affecting them;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration
with the Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund, to convene regular annual pledging conferences for the Fund starting in 1975.
2306th plena')' meeting
4 December 1974

3251 (XXIX). Technical co-operation among
developing countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2974 (XXVII) of 14 December 1972 and 3177 (XXVIII) of 17 December
1973 on co-operation among developing countries,
Recalling further its resolution 3172 (XXVIII) of
J 7 December 1973 on the convening of a special session of the General Assembly devoted to development
and international economic co-operation,
20 Offecial Ruords o/ the Economic and Social Council,
Fi/ty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 9 (E/SS28).
2 1 Offecial Records o/ tite General A.ssembly, Twenty-nintlt
Se.rsion, Supplement No. 3 (A/9603), chap. VI, sect. B.6.
22 Offecial Records o/ tite Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-sev,mtlt Session, Supplement No. 9 (E/SS28), para. 6.

Conscious of the role that the United Nations Development Programme should play in the establishment
of a new international economic order, in accordance
with the pertinent provisions of the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order2ª adopted by the
General Assembly at its sixth special session, and of
the contribution which technical co-operation among
developing countries "tt>uld make to the establishment
of such a new economic order,
Aware of the need to give international development co-operation a truly universal character and to
enhance the over-all efficiency and extend the dimension of the activities of the United Nations development system by making a systematic and comprehensive effort to pool and utilize the capacities,
experiences and resources of the developing countries,
Convinced of the need to make the fullest use of the
capacity and experience of ali Member States, independent of their degree of development, in united
action designed to accelerate the integral development
of the developing countries, especially the relatively
less developed among them,
Convinced further of the importance of ensuring the
optimum impact of the multiplier effect of the assistanct provided to developing countries, in particular
the assistance provided by the United Nations Development Programme,
l. Endorses th.e final report of the Working Group
on Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries~4 taking into account the decision of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme at its eighteenth session?'' and, accordingly,
requests the Administrator of the Programme to take
ali apr:,ropriate measures for its implementation;
2. Endorses the establishment of a special unit
within the United Nations Development Programme
to promote technical co-operation among developing
countries-principally through the implementation of
the recommendations of the Working Group-which
should have the functions set forth in the appendix of
the report of the Working Group, and with the objective of integrating this activity of technical co-operation among developing countries fully within the
Programme;
3. Invites the participating and executing agencies
of the United Nations development system to carry
out the measures contained in the recommendations
addressed to them in the report of the Working Group
and to give their ful) support to Member States and
to the United Nations Development Programme for
the implementation, as appropriate, of those recommendations of the Working Group;
4. Requests the Governing_ Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to consider at its
twentieth session the scope of, and the financial and
other necessary measures to convene at an early date,
an intergovernmental symposium on technical co-operation among developing countries sponsored by the
United Nations Development Programme, under the
aegis of the United Nations, to be preceded by regional
2a Resoluti-Ons 3201

(S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI).

24 DP/69, sect. 11.
211 See Offeciai Records o/ the Economic and Social Council,

Fifty-se!lenth Session, Supplement No. 2A. (E/5543/Rev.l),

para. 224.

49

Resolulions adopted on the reporta of the Second Committee

intergovemmental meetings, and to report on the action
taken to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session

through the Economic and Social Council at its fiftyninth session;
5. Requests the regional commissions to study and
give priority attention to measures designed to implement the recommendations addressed to them in the
report of the Working Group;
6. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to report, through the Governing Council of the Programme and the Economic
and Social Council, to the General Assembly at its
thirtieth session on the action taken regarding paragraphs l and 4 above and on the progress made with
regard to the functioning of the special unit mentioned
in paragraph 2 above;
7. Requests the participating and executing agencies of the United Nations development system and the
regional commissions to report on the action taken,
pursuant to the request contained in the present resolution, to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session
through the Goveming Council of the Onited Nations
Development Programme and the Economic and Social
Council, and to report periodically thereafter through
the Governing Council at its January session---commencing in 1976-and the Economic and Social
Council;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, together with
the Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme, to bring to thc attention of Member States
the report of the Working Group and to give wide
publicity to the report through the Office of Public
Information and the Centre for Economic and Social
lnformation of the Secretariat, and to report on the
action taken to the General Assembly at its thirtieth
session through the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme at its twentieth session and the Economic and Social Council:
9. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
progress report on the measures taken by the United
Nations Development Programme, the executing and
participating agencies and the regional commissions,
pursuant to the request contained in the present resolution, and to submit it to the Preparatory Committee
of the special session of the General Assemqly devoted
to development and international economic co-operation, to be held in 1975, for its consideration;
10. Decides to consider the question of technical
co-operation among developing countries al its srecial
session devoted to development and international economic co-operation and to include an ítem entitled
"Technical co-operation among developing countries"
in the provisional agenda of its thirtieth session.

Development Programme continues to be a single, unified programme,
Having considered the report of the Goveming
Council of the United Nations Development Programme
on its eighteenth session~•; and the relevant section of
the report of the Economic and Social Council on its
fifty-seventh session/ 7
Recalling decision III of 20 June 1974 of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme al its eighteenth session concerning regional and subregional co-operation aimed at the effective and efficient implementation of projects both
at the national and regional leve Is, ~H
Noting the statements of the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme at the eighteenth session of the Governing Council of the Programme~" and at the current session of the General
Assembli111 regarding the decentralization of the activities of the Programme in consonance with the principie of country programming and intercountry programming,
Noting further the views on decentralization of the
operational procedures and activities of the United
Nations Development Programme and the desire to
speed up the implementation and delivcry of country
and regional programmes and projects that werc expresseú at, sessions of the Governing C'ouncil of the
Programme, the Economic and Social Council and the
General Assembly,
Recognizing the need to help provide administrative
support from the field to the Administration of the
United Nations Development Programmc at Headquarters,
Reari11g in miml the views of Member States. the
statement of the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme and the action taken on his
note'11 by the Governing Council of the Programme at
its seventeenth session,"~
1. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme at its twentieth session to consider, taking into account the report of the
Administrator, the question of the decentralization of
the activities of the Programme, in particular the establishment of regional field offices of the United Nations
Development Programme, in liaison with the regional
commissions, with a view to improving thc programming, dclivery, implementation and follow-up action
of country programmes and regional and subregional
projects;
2. Decides to take up this matter further at the
thirtieth session in the context of its consideration of
the reports of the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme.

2306th plena,_,, meetinR
4 December 1974
3252 (XXIX). Decenlralization of the at'tivities of
the Uniled Nations Development Programme

The General Assembl_v,
Recalling its resolution 2688 (XXV) of 11 December 1970 on the capacity of the United Nations development system and subsequent decisions of the Goveming Council of the United Nations Dcvelopment
Programme on the decentralization of Pro!!ramme activities and the need to ensure that the United Nations

2306th plcnary meeting
4 December 1974
~u lhid., S11pp/('111n11 No. 2A ( E/~543/Rev. l ).
21' OUicial R,•cords uf the Ge11,.ra/ A.1·.w•mhl_v, Twe111_v-nintlr
Session. Suppl,·mnll No. J ( A/9603 ). chap. VI, sect. R.2.
~H See 01/ici<II R,•curd., uf 1/1<• Enmomit· <11ul Soda/ Cmmcil,
Fif1_v-se••e111/i Se.1·.1io11, Supp/eml.'II/ No. 2A (E/5543/Rev.l ),

para. 111.
~11 /1,i,I., para~. 99-102.
:111 0/lidal R,•cmds of t/r,• General A.,semh/_v, Twl'nt_v-nintl,
Sl'nio11. S,•nmd Co111111i11,•e, 1600th meeling, paras. 36-50.
:cr DP/29/Add.l.
"~ O[ficial Rl'cord.1 of t/rc Ecmwmic une/ Social Co1111ci/,
Fif1y •.w,·1·111J, Sl'ssion, S11ppl<•111c111 No. 2 ( E/5466 ), paras. 136-

148.
