TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR

th
MEETING: 27 JANUARY
NEW

1968

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. ,,. .. , .. .. ,. ., .. .. ...... . ... I

1

Adoption of the agenda , . . , , . , . . , . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . , , . .

1

Letter dated 25 January 1968 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8360) .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l389)
-

out
brk

x II
IOY
II0

35201-March

1971-2.100

SjPV.1389

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combinled with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/, . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Securi@ Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-NINTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Saturday, 27 January 1968, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. Agha SHAH1 (Pakistan),

this morning

the record of the debate yesterday evening

[1388tk meeting/. I must admit that I am astonished that
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisionalagenda(S/Agenda/l389)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 25 January 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8360).
Adoption of the agenda
The agendawasadopted.
Letter dated 25 January 1968 from the Permanent Representative of the United States of America addressed’to
the Presidentof the Security Council (S/8360)

1. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Mr, President,
first, let me welcome you as our President. We are
fortunate, I am sure, to be working at this time under a
President so wideiy respected for thoroughness and fairness,
and so determined to lead us to success.You will, Sir-we
are confident-maintain
and enhance the high standards of
impartiality set by those who preceded you in your high
and exacting office. It is especially to be welcomed that we
work under your leadership as we now face a challenge not
only to peace but also to the authority of this Council.
2. I have spent the past few days in my own Parliament
where there is deep concern about the events which have
led to this meeting of the Council. I have participated in
discussions with other Ministers of my Government not
only about the gravity of the situation but also about the
crucial interest of everybody to achieve early and effective
action by this Council.
3. It was in response to the general and deep concern in
my country that my Foreign Secretary spoke in the House
of Commons yesterday, and expressed the senseof outrage
felt in my country at the seizure of a ship on the high seas,
a ship peacefully carrying out a legitimate purpose. As the
representative of the Soviet Union well knows, there are
many other ships carrying out an exactly similar task-some
close to the shores of my country. I have, of course, studied

the suggestion should have been made in this Council that
we should not even discuss the dangerous situation reported
to us, that we should turn awBy from our duty in negative
impotence.
4. We pride ourselves on being ready to meet in this
Council at any time to deal with tension or conflict. And so
it should be. And it was well that it wasyesterday decided
that we should at once face the grave report made to us. It
is all-important that we should not only face it but also act
upon it, and act with a sense of clear urgency,
5. My delegation yesterday reminded the Council of the
consequences of obstruction and delay in dealing with the
dangers of the Middle East early last summer. It was
salutary that we should be so reminded, and that we should
realize that the alternative to prompt and positive action by
the Council, now as then, can be disastrous.
6. May I also say that as I read the report of yesterday’s
debate about inscription of this item I was especially
impr&sscd with the timely and persuasive-indeed the
overwhelmingly convincing-argument put forward by the
representative of Canada, who so often at a critical time
gives us the benefit of his constructive leadership?
7. We all know from past experience that the most
important time in the consideration of any question in this
Council is the time immediately following the opening
statements. Then is the time for initiative. Then is the time
when all of us must give our minds not so much to what
should be .said but to what should be done. If this moment
of challenge, of initiative, is missed our speeches may lead
us not nearer but further away from a peaceful solution.
8. Yesterday, the Council heard the thorough and detailed
and documented and convincing report on the seizure of
the United States ship &&lo
on the high seas. We also
heard confirmation of most disquieting evidence of the
increase in violations of the Korean Armistice Agreement.]
9. Certainly we feel a sense of indignation and outrage at
what Ambassador Goldberg rightly described as “nothing
less than a deliberate, premeditated armed attack on a
United States naval vessel on the high seas” [2388tk
meeting, para. 861.
1 For the text of the Armistice Agreement entered into in Korea
on 27 July 1953, see Official Records of the Security Council,
Eighth Year, Supplement for July, August and September 19.53,
document S/3079, appendix A.

order and peace?The first step is often the most important
and the most difficult. It is to this first step that I trust W’C
shall now all give our undivided and genuine and urgent
consideration,

10. We cannot disregard Ambassador Goldberg’s sombre
summary of the evidence. Again, I use his words:
C‘. . * the Pueblo, clearly on the high seas,was forcibly
stopped, boarded and seized by North Korean armed
vessels, This is a knowing and wilful aggressiveact-part
of a deliberate series of actions in contravention of
international law and of solemn international arrangements designed to keep peace in the area, which apply
not only to land forces but to naval forces as well.”
[Ibid., para. 87.1

17. As so often before in this Council, we search not for a
victory for anyone but for a successfor everyone-a succcss
in the interests of all and in the overriding interests of
peace. I trust that in that search for means to take that first
essential step we shall all be ready to co-operate together.
18. Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): My intcl.
vention at this stage of our deliberations will be necessaril!,
brief for the simple and, I believe, valid reason that it would
not seem to us opportune to enter into a substantive debatic
on the matter before the Council has had all available
information and all possible verification of the involved and
unfortunate incident that has been reported to us. My
observations at this stage will therefore be of a preliminarly
character.

Those were the words used in the summary given us
yesterday by Ambassaddr Goldberg. Certainly we must
deplore in the strongest terms all breaches of the Armistice
Agreement.
11. All our energies and endeavours must now be concentrated-this is the argument I should most like to urge ori
the Council this morning-not on exchange of accusation
but rather on an immediate effort together quickly to
restore the situation.

19. This is certainly not the time, in the view of my
delegation, to make any assessment of, let alone pass
judgement on, an event regarding which we do not as ye1
have full information. We have listened with great care and
keen attention to the respective statements made by our
colleagues, the representative of the United States rind the
representative of the Soviet Union, and we shall continue tc)
study these submissions, together with all the other
information available to us so far.

12. As to the mounting violations of the Armistice
Agreement there is, I trust, some comfort to be gained from
the fact that all concerned, I believe, claim to accept the
Agreement.
13. Very well, let the need for respect for the Agreement
be reaffirmed by this Council. To the profound relief of the
world the Agreement was reached fifteen years ago. It
brought to an end a destructive war which threatened even
greater dangers. We must at all costs not go back to those
dangers. Our duty is clear-to require all concerned to
maintain and respect the Agreement which everyone claims
to support.

20. We voted for the inscription of this item on thl!
Council’s agenda as an urgent matter for consiclcrntioll
because we have sensed real danger to world peace in the
developments that have surrounded this incident, and alstr
because we fully realize and recognize the role and primar)
responsibility of the Council for the maintenance OF
international peace and security,

14. Often when we meet in this Council to consider a
dispute or a conflict we have to endeavour to work out a
framework for a settlement. Sometimes we have succeeded
in doing so, aswe did recently in regard to the Middle East.
It is often a hard, long, frustrating task to find common
ground of agreement on which we can go forward. But now
we have no such problem. That work was done for us
fifteen years ago. The Agreement was worked out and
accepted. No one challenges its binding authority. now. All
can honourably confirm it. All must honestly carry it out.
It is on this firm ground that we can confidentiy advance.

21. Having thus brought the matter into the hands of the
Council, it becomes our duty and urgent responsibility a!;
Council members to find a suitable way and some effective
means whereby the Council can exert its conciliator)
influence in a situation which bears the risk of furthel
escalation and conflict.
r’--

221, It would seem to my delegation that, for the time
l%ing at any rate, the Council finds itself at the greal
disadvantage of not having verified information on whal
actually happened. In order to overcome this handicap to
its efforts the Council needs to take some agreed action ta
initiate an immediate investigation of the incident involved,
I am encouraged to learn that such an investigation of the
incident need not take undue time if the action has the
concurrence and the co-operation of the parties concerned;
but it would, in our view, be appropriate and in the
established tradition of the Council to extend an invitation
to North Korea, as a party to the dispute, to take its full
part in the carrying out of the investigation and to appear
and to present its casebefore the Council while this item is
being debated. This would have the obvious advantage of
enabling the Council to be possessed of first-hand submis.
sions from all sides and to gain fuller and more balanced
information on the matter as a whole.

15. There is no need therefore today to talk about a
framework for an over-all settlement. We have it already.
What we need to do now surely is to concentrate on an
immediate overriding need. We need to clear the ground to,
go forward on the basic agreement which is not in dispute,
HOW
can that be done? By restoring the situation, by
quickly reducing tension, by allowing the ship and her crew
to go free. If that can be quickly achieved then we can
return to good sense,and in goodwill we can go ahead with
the more satisfactory implementation of the Agreement,
the Agreement which will restore peace and remove tension
for the future.
16. What means, what method, can most quickly achieve
that first step to avoid mounting dangers and to return to
2

23. We believe, therefore, that investigation of the incident should be a necessary step for the Council to consider
at this opening stage of the debate on this item.

28. It should come as something of a surprise to many
Member States of the United Nations and the Security
Council that it is the delegation of the United States of
America which takes it upon itself to accuse another State
of aggressive military actions in violation of international
law and our Charter. Surely the record of the United States
of America in Viet-Nam and elsewhere is not one of
compliance with international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. For a country which has for years been
conducting a cruel and aggressivewar on a nation which has
no other aims than to secure its independence, it is indeed
strange to appear before us in defence of the very principles
which it is daily violating in its international conduct.

24. In the meantime there is the imperative need to reduce
tensions and to create the climate for the appropriate
negotiated settlement which, after all, is the objective of
this Present Security Council effort, While the Council
undertakes its investigations, the parties concerned must
Ilelp the council in its efforts by exercising maximum
restraint and by agreeing to make certain gestures of
conciliation and goodwill which will help reduce the risks
and the miscalculations inherent in the kind of explosive
situation in which the world finds itself at the moment,

29. In his statement at yesterday’s meeting the representative of the United States went to great lengths to accuse the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of activities that are
apt to increase international tension, We entirely reject
those allegations. It is not the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that is endangering peace and security in
Asia and elsewhere in the world. It is not its Government
which is maintaining military forces and military bases all
over the world. It is not the Democratic People’s Repub!,ic
of Korea whose aircraft carry nuclear weapons in the air
space of other countries and thus gravely menace their
security in case of an air crash, as happened a few days ago
with an American military aircraft, It is not the Democratic
Peoples’s Republic of Korea whose military is systematically intruding into other States’ territories and
territorial waters, as recently happened in the case of
Cambodia and has for years been taking place in the coastal
waters of other States. The doctrine of considering the
frontiers of other sovereign States as mere lines on a map
that can’be crossed impudently has been enunciated not by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea but by a former
President and a high-ranking General of the United States
of America. And, last but not least, it is not the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea which has been giving active
military and diplomatic assistance to countries which
invade their neighbours, occupy their lands, annex their
territories. All this is done by the United States, as the
recent painful events of the aggression against the Arab
States have clearly shown.

25. It would perhaps be premature for me to specify the
kind of reciprocal gestures of goodwill and conciliation that
may be envisaged and that will have to be, in any case, the
subject of very intensive consultations. But all those who
have followed the rapidly developing situation of the past
days must agree, I believe, that if we are to avert the danger
of a widening conflict, we need to ensure that both sides
will “play it cool”, and that they will avoid taking any
action which is likely further to aggravate an already serious
situation. The announcement by the United States that it is
intensifying its military preparations both here and in the
general area of the incident and, likewise, the announcement by North Korea that it intends to put the personnel
of the United States naval vesselPueblo on trial in North
Korean courts are two examples of the kind of area of
action where both sides can make gestures of conciliation
and restraint which can help reduce tensions and thus
enable the Council to perform its vital mission as the
guardian of world peace.
26. The more we can have of these gestures, the more we
can expect to resolve this problem in peace and without the
danger of a military conflict. Experience has clearly shown
that when the Council has been given a fair chance and a
breathing spell to exert its healing influence through the
proper use of good offices, and when all sides to a dispute
have been willing to co-operate, the Council can have the
capacity and the means to play its vital role of averting
imminent danger to international peace, This is the chance
and opportunity that we should strive to obtain in the
present crisis so that, by buying time for appropriate action
based on verified information, we can avert a crisis the
consequences of which would otherwise be extremely grave
not only for South-East Asia, but also for the world as a
whole.

30. That is the country which is now levelling charges
against the peaceful Government of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. What are those charges? They
are in essence charges of “wanton lawlessness against a
naval vessel of the United States operating on the high
seas”, in the words of the United States letter. The United
States Government contends that the USS Pueblo was, on
23 January, “illegally seized by armed North Korean
vessels , , . while operating in international waters”. /Ibid.]

27. Mr, CSATORDAY (Hungary): The Security COUnCil
has been convened in urgent and emergency session at the
request of the delegation of the United States of America
contained in a letter dated 25 January 1968. I have already
had the occasion to state the objection of my delegation to
a meeting on the subject indicated in the United States
letter. That letter states that the Security COUW~ should:

31. To substantiate those charges, the representative of
the United States even utilized large maps on which he
proceeded to demonstrate this accuracy by showing US the
alleged route of the vessel and informing us not only of the
alleged declarations of the American ship, but even of those
of the vessels of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.

“ . . . consider the grave threat to peace which has been
brought about by a series of increasinglydangerous and
aggressive military actions by North Korean authorities in
violation of the Armistice Agreement, of international
law and of the Charter of the United Nations.” [s/8360.1

32. NOW, as newcomers to this Council we wish to be the
last to show disrespect to any member of this organ. But we
3

are,..constrained:, to say, pat we had ,not expected the
delggation pf the i$Jnited, States .of America to inform us
about the ppsition pf t;he :Democratic People’s Republic of
K&e+ We have our own, channels for doing this and we feel
that the, burden of Fepyesenting the United States pojnt of
view in this matter must prove sufficiently heavy f?r *e
delegation of the ! United States, t9 shoulder. We shall
therefore base our judgement concerning the respective
positions of the parties in this case on the information
supplied by both sid&,,‘instead of looking for it from the
United States delegation alone. We wish all the more to
proceed in this manner since the subsequent versions put
out by various United States agencies in the last few days
make it difficult enough for us to accept any one of them
as the United States version. Thus, a New York Times
dispatch, appearing on page 14 of its issue of 24 January
and quoting the Defense Department, states that “the ship
had been in international waters about 25 miles off the
eastern coast of North Korea when she was boarded by , . .
North Korean sailors”. Another dispatch, in the same issue
of The New York Times and on the same page, says that
the details. given by the Pentagon on the ship’s position
when it was boarded “would have put her about 20 miles
from the peninsula that forms the northern arm of Wonsan
Bay and about 30 miles from the Port of Wonsan”, And
finally, Rear Admiral John V. Smith of the United States
Navy stated, according to press reports from Panmunjom,
that the vessel was “over 16 nautical miles from the land”.
33. In the light of these conflicting statements, how are
we expected to acquiesce in the information handed to us
by the delegation of the United States when the Captain of
the intelligence-gathering sl$p in question, in his statement
broadcast by the radio stations of the Democatic People’s
Republic of Korea, admitted that his ship “sailed up to the
point 7.6 miles off Nodo . . . when the navy patrol craft of
the Korean People’s Army appeared”? The representative
of the United States attempted to question the statement
of Captain Bucher and stated that the facts given by his
delegation were incontrovertible. This is not something
absolutely new to hear. Similar assurances have been given
on many occasions in the past by the United States
representatitives here and in other official positions. One
that comes immediately to our minds is the one concerning
the position of United States warships in the Gulf of
Tonkin in January 1965. Must I remind members of this
Council that those “incontrovertible”
facts, then announced, have never since been accepted by the international community, and that the Foreign Affairs Committee
of the United States Senate is even now probing into the
veracity of those statements? May I say that statements
put out by official United States agencies concerning the
spy flight of Gary Powers over the Soviet Union; the
so-called minor navigation error of his U-2 plane resulting in
a mere 1800 kilometres of overflight over the Soviet Union;
statements denying any knowledge on the part of the
United States Government concerning the armed invasion
of Cuba in 1961 for which the President of the United
States of America later accepted the entire responsibditythat all these do not encourage us to take at face value
similar assurances by the United States delegation in this
case. We may be excused if we have doubts about the
credibility of United States declarations.

34. It is for all these reasons and because of Our conviction
that the Democratic People’s’ Republic of Korea is a
socialist State deeply devoted to the pursuit Of its Policy of
peace and the peaceful development of its economy, in the
wake. of the terrible destruction resulting from the earlier
aggression against it, that we are convinced of the sincerity
of its declarations. We have no doubt whatsover that the
United States vessel violated the territorial integrity of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea when it penetrated
into its coastal waters in order to gather intelligence data on
the radio signals of that country.
3.5. In this connexion, I wish to quote the views of an
authority on codes who, in an interview appearing in i%e
New York Times, on page 9 of the 26 January issue, says
that “for the obvious reason that weaker signals fade
out. , . they”-that is the ships-“wanted to get in as close
as they could to get as many signals as possible and as loud
as possible,” The same person, further in his interview, after
describing the mission of the ship to tape radar signals,
states, concerning the use of these taped signals: “If we
know the wave shapes, we can send out a phony signal from
our bombers-a signal that looks just like the one the North
Korean radar sends 0u.t. Their radar will accept it as valid,
and this signal will be so timed as to make it appear that
our bombers are farther away than they really are.” So one
of the functions of the ship was to prepare for an eventual
attack on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, to
facilitate the bombers’ evasion of the defensive fire of the
installations of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
36. Is it not clear in the light of all these things that the
ship’s mission was not the first move against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, but only the last in a
chain of events, the difference being that this time the
illegal act of the ship in violating the territoria1 waters of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has not passed
without consequences?
37. All this makes it obvious that the issue before the
Council is not the one case of the Pueblo, but the entire
policy of the United States-a policy of hostility, of threats
and of aggressive actions against the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The Government of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has repeatedly warned the
United States of the grave dangers its hostile acts entail,
These warnings have all been ignored and those provocative
acts have thus far continued.
38. In view of the constant attacks against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, in the course of which,
between 23 December 1967 and 20 January 1968, the
United States ordered its warships, spy ships and South
Korean fishing vessels on twenty-four occasions into the
territorial waters of the East Sea; the many border
violations committed against the Democratic People’s Re.
public of Korea concerning which the representative of the
Soviet Union gave detailed information yesterday at the
1388th meeting; the continuing occupation of Soutll Korea
by the armed forces of the United States; and the misrule
of the erstwhile servants of the Japanese colonial rulers in
that unhappy land-in view ‘of all this, is it not clear that it
is precisely the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
which should expect the United Nations ,to put an end to

4

States militarv forces and bases, We cannot find a single
place where tension grows in the world without encountering there large forces of the. United States. This is the
essence of the present problem that we are facing. It shows
the dangerous irresponsibility of a great Power which does
not seem to understand that not only rights but also
responsibility are the attributes of a great Power.

United States intervention in the affairs of the Korean
people? My delegation completely shares the position of
those who feel that the Council must put an end to
manifestations of the outdated period of gunboat diplomacy. As we sit here, we are, in our deliberations, placed
under the threat of quasi-ultimatums, Mobilizations, military preparations, the dispatching of warships go hand in
hand with an alleged peace move in the Security Council.
The danger of “other remedies” being utilized wasreferred
to by the United States delegation yesterday. The news
media in ‘this country are full of discussions of aggressive
military plans, naval moves against Wonsan harbour, and
the like.

44. To sum up, my delegation feels that: first, it is the
United States which bears the responsibility for the present
tension; secondly, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea wants nothing more than peace and an end to the
hostile acts of the United States; thirdly, the Council
should strive to put an end to the policy of provocations
practised by the United States-it should ask the United
States to cease its threats of armed intervention against the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and to abide by the
principles of the Charter; fourthly, the foreign occupation
of South Korea must end, and its people must be enabled
to exercise their right of self-determination; flfthly, the
United States must recognize and respect the sovereign
existence and rights of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.

39. I regret to say that we are not surprised. What else can
we expect from a country which keeps half a million men
under arms in a war against a small heroic people in South
East Asia, ignoring the world-wide indignation of distinguished individuals, organizations, church leaders and movements of all kinds? But our conviction is all the stronger
that the United Nations must not tolerate that violation of
the most basic principles of our Charter, the sovereignty of
nations and their territorial integrity and, last but not least,
that the peace of the world should be threatened by a
Member State which clearly puts itself beyond all the
universally accepted norms of international conduct.

45. Mr. IGNATIEFF
(Canada): Despite the various contentious issues which had been raised before the Council,
the discussion so far of the item on our agenda has in the
view of my delegation revealed one simple but important
point of common ground, namely, the degree of seriousness
which is attached to the rising state ,of tension in the
Korean area. The Puebb incident has been a serious spurce
of exacerbation of this tension. I wasimpressed in listening
to the statement of the representative of the Soviet Union
that, while he differed profoundly as to the cause of the
tension and as to the best means of reducing it, he readily
admitted that tensions had been growing especially in the
last few months as reflected in a growing number of
incidents in the Korean area, In this sense he seems to be at
one with the representative of the United States.

40. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a
peaceful State which makes no war preparations. It does
not send its ships into the other corners of the globe, and as
it was put by a newspaper comment which appeared in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in recent days:
“What we have arrested is not an American fishing
vessel fishing in the Gulf of Mexico, but criminals who
took it upon themselves to intrude into our territorial
waters and who undertook actions of provocation against
our country.”
41. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is conscious of the threats directed against it by the United States
of America and its South Korean puppets. But the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea also knows that in
resisting aggressive designs on its sovereignty it is not alone.
It is a member of the family of socialist nations and enjoys
the sympathy of many other nations of the world. Thus
there is no point in trying to intimidate the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, and it would be well for
everyone to remember that.

46. When I spoke about the importance of inscribing the
item before us and fproceeding promptly with its consideration I stressed the gravity of the situation in justification of
the Security Council’s taking up this matter with a view to
bringing the influence of diplomacy to bear. This is the
main issue before the Council. I made a suggestion to you,
Mr. President, yesterday, as to what could be done to help
reduce tension and deal with the immediate problem of the
Pueblo.

42. Reference was made in the letter of the representative
of the United States to conditions in South Korea. Without
wishing to go into details, I cannot fail to state that it is in
the continuing American occupation of South Korea, in the
servile dependence of its rulers on the United States and in
the deep economic crisis which does not guarantee a decent
life to the South Korean people, that reasons should be
found for the unrest in that country and for resistance to
the ruling clique,

47. I feel sure that other members of the Council may
have ideas or suggestions, having regard to the interests of
those directly concerned as well as to the extreme urgency
of the matter.
48. I believe that progress would now best be achieved by
urgent consultations which might commence without delay
and take place over the week-end among members of the
Council before we meet again, I hope on Monday,

43. Social forces are as much at work in South Korea as
elsewhere, and no foreign intervention.can change that fact.
It should be stated clearly that tension all over the world is
mainly caused by and linked to the presence of United

49. The PRESIDENT: There are no other speakers on my
list for this morning, but the representatives of the United
States and of the Soviet Union have asked to be allowed to
speak in the exercise of their right of reply.
5

54. The Hungarian representative, Mr. Csatorday, today
has reverted to the information-gathering mission to which
the USS Pueblo was assigned when it was illegally seized on
the high seasin violation of all international law. He did so
and said that there was something illegal and heinous and
improper about this type of activity. It is a very strange
double standard that the representative of Hungary finds
the mission of the United States ship to be improper, while
he is entirely silent about the activities of the Soviet Union
which maintains exactly such ships in close proximity to
the United States and many other countries of the world.
Soviet information ships performing precisely the same
functions are currently located at numerous places in the
Pacific and Atlantic Oceans, in the Mediterrean Sea and
near the shores of a number of countries. And the activities
of the Soviet Union in the Sea of Japan are by no means
novel. They are of long standing. For the last eight years
Soviet intelligence-gathering ships have patrolled the seas
and coastal areas of the Sea of Japan, collecting electronic
and other information from a wide variety of sources and
places.

50. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): In
exercise of my right of reply I shall attempt to be very brief
and factual since I share the conviction expressed SO well by
Lord Caradon that the obligation of this Council is to seek
a diplomatic, peaceful solution of this very grave crisis, It is
not my desire to score debating points; it is, rather, my
desire to set the record straight so that the facts can speak
for themselves and control the decision of this Council so
that the Council can make a contribution to the cause of
peace in the area.
51, The representative of Hungary, our colleague Ambassador Csatorday, having voted against inscription yesterday,
today reverseshis course and has spent considerable time in
arguing that there is grave danger to’the peace in the area. I
agree with his conclusion, but I certainly disagree with the
type of reasoning by which he arrived at it. He has argued
at length, as he argued in the First Committee and in the
General Assembly, that all of the danger in the area arises
from the actions of the Government of the Republic of
Korea and that the authorities in North Korea have not
engaged in any provocative or dangerous action, that they
merely desire to live in peace and that they are without any
aggressive designs and intentions.

55. Today, this very day, a Soviet vessel is operating in
this area, as I indicated yesterday. For the information of
the Hungarian representative, the vessel is the T-48 class
submarine ship Gidrolog. Ambassador Morozov will correct
me if my pronunciation is wrong, This ship is roughly the
same size as the Pueblo. It is even larger than the standard
Soviet trawler used for these purposes. It is an 840 ton ship,
220 foot over-all length, 30 foot beam, 20 knot speed,
diesel engined twin-screw ship.

52. But my colleagues on the Council, I am sure, will want
to examine the evidence a little more carefully than this
conclusion and examine the evidence coming from themand perhaps not from other sources. Yesterday in the
course of my discussion I pointed to the aggressive and
dangerous activities in violation of the Armistice Agreement
by the North Korean authorities. Yesterday I also pointed
to evidence out of the mouth of North Korea as to the
location of the ship Pueblo.

56. It may be of interest to the members of the Council to
know that such ships of the Soviet Navy in the Sea of Japan
frequently sail closer than twelve miles to the shores of
neighbouring States in the area.

53. Let me turn to the first subject. I referred yesterday to
the latest incident-very grave and portentous in its
character-of armed assassinsbeing sent by the authorities
in North Korea across the demilitarized zone, with the
design of storming the capital, Seoul, and the presidential
palace with the object of assassinating the President of the
Republic of Korea. We do not have to rely upon extrinsic
evidence in support of that. We have the proof from the
very mouths of the North Korean authorities:

57. A final word. At our meeting yesterday Ambassador
Morozov complained that the United States in its presentation had concentrated too much on the matter of the
Pueblo, in which he said he had found it difficult to interest
himself, and not enough on another major aspect of the
threat to the peace in Korea, namely, the violations of the
Korean Armistice Agreement and the consequent deterioration of that Agreement as an instrument of peace and
tranquillity in the area. Perhaps after reviewing the provisional verbatim record of yesterday’s proceedings /1388th
meeting/ Ambassador Morozov will notice that in fact I did
discuss in some detail the gross infractions of the Armistice
Agreement by North Korean infiltrators, leading up to the
particularly outrageous attack on the city of Seoul this past
week with, as I have said, the admitted aim-fortunately
not achieved-of assassinating the President of the Repub.
lit. There is much more to that story, and we are given the
details of the latest incident in the report which I have just
referred to [S/8366/.

“On 22 January a loudspeaker broadcast by the North
Koreans in the demilitarized zone boasted that ‘the North
Korean combat unit advanced from Kwuhg-Bok to
Sudae-Mun’ “-these are both in South Korea-(‘ ‘The
unit killed a Korean national policeman and the-chief of
Police and destroyed four military trucks , . . , The
combat unit escaped from Park’s clique and continued
their mission’ “,2
This was a loudspeaker broadcast by the North Koreans,
Who broadcast over the demilitarized zone daily. The other
relevant facts are set forth for the information of the
Council in this same document.

58, I think that Lord Caradon has helped us very much in
this area by pointing up the fact that all members of the
Council should support the strict enforcement of the
Armistice Agreement. It is precisely because the North
Korean authorities are not respecting the Armistice Agreement but are violating it that a very grave threat to the
peace has occurred. Part of the difficulty has been that the

2 official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-third
Year,
for January, February and March 1968, document

Supplement
S/8366.

6

i

machinery set up by the Korean Armistice Agreement and
related
agreements to which the Democratic People’s
RepubIic
of Korea is a party includes joint observer teams
to
investigate complaints of violation of the Armistice.
unfortunately,
owing to the adamant refusal of the North
Korean side, this observer-team machinery has been almost
completely
blocked from the beginning, and much can be
said of the Military Armistice Commission which meets at
Panmunjom.

64. We should like to refer to the publication in Pyongyang today of a statement by the Government of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to the effect that
the measures taken by that Government in connexion with
the intrusion for hostile purposes of the spy ship PuebZo
into the territorial waters of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea were measures taken in self-defence
which in no way violated international law. In its statement
the Government says:

59. Specifically and in line with their past performance,
4he North Korean side at these meetings continues to refuse
to act in any way on complaints which are made to it, to
agree to investigations by the joint observer teams-the best
way to determine the accuracy of these complaints that are
lodged
before the Armistice Commission-or
indeed to
make any use of the Panmunjom meetings, except for the
most violent and intemperate propaganda tirades.

“Equipped with various kinds of intilligence apparatus,
the specially armed spy ship Pueblo, on the instructions
of the United States Central Intelligence Agency, intruded deep into the territorial waters of our country and
was carrying out reconnaissance into a number of such
military or state secret matters as the location of military
equipment, armed forces and industrial undertakings in
the ports and coastal regions of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea; but it was detained on 23 January of
this year by vessels of the nav$ forces of the Korean
People’s Army in the East Korea Gulf, in the territorial
waters of our country, at latitude 39” 17’ 4” North and
longitude 127’ 46’ Y’ East.”

60. It is our very sincere hope that out of this current
meeting of the Council will come a strong reaffirmation of
what I am sure is the will of the membership of the United
manifested by General Assembly decisions
Nations,
throughout
the years, that the Armistice Agreement be
scrupulously
adhered to and that the machinery of the
Armistice Agreement be utilized in order to preserve peace
in the area.

This is the exact point which we expected would be
indicated while we were waiting yesterday as we listened
patiently in the Council to the lecture given with such an
array of so-called visual aids by the representative of the
United States.

61. The PRESIDENT:
I now give the floor to the
representative of the Soviet Union in the exercise of the
right of reply.
62.

65. The statement of the Government of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea goes on to point out:

Mr. MOROZOV

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): In view of the statements made
by certain members of the Council at this meeting, I do not
think there is any need to explain why, despite the detailed
presentation
of all the factual material on, the question
which we gave in our statement yesterday to the Council
[138&h
meeting/, we shall have to devote some time to
replying to the ever-increasing number of unfounded and
repetitive assertions that are being made in contradiction of
the facts of the case. These assertions are apparently
intended, by their very number, to give at least some
semblance of conviction to the one-sided version which the
United States is continuing to propogate intensively in its
appraisal of the situation in the Korean peninsula, and
particularly in its appraisal of the special incident involving
the detention in Korean territorial waters of a vessel of the
United States Navy, the Pueblo.

“The provocative acts of the American imperialists’
armed spy ship Plceblo constitute a Further flagrant
violation of the Korean Armistice Agreement, and an
open aggression directed against the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. It is an integral part of the wilful
schemes of the United States imperialists to launch a new
war in Korea, and a serious threat to peace in the Far East
and throughout the world.”
66. The statement stressesthat:
“The defence of the security and sovereignty of its
homeland against the encroachments of the enemy is the
sacred right of every independent State and its own
internal affair, which no one may infringe.”
67. Today, the representative of the United Kingdom
attempted, by adding his unsubstantiated assertions to the
unfounded contentions of the United States representative,
to arrive at certain arithmetical results. I must say that, on
the basis of the terminology used in the four rules of
arithmetic, the multiplication of nought by nought, according to all the arithmetic primers, always equalled nought.
This was the brilliant result achieved today by my United
Kingdom colleague with his characteristic skill.

63. We have already noted in our statement to the
Council, and we wish to affirm once again, that the
intrusion of this vessel into the territorial waters of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a typical example
of the many provocations, whose number runs into the
hundreds and thousands, included in the 52,000 violations
of the Armistice Agreement committed by the American
militarists in the years since it came into force. These
provocations have of late been growing very noticeably in
number and importance. The spy ship Pueblo was, we
repeat, detained by the competent authorities of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, since it was
carrying out illegal and hostile activities against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in the territorial waters of
that sovereign State.

68. Today the representative of the United States continued to quote various excerpts from intercepted radio
broadcasts which are alleged-and I stress the last word-to
have fallen into the hands of the United States authorities
concerned. This assertion is certainly no more convincing
7

States version of what hap-

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea was a provocation.
This vessel violated the territorial waters of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, and the authorities of that
sovereign country took steps to protect its sovereignty and
its territorial inviolability.

69. Nothing has been added today in this way to what was
said yesterday about the factual side of the matter. Today I
should like to add something to what we said yesterday
about the totally unfounded nature of the one-sided
American version concerning the actual events of 23
January in territorial, waters when the Pueblo was detained.
I wish to refer to details published today in The New York
i%nes, in a special article dealing with the question which
we are now discussing in this Council. According to the
article, in answer to questions put by members of the
Senate Foreign Affairs Committee of the United States as
to whether it was possible for the United States Secretary
of State to assert categorically that, at the moment of its
detainment, the Pueblo was on the high seas,the Secretary
of State, Mr. Rusk, replied as indicated in the following
paragraph:

73. I should like to draw the Council’s attention to one
further point. Yesterday, en passant as they say in French,
the United States representative made a reference to the
courses followed by Soviet vesselson the high seas.He may
be better informed than I about these courses and the
matters relating to them, but I should not like to say
anything at this time concerning the courses followed by
United States military vessels, aircraft, and the rest, because
if I began a discussion on this subject I should be helping
my colleague, the United States Ambassador, to shift the
centre of gravity of the discussion to an area which has
nothing to do with the item before us, an item which was
raised and formulated within the limits to be found in the
letter addressed to you, Mr. President, by the United States
representative.

than the extreme attempts to which the United States had
recourse yesterday and today to convince us that we should

accept the one-sided IJnited
pened to the Pueblo.

74. It must be said that the arguments and evidence
advanced by the United States representative are in a bad
state if he has to have recourse to such manoeuvres and
justify or prove what he has called here the legal character
of activities and experiments such as those carried out on
the naval intelligence vessel Pueblo by making excursions
into a field that has nothing at all to do with the
Democratic People’sRepublic of Korea, which detained a
United States vessel for having made a hostile intrusion into
North Korean territorial waters, nor with the accusations
levelled by the United States representative. I venture to
decline the temptation to assist the United States representative in this connexion and shall confine my remarks to the
lengthy exposition, quite irrelevant to the matter in hand,
made by the United States representative yesterday and
again, in greater detail, today.

“When pressed on this point within the Committee,
Mr. Rusk was said to have explained that he could not be
categorical because the Pueblo, until the time of her
seizure, was maintaining radio silence and was not
reporting her position. But he was said to have emphasized that the ship was under strict orders not to come
any closer than thirteen miles from the North Korean
shore. North Korea claims a twelve-mile territorial sea.“3
70. In Russian, this amounts to the following:
“When Mr. Rusk was asked to clarify this question (and
I myself would add here-the question of the co-ordinates
of the ship’s position at the moment of its detention), he
replied that he could not make a categorical affirmation
because the Pueblo, up to the time it was detained, was
not carrying out any radio broadcasts and had given no
information on its position. He stressed, however, that
the vessel was under strict instructions at the time not to
approach closer than thirteen miles from the Korean
coast, as North Korean territorial waters extend twelve
miles from the coast.”

75. Once again we deem it necessary to stress that the
chief cause of tension in Korea is the continued presence of
American and other foreign troops in South Korea. The
chief cause of tension continues to be the aggressive acts
committed by the United States of America and its South
Korean puppets against the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. We have repeated over and again that the
occupation troops must be withdrawn immediately from
South Korea. That is the real way to peace in Korea.

71. I would ask the United States representative how he
explains the remarks he made yesterday and today, which
contradict the a,sertions made by the United States
Secretary of State. In this case it would seem that the
customary references to the freedom of the press in the
United States and to the fact that American newspapers can
write anything they like will be of no avail, because then he
would have to make an accusation against the publishers of
that material of having deliberately distorted what occurred
in the Senate Committee. It is hardly likely that such a
responsible and respected United States newspaper, which
enjoys a considerable reputation in this country, should
take it upon itself to make such a distorted statement.

76. We reject as unfounded the accusation levelled here
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea by the
United States of America and its supporters. In connexion
with today’s remark in the statement made by the United
States representative, we should like to state that the
struggle for the withdrawal of foreign occupiers and against
the puppet regime is being waged by the South Korean
people itself, we repeat, by the South Korean people itself.
We condemn the repressions and reprisals which the South
Korean authorities, whose existence is due solely to the
presence of the bayonets of the American armed forces in
that area, are carrying out against the patriots in South
Korea itself. We stress these circumstances, and reject as
utterly unfounded the assertions that we have just heard in
the statements of the United States representative.

72. We repeat, therefore, that the intrusion of the American military vessel Pueblo into the territorial waters of the
3 Quoted in Englishby the speaker.

a

77. Nor can we Pass over the fact that at this time, while
the Council is meeting, the United States of America is, in
effect, issuing ultimatums to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Responsible representatives of the
United States are uttering direct threats to use force,
including the use of all modern forms of weapons, if their
demands and importunate claims are not met.
78. Those points warrant the most serious attention of the
members of the Security Council.
79. In this connexion, it is appropriate to mention that
the statement published on 27 January in Pyongyang by
the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, some parts of which I have aiready referred to,
included the following:
“The heroic Korean People’s Army and the whole
Korean people are in full readiness to resist any provocation or intrusion on the part of the American imperialists,
and will deliver crushing blows to the enemy if he dares
to attack us.”
80. In conclusion, we should like to stress that all the
commotion and war hysteria that are being whipped up in
the United States of America in no way help to reach a
solution of the question in accordance with the principles
of the United Nations Charter. We should like to say that
emotions should not be given free rein. All those who seek
to strengthen international peace and security should now
display a high sense of responsibility and not permit the
creation of a new hotbed of war in the Far East.
81. The PRESIDENT: The representative of I-Iungary has
also asked to be allowed to exercise his right of reply, and I
now call on him.
82. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): I shall take only a few
minutes of the Council’s time, The representative of the
United States, Ambassador Goldberg, referred to several
points in the statement that I made this morning. I was
partially gratified that he ,did not attempt to refute the
series of facts I mentioned, and that can be considered as a
sort of recognition of the validity of my statement that the
United States is conducting a policy of violating the
sovereign territories of other countries, thereby deplorably
violating the charter as well. But he mentioned some alleged
facts. For instance, he stated that the seizure of the ship
Pueblo occurred at a location that was beyond the
territorial waters of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, whose Government, he said, had recognized this fact
in its statement.
83. I do not want to dwell at length on this question. The
representative of the Soviet Union already quoted from the
statement of the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, I also have the text of that statement
and I could quote the same data, which clearly prove that
the North Korean authorities never said that the seizure
took place beyond the territorial waters of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
84. Ambassador Goldberg also stated that the broadcasting station of the Democratic People’s Republic of

Korea was spreading some news of infiltration committed
by the Koreans themselves. I also have texts of broadcasts
emanating from the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. Those broadcasts speak of partisan or guerrilla
action in South Korea conducted by the South Korean
people as a result of the prevailing social tensions and
difficulties of which I had an opportunity to speak in my
statement this morning, However, it is not unusual for
conservative forces to attribute any kind of revolutionary
movement to foreign forces. This has been happening since
the French revolution in connexion with all revolutionary
and progressive movements. But in this case, I think that
the data given by the representative of the United States
lack any foundation as far as my information is concerned
and as far as logic can conceive.
85. The representative of the United States has taken
many words from my statement and added some other
words of his own, to put it jn a context of his own choice,
and on this pretext he has tried to accuse another country
of the same illegal actions that the United States is
committing. The main point that I raised wasnot that ships
are moving around on the high seas;the question waswhere
those ships were moving around. We should take as our
point of departure in considering this problem the universally accepted rules of international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations; and on the basis of those
rules, no one has the right to violate the territorial waters of
other countries. That is the issue we are seized of. I do not
believe that the United States representative, Ambassador
Goldberg, could make the accusation that naval units of the
Soviet Union are violating territorial waters of the United
States. If he had such an example, he would certainly have
cited it to us. What I waswondering about and what I failed
to hear was why the Ambassador of the United States was
not willing to commit the United States to a policy of
respecting the sovereign rights of other countries, of
respecting the territorial integrity of other countries and
not undertaking any action that might violate their territorial sovereignty.
86. The policy that every day, even every hour, risks
international conflict by violating the sovereignty of other
countries can lead only to further international tension and
to ominous consequences. My delegation is of the opinion
that we should raise our voices here and everywhere else,
whether in the Security Council, the General Assembly or
the First Committee, in defence of the sovereignty of all
States. It is only in this way that we can really pursue a
policy of peace and preserve peaceful relations.
87. We hope that the United States will recognize the
validity of this rule and the applicability of international
law in this matter, and that it will abide by the provisions
of the Charter.
88. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the United
States has again asked to exercise his right of reply, and I
now call upon him.
89. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I am
very glad that our colleague, Ambassador Morozov, is such
an assiduous reader of The New York Times and I am glad
that he shares my high regard for that eminent and

the seizure, the fieblo might have intruded into North
Korean territorial waters, as has been charged by Nxth
Korea.”

world-famous newspaper. But if you are as assiduous a
reader of The New York Times as I am, you start on page 1
and not on the much later page to which Ambassador
Morazov referred. And since he, as I said yesterday, is such
a distinguished lawyer, he will remember another legal rule:
that you must not merely excerpt quotations, you must
give the whole record and not a partial one.

He also omitted the sentence:
66‘The ship was in international waters at all Stages,
according to every indication we have. And there are
indications that the other side also knew that. ”

90. Starting at page 1, and if you wish to have the record
complete, you will start with the article which refers to the
Soviet intelligence ship I referred to in the course of my
remarks, and you will read that into the record. I shall read
only a few paragraphs, since it is a very comprehensive
account, of the article appearing on page 1 of The New
York Times of today, 27 January:

94. Now, I wish to be very frank with this Council because
this is a very grave incident. The Secretary of State and I
have been in constant communication; we have been
constantly meeting and in touch with each other at all
times and we have revealed to the Council, in the interests
of informing it, the indications that we have. As youI saw,
we revealed them to the Council quite specifically.

“Defense Department officials said tonight that a Soviet
intelligence-gathering vessel was shadowing the nuclear
aircraft carrier Bzterprise off the coast of South Korea.

95. I come now to the radio silence of the ship. The report
I gave yesterday indicated very specifically that the North
Koreans were not preserving radio silence-and the dis.
patches which I gave were from North Korean sources, I
also gave some from the Pueblo, which broke its radio
silence at the time of the incident in question. Therefore,
what the Secretary of State said and what 1 said yesterday
are entirely compatible and do not represent any cont.radic.
tion in the statements which I have furnished to the
Council.

“The Soviet vessel, identified as the Gidrolog, was said
to be sailing in the midst of the Enterprise’s task force,
which includes a guided-missile ship and several destroyers.
“The trawler is on essentially the same sort of mission
as the Pueblo was engaged in when she was seized by the
North Koreans on Tuesday, the officials said.”
I have referred to this specific article, and it illustrates that
by picking selected excerpts you can come to one conclusion, but when you read the whole article, then, as it
appears, you arrive at another conclusion.

96. But there is something in addition to that which is
very important. I wish to add that from the time at >which
submarine chaser No. 35 first reported contact with the
Pueblo at 11.10 a.m. Korean time, until the Pucbk~ was
boarded in international waters and taker; to v.‘onsan we
have monitored at least a dozen position reports from the
North Koreans which place the activity outside the twelvcmile limit. Weshave the exact co-ordinates reported at that
time, all outside the twelve-mile limit. This is entitled to far
more credibility than this fabricated co-ordinate published
after the event by the North Korean authorities. Their own
naval forces on the spot reported in a series of messag,esthe
exact location of the ship outside the twelve-mile limit.

91. In the first place, I am sure that there was some
mistake, perhaps in the interpretation that I heard. At the
end of the other article, there is no assertion by our
Secretary of State that North Korea claims a twenty-mile
territorial sea, which is what I heard in the interpretation.
In that article, continued on page 7 of today’s New York
Times, I read:
“But he”-the Secretary of State-“was said to have
emphasized that the ship was undsr strict orders not to
come any closer than thirteen miles from the North
Korean shore. North Korea claims a twelve-mile territorial
sea.”

93. There were certain omissions in what Ambassador
Morozov said about what Secretary of State Rusk was
reported to have said to the United States Senate Committee. One of the things he omitted was that:

97. Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): First of all, I should like to
express the conviction that step by step-since we have
been drawn into consideration of this question-members
of the Council will feel more and more their high
responsibility for the fate of international pcacls and
security, and that those emotional feelings which llnv~cbee11
aroused by the desire to impose at all costs a one-sided
version of the events which we are now investigating will
diminish hourly and will give way to sober reason guided by
feelings of the high responsibility of the council for its
duty, incumbent upon it under the Charter, to m&ntain
international peace and security. That is why I shall confine
myself to a brief reply to the further lengthy cluotatioas
and digressions which the United States representative has
made once again, for the fourth or fifth time, in an ai;tcmpt
to give the semblance of some kind of conviction t.o that
one-sided and unfounded version which the United States
delegation SOpersistently continues to put forward,

“The Rusk briefing was understood to have put to rest
the suspicions of some committee members that before

98. I am, of course, ready to read the first, second and
third pages of The New York Times,I did so as soon as tile

Therefore, I think that there was perhaps some mistake in
the interpretation or in what Ambassador Morozov received
from his briefing-paper.
92. That statement too, I think, should answer Ambassador Csatorday. We adhere strictly to international law and
do not intrude or seek to intrude upon the sovereign right
of other countries, even though our own conception of
international law is different from theirs and we adhere to a
three-mile limit, not a t-velve-mile limit, as I said yesterday,

10

newspaper appeared, in fact, before the ink on its pages was
dry. If I confined myself, in my quotations, to one small
extract, it was not because I wanted to break the rule
mentioned by the representative of the United States. The
rule can be taken to mean that it is not permissible to drag
anything out of its context and to draw any conclusions
from anything that is said in such an extract from a
context. Had 1 ventured to do that, the United States
representative would have been in the right. But I have
taken nothing out of context and I have not distorted
anything.

102. Permit me to say something which has already been
heard within the walls of this Council chamber. Walls are,
unfortunately, silent witnesses of all that takes place here.
But there are also people here, who were present at the
meeting of the Council when what I am about to say now
was first heard. In the case of the flight of the United States
U-2 spy plane, were not false co-ordinates given in respect
of its position? Was it not asserted that, if it had been shot
down, it could only have been in the area of the southern
borders of the Soviet Union, which was allegedly shown by
references based on data relating to the location of the
aircraft, which were given in the same one-sided way as we
are seeing today? The aircraft, however, was shot down not
over the southern borders of the Soviet Union, as was
asserted, but near Sverdlovsk in the Central Urals, which is
roughly equidistant from the northern and southern frontiers of my vast country,

99. Justice Goldberg knows full well that. after a witness
has given evidence in a high court, he undergoes his worst
moment: the practice adopted in criminal court procedure
in all the countries of the world, known as cross-examination. Its purpose is not merely to hear what the witness has
to say, but to give the parties and the judge the right to ask
clarifying questions. With his great legal experience, the
United States representative cannot fail to know that often,
after the evidence given by witnessesseems so convincing as
to leave no doubt whatsoever as to what actually happened,
the replies to the questions put for purposes of elucidation
in the course of the procedure I have just mentioned are
what determine the significance of, or even sometimes
destroy, that evidence.

103. That is why, when we have had political experiences
of this kind and when more and more attempts are being
made to justify actions by prejudiced and one-sided
versions of the events, we are hevitably bound to ask what
the intentions underlying suc11 attempts and assertions are.
Do those intentions coincide with what has been stated
here by the United States representative as to his country’s
desire and efforts to achieve a peaceful solution of the
matter?

100. 1 took the liberty, in respect of the key element of
dialogue which occurred at the highest level in this country,
to refer to the part which has a direct bearing on the reply
to that clarifying questian. I do not intend to try the
patience of the Council by reading the text again, I read it
in English to avoid any mistake. I did not hear it said here
that such a question had not been put in the course of the
procedure which I have just mentioned, or that, if the
question was put, some answer was given other than the
one to which the fresh pages of today’s issue of The New
York Times bear witness, the answer, I would emphasize, to
the said question asking for clarification,

104. Permit me to conclude by stressing once again the
heavy responsibility which rests upon the members of the
Council for the fate of peace.
105. The PRESIDENT:
list of speakers.

There are no more names on my

106. We have heard full statements from the representatives of the United States and the Soviet Union setting
forth their respective versions of the situation confronting
the Security Council, and the other members of the Council
have also expressed certain views and ideas. The time has
now come for the Council to consider how it should
proceed to meet the situation facing it.

101. With regard to the continued references to the
one-sided American version concerning the co-ordinates for
the location of the Pueblo on 23 January at the time it was
detained by the North Korean authorities, I should like to
add the following to what we said before. When mention is
made of a one-sided version, the meaning is exactly what
the word “one-sided” implies. One-sided means a version
which is controlled and presented by that party which is
interested, for one reason or another, in presenting the facts
in a light favourable to itself. For that reason, it is called, in
all languages in the world, “one-sided”, and a one-sided
version has never been accepted as sound or solid evidence.

107. The representative of Canada has proposed that the
members of the Council utilize the weekend to enter into
consultations. Therefore, as there is not objection, I now
propose to adjourn the Council until Monday afternoon in
order to permit consultations among the members.

The rneehg

11

rose at 1.35 pm

HOW

TO OlTAlN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Notions
publications,moy
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Les publications
des
depotitaires
du monde
Nations
Unles, Section

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PlJ8LlCATlONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
Nations,
Sales Section,
to: United

LES PUt3llCATlONS

UNIES

Nations
Unies
sont
en vente
danr
les librairier
et les agencer
entier.
Informez-vous
oupres
de votre librairie
ou adrerrez-vous
b:
des venter,
New York ou GenBve,

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidar
estan
en lodes parter
del mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
yentas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in U.N.

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venta en librerlas
o dirtjare
a: Nacioner

y ca~as dirtribuidoror
Unidas,
Section

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

de

35203~-January

1971-2,100
