S/PV.6154 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6154th meeting
Tuesday, 30 June 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. İlkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Turkey)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Nguyen
Mr. Koudougou
Mr. Pan Jingyu
Ms. Zamora
Mr. Galli
Mr. Guidée
Mr. Kumagai
Mr. Gebreel
Mr. Puente
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Kamahungye
Mr. Quarrey
Ms. Germain
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2009/323)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-38734 (E)

*0938734*

S/PV.6154 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. De Klerk (Netherlands): I thank you, Sir, for
allowing the Netherlands to take the floor at this
important debate on the situation in Afghanistan. We
fully align ourselves with the statement made earlier by
the Ambassador of the Czech Republic.
Before offering a few remarks regarding the
future, allow me to express the gratitude of the Dutch
Government for the exemplary leadership of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Eide in the
run-up to and during the International Conference on
Afghanistan in The Hague earlier this year. We are also
grateful for the overwhelming support and constructive
attitude of the approximately 100 delegations that
attended the Conference.
Regarding the future, the Netherlands would like
to make a few observations. First, on the upcoming
elections, many speakers around the table have
rightfully emphasized the importance of fair elections
and, in this regard, the need to ensure a level playing
field for all candidates. But let us not forget that these
are the first elections organized by the Afghan
authorities themselves, and that is no small
development. It is an important sign that the spirit of
democracy is gradually finding its place in Afghan
society, and we congratulate the Afghan people on this.
Secondly, it is time for the international
community, including the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), to start thinking of
the period after the elections. We believe that there is
merit in discussing some sort of agreement between the
international community and the new Afghan
Government, following the formation of such a
Government. That will enable both sides to express
their expectations towards each other.
From our side, we would wish to focus on the
areas of good governance and human rights, values
which are cherished not only by the international
community, but also and more importantly by the
Afghan population. In particular, more emphasis on
clear targets in the area of the rule of law will help to
establish the credibility of a new Government that will
be trusted by the people of Afghanistan.

2

A third issue relates to what is sometimes referred
to as the civilian and military surges which are under
way and which we believe are necessary, particularly
given the volatile security situation. We attach particular
importance to the growing consensus regarding the
importance of civilian assistance. In that regard, we
share the view of others that international civilian
efforts should be geared towards supporting and
consolidating Afghan civilian capabilities, in line with
the priorities identified by the Afghan authorities
themselves. Pooling international civilian assistance
capabilities would increase the efficiency of aid efforts
and reduce the risk of duplication or, even worse,
miscommunications between donors and the Afghan
authorities.
This brings me to a fourth and final observation —
the Dutch experience in Afghanistan. We say this with
modesty because we fully realize that situations in
different provinces have been and are different.
Nevertheless, we feel a few developments are
noteworthy. First, the civilian footprint of the Dutchled multilateral provincial reconstruction team in
Uruzgan is growing. In fact, the team operates under
civilian leadership. We feel that investments in
civilian-military cooperation are paying off. UNAMA
opened an office in May, and we feel that this is very
useful. Moreover, the presence in Uruzgan of civilian
actors has risen to 50 non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), international organizations and companies, as
opposed to 6 NGOs in Uruzgan just three years ago. At
the same time, Afghan authorities have increased their
security and military presence in Uruzgan, and we
expect this trend to continue.
Secondly, the civilian capacities of the Afghan
authorities in Uruzgan are growing. We used to liaise
mainly with the Governor, but these days we are
linking our activities more and more to the executive
branches of line ministries in Uruzgan and thereby
strengthening the institutional structures and policies
of the Afghan Government.
Thirdly, all those developments, both on the
civilian and on the military side, are contributing to
strengthening the zone of stability and development in
Uruzgan, and this will help us and our international
partners to gradually shift towards a more national and
a less single-province-oriented approach.
We share Special Representative Eide’s view that
such a shift will help reduce the current level of aid

09-38734

S/PV.6154 (Resumption 1)

fragmentation in Afghanistan. This is what we are
trying to do already; of our assistance for Afghanistan
of approximately €200 million since 2006, about one
third is spent directly in Uruzgan, in full transparency
towards the central authorities in Kabul and UNAMA,
while about two thirds are spent through multilateral
channels in support of the central Government.
The President: I
representative of Norway.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mrs. Juul (Norway): Let me first thank the
Secretary-General for his latest report (S/2009/323)
and Mr. Kai Eide for his refreshingly frank and honest
remarks. I would also like to take this opportunity to
commend all the women and men of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
for their tireless efforts, and the Government and
people of Afghanistan for their unyielding commitment
to building a peaceful and stable Afghanistan. Norway
shares this commitment, and we remain fully dedicated
to doing our part financially, militarily and politically.
It was with great interest, therefore, that we read the
Secretary-General’s report, in which a mixed picture of
progress, challenges and setbacks is painted.
In terms of progress, we are encouraged by the
positive developments of the past few months: the
expanded role of the Afghan National Army and the
Afghan National Police, the advancement in designated
priority areas, such as agriculture, as well as the
gradual alignment and improved coordination of
international contributions. We are also pleased to note
that the preparations for the upcoming elections
continue and have been carried out without any serious
incident so far.
We further welcome the observations on the
emergence of three interlinked strategic shifts in
Afghanistan: increased emphasis on civilian efforts,
focus on subnational governance and service-delivery,
and alignment of international efforts, that is, the aid
effectiveness agenda. These issues have been high on
the Norwegian agenda for some time, and we should
all join forces in further promoting these positive
developments, which are of great importance in
improving the overall situation in Afghanistan.
At the same time, we note with concern some
alarming setbacks during the same period, in particular
the deterioration of the security situation in some areas
of the country and the increase in civilian casualties
compared to the same months of 2008. In the light of

09-38734

the political progress achieved on the ground and with
a view to the elections in August, it is crucial to ensure
that military activity — now expected to increase over
the summer — does not serve to alienate the Afghan
population from the international community.
Let me turn the Council’s attention to a question
of increasing importance — that of a regional approach
to the stabilization of Afghanistan. The situation in
Afghanistan is a challenge to all countries in the region.
It is therefore paramount that all of Afghanistan’s
neighbours, as well as other major countries, be
engaged in a constructive political dialogue and
partnership in order to combat organized crime, drug
trafficking and terrorism, and to promote trade,
cooperation and the general integration of Afghanistan
into the region.
Allow me also briefly to comment on the
question of funding for UNAMA. Last year’s increase
in the Mission’s budget was significant and important,
yet in recent months we have seen the demand for
UNAMA’s services grow faster than the increase in
resources. Grown, too, have the expectations to deliver,
both from within Afghanistan and from outside the
country. This points to a deeper question in need of
deliberation — if UNAMA succeeds in its role as an
enabler for political stability and development, then
how far would we, as donors, be willing to stretch in
order to maximize the Mission’s impact? I will limit
myself to saying that Norway stands ready to engage
constructively with the Council and the international
community on the matter.
The President: I give the floor to the new
Permanent Representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): Mr. President, as
others have noted, this is your last time in the Security
Council. As it is my first, I want to thank you for your
very able stewardship of the Council in June and wish
you the best as you come to the end of your time in
New York. There could, I would suggest, be few more
distinguished ways to spend your last day in this place
than to preside over the Council. I am also very
mindful that our two countries share a very special
bond, best epitomized by the memorial to Kemal
Atatürk that stands looking over the harbour of my
capital city.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his
quarterly report (S/2009/323) on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), the

3

S/PV.6154 (Resumption 1)

Special Representative for his incisive comments, and
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan for his
very constructive response.
New Zealand is grateful for the opportunity to
participate in this debate. Ours is a small nation of
4 million people a long way from Afghanistan, but it
has made a long-standing commitment to that country.
We seek an Afghanistan that is sustainable as an
independent nation, free from the scourges of subversion
and terrorism.
Despite the security challenges that we face
elsewhere, particularly in our own Pacific
neighbourhood, we lead the provincial reconstruction
team in Bamyan province. New Zealand personnel
support the International Security Assistance Force
headquarters and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, and provide police training
and mentoring in Bamyan.
New Zealand contributes to other priority areas of
the Afghanistan National Development Strategy, such
as rural livelihood programmes, education and health
services, and the capacity-development of provincial
governmental, non-governmental and civil society
organizations. We welcome the new national agriculture
strategy and plan to increase our support to improve
agricultural productivity and related research. New
Zealand also welcomes the increased emphasis on
civilian contributions to Afghanistan and more effective
coordination of the international community’s efforts,
as expressed during The Hague Conference in March.
UNAMA will play a key role in those areas.
New Zealand agrees that there is a need for a
clear strategy for engagement in Afghanistan that
achieves the right balance between stability and security,
on the one hand, and development and diplomacy on
the other. Effective implementation of that strategy is
vital. Coordination of international contributions
supporting the Government of Afghanistan is critical,
and Afghanistan’s neighbours also have an important
role to play in this regard, as has already been noted.
New Zealand is encouraged by the Secretary-General’s
reports of recent progress on such regional cooperation.
New Zealand is concerned about increasing levels
of violence in Afghanistan in the lead-up to the
elections. As has been made clear, Afghanistan continues
to face deep-seated problems with governance, human
rights, development, justice and narcotics. The security
situation, especially in the South and the East,

4

seriously hampers development and limits the reach of
the Afghan Government and its ability to improve the
lives of all Afghans. All this makes strengthening
Afghan military and police capability a key
commitment for the international community, because
development in Afghanistan needs to be underpinned
by sound, credible and effective Government.
New Zealand also welcomes the progress towards
elections to be held on 20 August and is encouraged to
see a greater number of women candidates than in the
previous election. We also welcome the additional
security to help enable the Afghan people to express
their democratic rights at the polls without fear of
violence, and we are providing NZ$500,000 to support
the elections.
While we welcome the progress in Afghanistan in
recent years, we believe that a continued, sustained
commitment of the international community will
remain necessary to help Afghanistan build a positive
future, and New Zealand is committed to playing its
part in achieving that future.
The President: I give
representative of Pakistan.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Amil (Pakistan): I would like at the outset to
avail myself of this opportunity to congratulate you,
Sir, on your successful and eventful presidency of the
Security Council and on your able guidance and
stewardship of the Council’s work this month. As you
are a dear friend of the people of Pakistan, and since
you are coming to the end of a brilliant career, our
delegation should like particularly to wish you all the
best in your future endeavours.
This timely debate is testimony to the continued
attention of the international community and the
Security Council to Afghanistan. We are also thankful
to Mr. Kai Eide for his informative briefing this
morning. Pakistan appreciates the important role of the
United Nation in Afghanistan.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/323) presents an objective analysis of the
situation in Afghanistan. While Afghanistan has made
progress on certain frontiers, considerable challenges
remain on the political, security, governance,
humanitarian and development fronts. The overall
deterioration of the security situation is a matter of
concern. Development and reconstruction efforts are
slow and uneven. The absence of State authority

09-38734

S/PV.6154 (Resumption 1)

beyond some major cities, a lack of good governance,
rampant corruption and economic hardships are
shattering the people’s confidence in the ability of the
Government to provide protection and better conditions
of life. An increase in civilian casualties is further
fuelling public grievances against foreign forces. This
has been a major impediment to winning the hearts and
minds of the Afghan people, which is necessary for
success in Afghanistan.
Afghanistan is standing at the crossroads of
history. The challenges facing Afghanistan are numerous
and daunting. For decades, Afghanistan has suffered
the ravages of war and civil strife. The brotherly people
of Afghanistan have been the victims of instability,
violence, terrorism, factional fighting, illegal arms,
narcotics production and trafficking, and organized
crime. This has had a disastrous effect on the Afghan
economy, infrastructure and society. The time has
arrived to put an end to this vicious cycle, but there is
no magic wand to turn the devastation of decades into
development overnight.
The absence of a comprehensive strategy has
prevented us from gaining any significant headway in
the consolidation of peace and achieving stability in
Afghanistan. We must move from the fragmented and
piecemeal approach to tackle these formidable
challenges and mount an integrated response fully
owned and led by the Afghan people, with the support
of the international community.
Partnerships with regional States, as well as the
international community, will remain key to sustainable
peace and development in Afghanistan. A series of
recent international and transregional meetings
indicates the dedication and commitment of regional
and international partners to the development of
Afghanistan. The abundance of international attention
and goodwill towards Afghanistan is a good
opportunity to galvanize our efforts and evolve a new
consensus on achieving a comprehensive strategy for
peace in Afghanistan and the region. Based on
cooperation and shared responsibility, such a consensus
should address the past and present shortcomings and
set a clear strategic direction for the international
efforts in Afghanistan.
In this regard, let me briefly mention some
aspects which would require particular attention.
First, the challenges faced by Afghanistan are of
internal origin and therefore require internal solutions.

09-38734

Any comprehensive strategy devised to address these
challenges must enjoy the full ownership of the Afghan
people and the continued support of the international
community, particularly the neighbouring countries.
Secondly, the use of military force alone cannot
deliver. The resultant civilian casualties have been a
major cause of alienation. It would be worthwhile to
focus less on military operations and to devote more
energy to protecting populations and securing areas.
Thirdly, a civilian development surge is needed.
Massive investment is required in reconstruction,
development and social welfare programmes, improving
governance and putting a premium on the strengthening
of State institutions and capacity-building. Providing
better living conditions and making peace dividends
visible would greatly help to win the support of the
Afghan people.
Fourthly, we must not deal with the problems of
terrorism and violent extremism in isolation; they are
part of a wider issue and should be tackled accordingly.
The rise in militancy in Afghanistan is directly linked
to the unchecked growth of narcotics there. Financial
resources generated through illicit trade in drugs have
helped sustain the activities of insurgents and extremist
elements. There is a dire need to address this narcotics
problem.
Short-term
measures
need
to
be
complemented by comprehensive, durable and longterm solutions based on alternative livelihoods and
development.
Fifthly, any strategy, no matter how innovative or
dynamic it is, would be doomed to failure without the
support of all elements of Afghan society. There is a
dire need to launch an Afghan-led process of
reconciliation based on dialogue. The renewal of the
democratic mandate in the forthcoming elections in
Afghanistan is an ideal opportunity to promote political
and socio-economic inclusion and national reconciliation.
Sixthly, the parameters of a sustainable solution
should include a comprehensive regional approach,
taking into account the interests, the capacities and the
aspirations of sovereign States and their people. It
should build solid stakes for all sides in lasting peace.
Given its strategic geographical setting, the region has
a vast potential to be transformed into an international
cooperation and development hub. We must move from
confrontation and rivalry to competition and cooperation
in order to harvest the latent benefits. Tapping this

5

S/PV.6154 (Resumption 1)

potential would be a win-win proposition for all in the
region and beyond.
The role of the United Nations is the cornerstone
of the international efforts to help Afghanistan. We
appreciate the constructive role played by UNAMA in
Afghanistan. Given the formidable scope and gigantic
task at hand, we believe that the Mission should be
provided with the necessary resources to carry out its
mandate.
Apart from Afghanistan itself, no other country
has a more vital stake in the establishment of peace,
security and prosperity in that country than Pakistan.
Pakistan is the direct sufferer of ongoing instability in
Afghanistan. Peace in Afghanistan is essential to the
tranquillity and development of Pakistan’s own border
regions. Therefore, we are firmly committed to helping
the Government of Afghanistan and the international
partners in restoring security and bringing stability to
Afghanistan. Pakistan has been host to the world’s
largest refugee population, with all its consequences.
The security forces and the people of Pakistan continue
to make tremendous sacrifices.
Pakistan attaches high priority to close, friendly
and cooperative relations with Afghanistan and wants
to have a broad-based, mutually beneficial relationship
with its western neighbour. Pakistan-Afghanistan
relations have improved tremendously with frequent
contacts at the highest political levels and commitment
on both sides to working together to address common
problems and realizing our joint potential. The Third
Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan, held in Islamabad on 13 and 14 May, was
a further demonstration of Pakistan’s commitment to
the stability and economic development of Afghanistan.
Let me highlight some of the words spoken by
my Prime Minister at that meeting. Since his meeting
in Colombo in 2008 with President Karzai, our two
democratic Governments have jointly brought about a
fundamental transformation in our bilateral relationship.
Today our multi-track engagement is comprehensive,
encompassing the political, economic, security and
social spheres.
Pakistan has also been engaged in the capacitybuilding of Afghanistan’s State institutions in the fields
of diplomacy, law enforcement, judiciary, agriculture,
counter-narcotics
and
medical
services.
Our
participation is meant for the Afghan people, on
projects identified by the Afghans and implemented

6

through the Afghan authorities. A culturally nuanced,
Afghan-led process of dialogue and reconciliation has
to proceed in tandem with efforts to co-opt local
populations. Pakistan welcomes the renewed focus on
transregional development. The Prime Minister also
announced specific measures at that forum, including
1,000 scholarships for Afghan students, setting up
model villages for Afghan refugees when they return,
and the establishment of vocational training centres.
Lately, Pakistan has been engaged in trilateral
summits involving key players, from the United States
to Turkey, Iran and Russia, and has participated in
other international meetings on Afghanistan, which
continues to demonstrate our commitment. We welcome
the reinvigoration of the United States focus on the
region to promote broad-based cooperation between
Pakistan and Afghanistan. The meeting of the foreign
ministers of three countries in February, followed by a
trilateral summit in May, has greatly helped to define
the future contours of a comprehensive strategy for
Afghanistan.
Our participation in the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization meeting in Moscow on 27 March further
enhanced trilateral cooperation among the Russian
Federation, Pakistan and Afghanistan. We welcome the
readiness expressed by the Russian Federation to
contribute to all positive initiatives. Similarly, our
participation in the trilateral summit, very graciously
hosted by our brother country Turkey in Ankara in
April, constitutes a step forward in trilateral cooperation
among our three nations in the field of security and
intelligence-sharing, leading towards building greater
trust among all sides. Equally important was the
meeting in March in Tehran at which Pakistan, Iran and
Afghanistan established a trilateral mechanism. This
was followed by a senior officials’ meeting in April in
Islamabad to strengthen further coordination.
Pakistan envisions a peaceful, stable, prosperous
and thriving region and stands ready to play its part in
that process. We reiterate our full support for durable
peace and stability in Afghanistan. We also call on the
international community and the United Nations to
remain steadfast in their commitment to Afghanistan.
The President: I
representative of India.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Puri (India): Let me begin by offering you,
Sir, my warmest good wishes on the completion of
your tenure as Permanent Representative of Turkey,

09-38734

S/PV.6154 (Resumption 1)

and my congratulations on your completion of an
outstanding career in public service. I wish you the
very best and every success in your future endeavours.
I also thank you, Sir, for scheduling today’s debate on
the situation in Afghanistan. This is of immediate and
abiding interest to India, a close neighbour and
civilizational partner of Afghanistan.
India welcomes the positive perspective reflected
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/323) and the
briefing by Special Representative Eide regarding the
three interlinked strategic shifts in Afghanistan.
For India, the litmus test of cost-effective
investment in assistance programmes is to ensure that
these are aligned closely with Afghan priorities and
that they contribute to capacity-building. We endorse
the Secretary-General’s exhortation to the international
community to maintain its broad and multinational
presence. This is indeed the time not to reduce our
efforts, but to enhance them in a coordinated manner.
That has been our consistent position, even after the
attack on our embassy in Kabul last July.
The Secretary-General’s report is a clear riposte
to the voices questioning the utility of our collective
effort. In response, we must stand behind the civilian
surge and the expansion of Afghan capacity, both in
word and deed. That will require strongly supporting
the priority areas identified by our Afghan partners,
including agriculture, energy, private sector development
and capacity-building. Useful decisions in that regard
were taken at the eleventh meeting of the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board. We must also
support the financial and administrative expansion of
the United Nations presence, undertaken at our
collective exhortation.
At the same time, organizational difficulties and
political debates notwithstanding, the second nationwide
and presidential elections since 2001 should be more of
a cause for satisfaction, as emphasized by my friend
and colleague the Ambassador of Afghanistan. We
recognize that there are calls to ensure that the
elections are free and fair. Naturally, elections need a
level playing field, but let us recognize that vibrant
political debate is itself a hopeful sign. Energetic
debates do not always imply the unravelling of the
political process. We need also to be mindful that too
much external advice often acts conversely and
undermines domestic institutions.

09-38734

From all these standpoints, the moment has come
for us to more vocally recognize and support growing
Afghan capacities. Too much time has been spent
berating Afghan actors for various failings, instead of
placing their efforts in the correct perspective.
Establishing a modern Government after decades of
war, displacement and privation was never going to be
an easy task. We must no longer continue to miss the
woods for the trees.
On the negative side, the security situation
remains deeply worrying. It does not take much
foresight to predict that the coming six months will be
difficult, most of all for the Afghan people.
Asymmetric warfare and complex terrorist
attacks are being mounted and the wellsprings that
sustain such terror show no signs of being drained. We
need to ponder deeply over how best that can be
achieved. In that context, we continue to have
reservations with regard to the language used in United
Nations reports to describe terrorist attacks. Surely
such operations are not being mounted by antiGovernment elements or insurgents.
We welcome the progress recorded by the Afghan
National Army, especially as the expansion of its
capacity is the only viable guarantee of a successful
conclusion to military engagement in Afghanistan. We
note with appreciation the efforts being made by third
countries to strengthen the capacities of the Afghan
National Army.
That brings me to reconciliation. While that is
often a corollary of military strategies, in Afghanistan
it is a matter that requires great caution. Successive
reports of the Secretary-General and resolutions here
and in the General Assembly have underscored that it
should be an Afghan-led process, within the parameters
of the Constitution of the land. It has also be been
reiterated that it must be pursued from a position of
strength. We must consider whether we are at that
juncture as yet.
Reconciliation requires strategic clarity, unity of
purpose and due recognition of the nature of those with
whom we seek to reconcile. Without consensus among
the relevant parties over key issues — such as
reconciliation, with whom and how — we may well be
dividing ourselves, not those we seek to peel away
from terrorist groups. It is for that reason that we must
go beyond unworkable distinctions between good and
bad Taliban. Equally, we have to be mindful that, in

7

S/PV.6154 (Resumption 1)

pursuing those distinctions, we are projecting
impressions of weakness, desperation or even a
defeatist mentality.
I should like to reaffirm our unswerving
commitment to helping our Afghan partners to the
fullest extent of our capabilities. Stabilizing
Afghanistan is not only integrally connected to our
own security; it is also connected to the civilizational
legacy of our friendship. That is why attacks upon our
people and symbols of our friendship only serve to
outrage us and redouble our commitment to
Afghanistan.
Our commitment to Afghanistan has now
exceeded $1.2 billion. It includes the widest range of
activities, from a cold-storage plant in Kandahar to a
power transmission line to Kabul. We are building the
Parliament building while simultaneously targeting
community-based local projects that provide quick
peace dividends, such as schools and hospitals. In all
of that, capacity-building is a core element. It is in
support of that core task that India has expanded the
current allocation of 1,000 seats in our institutions for
capacity-building and scholarship programmes by
35 per cent.
Turning to the regional aspect, the stabilization of
Afghanistan must be a central part of regional
processes if the country is to regain its role as the
crossroads of South, West and Central Asia. That
includes regional economic processes, such as the
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation and
the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan, which benefit the entire region. Hindering
those processes affects Afghanistan as well as the
region. We must expand rather than hinder trade,
transit and transport ties, including overland transit and
trade. That is the best way of bringing the regional
dimension into play in a positive manner.
In conclusion, we note the Secretary-General’s
commitment to providing us with benchmarks of
progress in his next report. That will be a good step,
especially if they are results-based rather than timelinebased. We look forward to participating in the
discussion about the benchmarks, with the full
ownership of the Government of Afghanistan.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Italy.

8

Mr. Terzi di Sant’Agata (Italy): Let me first
congratulate Ambassador Baki İlkin and express my
personal wishes and the congratulations of my
authorities for the significant coincidence of Turkey’s
very successful presidency of the Security Council this
month and the completion of his mission to the United
Nations, which has been one of great achievements for
Ambassador İlkin’s career and for his country.
I wish to thank Ambassador Kai Eide, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his frank
and always thought-provoking briefing. I would also
like to thank Ambassador Tanin, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, for his important
remarks, especially on the political perspective of his
country, the development challenges that Afghanistan
is facing and the need for a genuinely unified approach
by the international community to its efforts in
Afghanistan.
We fully share the assessment provided by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2009/323). The
United Nations efforts remain essential to building
Afghan ownership and capacity in the security,
infrastructure, agriculture, governance and rule of law
sectors. The deployment of additional international
troops, whose importance we all understand against the
background of security developments, should be
accompanied by a resolute civilian surge. Enhancing
the presence of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) at the provincial level will
be equally critical to maximizing the benefits of our
efforts.
Italy supports the Secretary-General’s call for
additional resources in the Mission’s 2010 budget. My
Government will also continue to promote Afghan
empowerment at all levels, including those of
institution-building, economic development and
cultural dialogue. I would like to add that my country
is deeply committed to Afghanistan’s security. A
further reinforcement of the Italian contingent has
already been announced as part a strategy that must
include all the necessary efforts to protect and ensure
the safety of the civilian population.
The Secretary-General has underscored the link
between peace and development in Afghanistan. He has
urged us to move beyond the simple logic of conflict
management. That was indeed the main message of the
G-8 ministerial meeting on Afghanistan and the
regional dimension, which took place in Trieste on

09-38734

S/PV.6154 (Resumption 1)

26 and 27 June. The meeting reiterated the need for a
comprehensive approach. That was a concept that was
endorsed by the G-8 foreign ministers and the Foreign
Ministers of Afghanistan and Pakistan in their joint
statement, and echoed by the communiqué issued at the
outreach sessions with neighbouring countries, major
contributors and international actors.
Both documents emphasized the importance of
building on a number of critical initiatives, including
the tripartite talks initiated by Afghanistan and
Pakistan with Iran, Russia, Turkey and the United
States, and the Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan, which in our view is an
essential
mechanism
to
spur
socio-economic
development in the country. They also reiterated the
need for full support for UNAMA and their
commitment to working with the Independent Election
Commission, the United Nations and the International
Security Assistance Force to ensure credible, inclusive
and secure presidential elections.
The discussion on drug trafficking and border
management underlined the limitations of past
approaches. It shed new light on the potential of the
draft regional programme of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and on the opportunities provided
by a climate of mutual trust in the region through
enhanced border cooperation, intelligence exchanges
and joint actions between Pakistan and Afghanistan in
the framework of the Dubai initiative.
A wide range of development programmes is
needed to ensure the return of Afghan refugees and
internally displaced persons. The Trieste meetings
further emphasized the centrality of agriculture to
Afghanistan’s future. As the Council knows, refugee
repatriation and food security are key components of
the Afghan National Development Strategy.
What is needed now is more tangible aid,
including support for such United Nations agencies as
the Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees, the
Food and Agriculture Organization, the International
Fund for Agricultural Development and the World
Food Programme. Access to regional markets through
new infrastructure, as well as greater integration and
the availability of human capital, are all essential
priorities, together with the education of young people
and women and the promotion on the role of the media
as drivers for social participation in public life, in

09-38734

particular in view of the upcoming presidential
elections.
On that point, the Afghanistan-Pakistan
international support group met in Trieste and spelled
out the prerequisites for a credible electoral process,
including fair play by all candidates, scrupulous
respect for the principle of non-interference, and
impartiality of the international community. Also
stressed was the UNAMA coordination mandate and
Ambassador Eide’s crucial task in enhancing the
coherence of the international presence.
Participants in the Trieste meeting focused on
regional stabilization, with specific attention to the
situation of internally displaced persons in Pakistan.
Lack of security will become even more serious when
the monsoon season will affect life in the camps and
make it easier for the Taliban to exploit poverty and
discontent among the internally displaced persons. All
this calls for immediate action and for supporting the
democratic Government in Islamabad in dealing with
the current humanitarian emergency and the upcoming
phase of reconstruction. The G-8 should meet again on
this subject at the margins of the next General
Assembly ministerial week in New York.
I add my remarks to the statement that was
pronounced this morning by the representative of the
Czech Republic on behalf of the presidency of the
European Union.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Australia
welcomes the opportunity to participate in the
Council’s discussion of the Secretary-General’s latest
report on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2009/323). I
would also like to take this opportunity to thank you,
Sir, on my Government’s behalf, and to congratulate
you on your leadership of this Council over the past
month.
Australia appreciates the United Nations
leadership of international civilian engagement in
Afghanistan, and we would like to acknowledge again
the tireless efforts of Special Representative Eide in
that regard. As we have said before and will no doubt
say again, international engagement in Afghanistan
must address security, governance and regional
cooperation. We all understand the importance of
creating a secure environment in Afghanistan in which

9

S/PV.6154 (Resumption 1)

development and economic opportunities can grow.
That is why we are increasing our force levels by 40
per cent. Australia is also helping to build and
strengthen the capability of the Afghan National Army
in Uruzgan, and we will contribute $200 million to the
Afghan National Army trust fund.
At the same time, we must not lose focus on
developments in the civilian area. Afghan authorities
and the international community must continue to work
together to ensure that forthcoming elections are
secure, credible and inclusive and that all candidates
are able to compete on a level playing field.
Australia will provide supplementary support for
the conduct of the elections, including short-term
military support through the deployment of an infantry
company for a period of eight months. We will also
make a small financial contribution to support the
conduct of elections and, of course, we will be
dispatching a civilian observer team.
Last year, Australia pledged $250 million in
development and reconstruction assistance to
Afghanistan, bringing our total assistance to date to
approximately $600 million. That is a fairly significant
amount, given that Afghanistan falls outside our sphere
of influence, but it underlines the importance of our
bilateral relationship with Afghanistan and the
importance that this issue has for the international
community as a whole.
We have also provided funding to the Afghanistan
Reconstruction Trust Fund. This Fund is working to
strengthen the resilience of Afghan communities and
expand economic opportunities and access to essential
services, including by supporting the National
Solidarity Programme. I am told that some 68 per cent
of Afghanistan’s rural population have benefited from
this Programme, and we note that the World Bank
considers the Programme to be one of the most
successful in supporting rural and community
development. We therefore encourage Member States
to pledge additional funds to this worthy work.
Despite the deteriorating security conditions,
progress has been made in Afghanistan. Average per
capita gross domestic product in Afghanistan has
almost doubled since 2002. The World Bank reports
significant progress in public financial management,
and that is something that has been reflected in the
reports we have had from the Special Representative.
There have also been impressive advances in

10

increasing basic education, with a sixfold enrolment
increase since 2001, of which 35 per cent are girls. But
as Ambassador Eide has reminded us separately, we
may now have 6 million small boys and girls in basic
education, but small boys and girls grow up, and we
need to be ready to support them as they move through
the primary and tertiary periods of their education as
well.
The international community must continue to
unite to build on these successes. It is continued
cooperation with Afghan authorities and with each
other that will create the secure and prosperous future
that Afghanistan deserves.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Germany.
Mr. Matussek (Germany): First of all, allow me
on this, your very last day, to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your successful Security Council
presidency. You have had a full agenda, and we will
always remember this special presidency. I would like
to join my colleagues in thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2009/323) and Special
Representative Kai Eide for today’s briefing, which
was passionate, honest and clear, as we are used to his
being. In addition, I would like to thank in particular
Ambassador Tanin for his realistic analysis and his
wise counsel.
Germany fully supports the statement of the
European Union presidency and shares the analysis
presented on the situation in Afghanistan.
As an important contributor to civilian
reconstruction and development programmes for
Afghanistan and as a major troop contributor to the
United Nations-mandated International Security
Assistance Force operation, Germany would like to
highlight the following aspects.
First, the electoral process in Afghanistan is a
crucial step for consolidating democratic development
in Afghanistan. The international community, in
particular through the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), is successfully supporting the
Independent Election Commission in preparing for
these elections. We are confident that, for these first
Afghan-led elections, our Afghan partners, first of all
President Karzai and his Government, will work to
ensure a stable process that leads the country all the
way to credible, free and fair elections on 20 August.

09-38734

S/PV.6154 (Resumption 1)

Germany has continuously supported the UNDP
Enhancing Legal and Electoral Capacity for Tomorrow
project by donating $10 million in 2008, and will
provide an additional $12 million for this programme
in 2009.
Security remains a critical concern, especially
with regard to the election process. In this context,
Germany has increased the number of its troops on the
ground in order to assist in conducting free and fair
elections in a safe and secure environment.
Secondly, Afghan
ownership
and
good
governance remain key to the success of the efforts of
the international community in supporting development
in Afghanistan. We encourage the Afghan Government
to fight corruption and the trade and production of
narcotic drugs with increased dedication. We also
welcome the recent Government initiatives in the field
of agriculture and private sector development and call
upon the Afghan Government to follow through with
them.
Thirdly, Germany will continue to support
reconstruction and development in Afghanistan. 2009
has seen yet another increase in German contributions,
up to approximately $250 million overall. We strongly
believe that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) must continue to play the
leading role in coordinating all civilian efforts of the
international community, as agreed upon last summer
in Paris.
In this respect, we strongly support the Joint
Coordination Monitoring Board process as the core
consulting mechanism. As a major contributor to the
United Nations budget, we openly supported the
considerable increase of the 2009 UNAMA budget, and
we look forward to seeing tangible results. We believe
that, in order for UNAMA to carry out its enhanced
mandate, a further increase in its resources is
warranted, as Kai Eide rightly pointed out this
morning.
Against this background, Germany welcomes the
increase in UNAMA personnel on the ground and the
inauguration of two more UNAMA regional offices in
Tirin Kot and Sari Pul. We express our support for
UNAMA’s efforts to open additional regional offices in
Afghanistan. We are pleased to note that the increased
presence of UNAMA in the regions has already started
to add value, including in the areas of Mazar-e-Sharif,
Kunduz and Faizabad.

09-38734

Fourthly, we support the proposal brought
forward by the Secretary-General to include a finalized
set of benchmarks in a later report to the Council. We
believe that those benchmarks could contribute to
measuring progress in the implementation of UNAMA’s
mandate and priorities. At the same time, we ask that
those benchmarks be considered as supporting
reconstruction efforts that already exist, not as an end
in themselves.
Let me conclude by thanking Kai Eide again for
his tireless efforts and his successful leadership of
UNAMA. Despite all the challenges ahead we have
been able to help improve the living conditions in
Afghanistan, to build schools for boys and girls,
hospitals, bridges, streets, etc. This success has been
possible only thanks to all the women and men from all
over the world who are willing to serve in Afghanistan.
Let me seize this opportunity to thank them all for their
tireless efforts and their personal commitment.
We would like to thank all the teams working
under the umbrella of UNAMA as well as the many
non-governmental organizations and members of the
diplomatic corps, and last but not least all the
personnel of the security forces, for their efforts to
improve the life of the Afghans.
Germany will live up to its international
responsibilities and will continue to support the Afghan
people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish
to begin, Mr. President, by congratulating you on your
skilful stewardship of the Security Council’s work this
month and by extending our gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral, his Special Representative and all their
colleagues in the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their dedication to the
consolidation of peace and stability in Afghanistan.
Since you are to leave us soon, Mr. President, I
join other colleagues in wishing you all the best and
every success in your future endeavours. You are
known for your friendship, professionalism and
kindness. We will surely miss you a great deal.
I would like also to thank Mr. Kai Eide for his
comprehensive briefing to the Council today and for
his tireless efforts and sincere dedication to help
coordinate international efforts in Afghanistan. Our

11

S/PV.6154 (Resumption 1)

thanks also go to all the men and women in UNAMA
for their praiseworthy endeavours in Afghanistan. I
also extend our thanks to the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan for his impressive statement this
morning and for his update on the situation.
As the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/323) clearly indicates, we are yet again facing
a mixed picture of both achievements and causes for
continued concern in Afghanistan. The report stresses
that during the reporting period progress has continued
to be made in such important areas as the expansion of
the Afghan National Army and the Afghan National
Police. The report also indicates that the agricultural
sector and the private sector continue to blossom, while
there has also been encouraging progress as far as
overall development and capacity-building issues are
concerned. Moreover, it is encouraging to learn
through the report that donor coordination has
improved, including through a more effective use of
the Joint Coordination Monitoring Board.
The Afghan people and Government deserve our
collective admiration for their steadfastness on the path
they have chosen and for the remarkable achievements
they have made in the past several years towards a
stable and prosperous Afghanistan.
Despite those positive developments, causes for
concern remain in other areas. The security situation
has continued to deteriorate and the number of security
incidents and the level of violence have increased
compared to the same period last year. The menaces of
poppy cultivation and drug trafficking have continued
to pose a serious threat to Afghanistan, the wider
region and beyond.
We are of the view that, to address insecurity in
Afghanistan, adequate attention should be given to the
genuine needs and views of the Afghan people and
Government. The “Afghanization” of security and
reconstruction efforts and greater seriousness in paving
the ground for home-grown security and full national
ownership by Afghans over their country’s issues are
needed and are of paramount importance if we want to
see real improvement in the situation in Afghanistan.
The Afghans have made it clear that they will not
accept the indefinite presence of foreign forces in their
country. And the increase in the number of foreign
forces there, if it is done based on past approaches, will
not help to improve the security situation.

12

We concur with the report that capacity-building
and the utilization of regional potential for the
reconstruction of Afghanistan can contribute a great
deal to the improvement of the situation in the country.
Afghanistan’s constitution is of vital importance,
since, among other things, it underpins the unity of
Afghans from all walks of life and from all religious
and ethnic backgrounds. We support the position of the
Afghan Government that Afghan-led dialogue can be
considered only with those groups that are committed
to the constitution of the country, have not and will not
act against the country’s security and have not
perpetrated terrorist acts. Any effort in that regard
should also be without prejudice to relevant Security
Council resolutions particularly resolution 1267 (1999).
The upcoming presidential and provincial council
elections in Afghanistan will be among the most
important political developments in the country this
year. We are confident that Afghans will turn this
opportunity into another milestone on their path
towards stability and prosperity.
Regional and international initiatives and
gatherings in the reporting period, particularly the
Tehran trilateral summit of 24 May 2009, the Hague
Conference on 31 March 2009 and such initiatives as
the joint cooperation of Iran and Japan in Afghanistan,
demonstrate the regional and international potentials
and commitments in supporting Afghans in their
journey towards peace, security and development. We
must build upon these initiatives in our endeavours to
help Afghans.
The cultivation and production of and the
trafficking in narcotic drugs in Afghanistan pose
another daunting challenge that not only adversely
affects that country’s economic reconstruction and
undermines its stability and security, but also poses
serious threats to the whole region and to the entire
international community. Despite the presence of
military forces from various countries in Afghanistan,
the international community has not left a satisfactory
record in fighting this threat in Afghanistan. This is a
threat to all of us and therefore requires a collective,
resolute and serious response in all its aspects.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has been and
continues to be unwavering in its war against heavily
armed drug traffickers originating from Afghanistan,
and we encourage others to join us in this important

09-38734

S/PV.6154 (Resumption 1)

fight in order to save present and future generations
from the devastating impact of this calamity.
Afghanistan’s security and stability are of vital
importance for the Islamic Republic of Iran, as they are
for the rest of the region and beyond. We have always
been clear in our condemnation of all heinous terrorist
acts committed by terrorist groups, particularly
Al-Qaida and the Taliban, in Afghanistan, and also in
our condemnation of attacks on civilians through air
raids by foreign forces, and we have extended our full
support to the efforts of the Afghan Government to
improve the security and economic situation in the
country.
We have displayed our sincere and serious desire
to help our Afghan brothers and sisters through the
concrete steps that we have taken in various
reconstruction activities in Afghanistan, as I mentioned
in my previous statement. As the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative have stressed on various
occasions, regional potentials should be more seriously
explored in addressing the challenges that Afghanistan
is facing.
The Islamic Republic of Iran not only has
attended various international and regional gatherings
on Afghanistan, but has also taken the initiative to host
or propose several regional meetings in this regard,
including the first trilateral summit of the Presidents of
Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan, which was held in
Tehran in May.
As the report of the Secretary-General mentions,
a declaration was adopted at the end of the summit in
Tehran, in which the three countries expressed their
commitment to joining efforts to fight terrorism, support
trilateral economic projects and counter the production
and trafficking of narcotics.
I wish to conclude by stressing that we support
the central role that the United Nations has played and
continues to play, through UNAMA, in coordinating
the international community’s assistance to Afghanistan
and in helping the Afghan people and Government
tackle the challenges they have faced over the past
several years. Under Afghan ownership and leadership,
we should focus our attention on the four priority areas
described in the Chairmen’s Statement issued at the
end of The Hague Conference in March this year:
strengthened security, improved economic growth,
good governance and enhanced regional cooperation.
The journey towards a stable and prosperous

09-38734

Afghanistan may be long. It may also be difficult, but
we are confident that the Government and people of
Afghanistan will make it. They will succeed.
The President: The representative of Afghanistan
has asked for the floor to make a further statement. I
give him the floor.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I want to sincerely
thank everyone who has spoken today for their support
for Afghanistan, the Afghan people and the
stabilization process. I have taken note of all the views,
suggestions and concerns that have been presented
today. The enduring partnership between the
international community and Afghanistan is key to
success in the country.
I am particularly grateful to you, Sir, for
organizing this debate on your last day as President of
the Council and at the United Nations. You have been a
well-known and well-respected diplomat at the United
Nations, and particularly in our region for your work
there earlier in your career. In Afghanistan, you are
known to be a distinguished diplomat of a country,
Turkey, that has cordial relations with mine. In the
name of the Afghan people, I would like to pay tribute
to your work and your efforts on behalf of Afghanistan.
We take note and will certainly remember that the
convening of this debate was among your last official
acts.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Kai
Eide to respond to some of the comments that have
been made.
Mr. Eide: I really asked for the floor in order to
be the last person to whom you give the floor in any
Security Council meeting. I have achieved that. I want
to echo the best wishes that have been expressed by so
many around the table, and I am honoured to be
present at your last meeting, Sir. I wish you all the
best.
I have just two or three very brief comments.
Some speakers have mentioned the need to look
beyond the election period. I agree, and I touched upon
that in my statement. I think it is important that we
start thinking about it, because I believe that, with a
new Government in place, whoever the new President
may be, it will be important to have a vision to build
on very soon that ensures continuity with our current
situation. That is important.

13

S/PV.6154 (Resumption 1)

The question of donor coordination has been
raised again a number of times. It scares me sometimes
to hear of the kind of expectations some have, given
our ability to do magic with limited resources. But I
think that we will certainly have to do that in the
future. Ambassador Rice and others noted that we need
to get together at a much earlier stage when we
formulate our aid programmes, and to think together
much more before we carve our programmes in stone,
so to speak. When we do not, it makes it much more
difficult for us to be flexible afterwards. We will try to
learn from what we have seen in the past.
We will open new offices and I do need more
personnel, but I would like to urge all Council
members and other colleagues who have participated in
this meeting to see if they have personnel with the right
qualities whom they could offer to us — not as gratis
personnel, but to be recruited. It is not only a question
of the number of personnel for me; it is a question of
the quality of people and the expertise and resources
that they represent. That is particularly true for the new
offices to be established. We will undertake that as well
as we possibly can.

14

Finally, the benchmark issue has been raised by
many. I repeat that I take it very seriously, but it is
interesting to see how many different versions there are
around the table of what “benchmarks” means. I will
conclude by saying that I will take all those ideas with
me and be inspired by them. Hopefully, we will also
come to our own conclusions so that the Security
Council can receive a decent report in September —
not you, Mr. President, but many others who will
remain here. I thank them all for their kind words to
me and my staff.
The President: I thank everyone for their kind
and generous words to me.
There are no other speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

09-38734
