A/66/PV.106

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

106th plenary meeting

Thursday, 19 April 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Sajdik (Austria),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 138 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/66/668/Add.10)
The Acting President: I should like, in keeping with
established practice, to draw the attention of the General
Assembly to document A/66/668/Add.10, in which the
Secretary-General informs the President of the General
Assembly that, since the issuance of his communication
contained in document A/66/668/Add.9, Dominica has
made the payment necessary to reduce its arrears below
the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter. May I
take it that the General Assembly duly takes note of the
information contained in that document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 12 (continued)
Global road safety crisis
Note by the Secretary-General (A/66/389)
Draft resolution (A/66/L.43)
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to the representative of the Russian Federation
to introduce draft resolution A/66/L.43.
Mr. Kiryanov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Road safety continues to be one of the most

(Qatar)

pressing challenges for large cities. The problem is of
no less importance for towns and urban settlements.
The international community’s recognition of the
seriousness of road safety issues provided a strong
impetus to active measures undertaken by national
Governments, with the support of the United Nations,
other international organizations, the World Bank and
regional development banks, at the national, regional
and international levels. The first Global Ministerial
Conference on Road Safety, held in Moscow three years
ago, significantly accelerated international efforts in the
field. The Moscow declaration adopted as an outcome
of the Conference called upon Member States to declare
2011-2020 the Decade of Action for Road Safety. That
was followed by the adoption of resolution 64/255,
on 2 March 2010, which built upon that initiative and
launched a large-scale campaign to stabilize and reduce
global fatality rates due to traffic accidents.
We reiterate our commitment to joint international
efforts to fight injuries and deaths caused by traffic
accidents. We stand ready to continue to take practical
steps to improve road safety.
At present we are working hard to develop a new
federal target programme to improve road safety until
2020. It will be strategic in nature and stipulate the
modernization of legal and organizational instruments
in that field. Measures within the framework of
the programme are intended to prevent road users’
dangerous behaviour, ensure road safety for children,
ensure acceptable standards for the technical condition
of vehicles, and develop traffic management systems

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-29933 (E)

*1229933*

A/66/PV.106

for vehicles and pedestrians, as well as assistance for
road victims.
The fourth international congress on the theme
“Safety on the Roads for the Safety of Life”, organized
by the Council of Federation of the Federal Assembly of
the Russian Federation, will be held in Saint Petersburg
this fall. We invite delegations from all countries to
participate.
We attach great importance to international
cooperation, which plays a crucial role in the field of
road safety best practices and traffic-injury reduction.
To that end, I should like to introduce draft resolution
A/66/L.43, entitled “Improving global road safety”.
The text of the draft resolution was negotiated here
in New York and enjoys full consensus. We would
like to express our gratitude to our partners for their
substantive amendments and proposals and thank the
secretariats of the World Health Organization, the United
Nations Economic Commission for Europe and other
international organizations for the assistance provided.
We note that the draft resolution has 80 sponsors.
Allow me to briefly present the basic provisions
of the draft resolution. The document expresses
appreciation for the activities under the Global Plan for
the Decade of Action for Road Safety 2011-2020, which
is being implemented by the World Health Organization,
the United Nations regional commissions and the
United Nations Road Safety Collaboration, in which
the Russian Federation is an active member. The draft
resolution highly appreciates the efforts of States that
have developed national plans to implement the Global
Plan. It also requests regional commissions to continue
to undertake measures to raise public awareness about
road safety. I would like to emphasize that the draft
resolution calls upon Member States to undertake
measures in all major areas stipulated in the Global
Plan, namely, road safety management, safe roads and
transport systems, safe vehicles, well-trained road users
and responding quickly to traffic accidents.
Death and injury caused by traffic accidents are
a serious problem for global health care. Focused
measures to reduce traffic injuries undertaken by
the United Nations since 2003 have yielded positive
results. Over the past few years a downward trend in the
number of road accidents has been observed in many
countries, including low- and middle-income countries.
Our joint efforts to fight traffic injuries at the national
and global levels will be able not only to save hundreds

2

of thousands of lives but will also promote social and
economic progress in the world, including in the context
of the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals by 2015.
I call upon all delegations to support the draft
resolution and invite all Member States to become
sponsors.
Mrs. Al-Mughairy (Oman): Allow me, at the
outset, to express my gratitude on behalf of my country,
the Sultanate of Oman, to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report contained in document A/66/389,
in which he provides us with an account of activities
undertaken and achievements attained by the global
road safety community towards the objectives of the
Decade of Action for Road Safety, as well as on the
ongoing road safety activities worldwide.
The report describes the efforts to prevent the
waves of road traffic injuries, including the hosting of
the first Global Ministerial Conference on Road Safety
by the Russian Federation, in November 2009, and
the launch of the Decade of Action, in May 2011. The
report of the Secretary-General also contains useful
recommendations for Member States on how to reduce
injuries and death caused by road traffic accidents,
such as acceding to and implementing United Nations
international legal instruments on road safety and
developing national and local capacities for monitoring
and evaluating road safety projects in order to advance
the cause of road safety.
The General Assembly decided to include an item
on road safety for the first time on the agenda of the
fifty-seventh session. At that session, my country
introduced resolution 57/309, entitled “Global road
safety crisis”, during the plenary meeting held on 22 May
2003. I am proud, yet humbled to refer here to my
Government’s leading effort, through my predecessor’s
chairmanship of the Third Committee at that time, in
ensuring the inclusion of an item on road safety in
the agenda of the Assembly. We are also proud of our
pioneering role in launching at the General Assembly
the first international campaign for road safety to make
roads safe for generations to come.
The Sultanate of Oman’s introduction of that
resolution, which was adopted by consensus, was a
first step, in that it requested a report on global road
safety from the Secretary-General for consideration
by the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session.
We have come a long way since then, and the General

12-29933

A/66/PV.106

Assembly has held many plenary meetings on the issue.
The World Health Organization, the World Bank and
the regional economic commissions have demonstrated
genuine leadership in raising awareness on this very
important issue. Ministerial level meetings were held
to address the problems of road traffic injuries and to
build safer roads and provide technical support for road
safety at the international, regional and national levels.
In the years since then, the General Assembly adopted
various resolutions on the global road-safety crisis
and its improvement, in response to the international
community’s determination to reduce mortality rates
resulting from road accidents. Interaction among States
in the area of road-traffic safety has recently become
a priority for international cooperation at bilateral
and multilateral levels, and is becoming an important
item on the agendas of the United Nations and other
international organizations.
United Nations data show that each year nearly
1.2 million people die, and millions are injured or
disabled, as a result of road accidents. The economic
and social costs for individuals and their families are
high, amounting to $518 billion per annum. With
developing countries bearing $100 billion of that total,
there is an urgent need for raising awareness of the
social and economic costs of road accident injuries.
Such injuries can be reduced by facilitating the exchange
of information and experience on best road-traffic
safety practices and developing recommendations for
prevention, especially in developing countries. In that
regard, we call for further strengthening developing
countries’ efforts to build capacity in road safety and
increasing international financial and technical support.
In that context, we should commend the relevant United
Nations agencies and other organizations for their efforts
to promote road safety.
I would like to refer to the steps taken by the
Government of the Sultanate of Oman at the national
level, which include outreach efforts by the Royal
Omani Police to enhance traffic safety by distributing
nearly 1 million awareness bulletins annually in every
governorate of Oman and by preparing films, some of
which have won international awards, on road traffic
accidents. I should mention that on 11 May my country
celebrated the launch of a national road-safety strategy
to coincide with the Global Plan for the Decade of Action
for Road Safety 2011-2020. In 2009, in accordance with
international requirements and its own aspirations, Oman
also established a steering committee for administering

research programmes on traffic accidents. We have also
set up a traffic school for children to educate the younger
generation on traffic-safety rules and regulations. In
coordination with the Ministry of Education, more than
6,000 students visit the school each year. Beginning
in 2010 with the organization of a symposium on the
subject, 18 October was designated an annual day of
traffic safety.
Omani police are continuing their efforts to promote
road safety, recently initiating a scheme under which
three buses, equipped with modern technology such as
computers and display screens, will travel around the
country to present awareness programmes and lectures
on road safety. The buses will visit every governorate in
Oman in order to help raise awareness among all sectors of
society. To help ensure road safety, the Director-General
for Traffic of the Royal Omani Police has established
a road-safety institute and stepped up the police’s role
in training traffic officers, public transportation drivers
and pedestrians. The Director-General has also worked
on improving safety standards by modernizing vehicle
technical inspection stations, equipping them with
up-to-date technology, and by installing high-quality
fixed and mobile speed radars. Since their introduction
there has been a significant drop in speed violations.
The role of the Royal Omani Police ambulance unit
has also been enhanced. The police, along with other
Government agencies responsible for planning and
constructing roads, have participated in modernizing
road design to help meet international and local safety
standards and requirements on Oman’s highways, which
now total 56,361 kilometres. The Director-General for
Traffic has set up a web site aimed at providing service in
all areas of traffic awareness and answering the public’s
questions, as well as monitoring traffic accidents daily.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that the
Moscow declaration adopted in 2009 at the first Global
Ministerial Conference on Road Safety and the launch
of the Decade of Action for Road Safety 2011-2020
are clear evidence of the international community’s
commitment to keeping road safety high on the political
agenda of the United Nations. We cannot be lax about
this, because every year hundreds of thousands of
human lives are at risk. We are pleased that the draft
resolution before us recognizes the great danger caused
by careless driving: driving under the influence of
alcohol or drugs, at excessive speeds, or while texting
or using cellphones. We are grateful to the Russian
Federation for introducing the draft resolution, entitled

12-299333

A/66/PV.106

“Improving global road safety”, in which the Assembly
encourages Member States that have not yet done so
to become contracting parties to the United Nations
road-safety-related legal instruments and to implement
them; to consider signing and ratifying the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities; to nominate
national focal points for the Decade of Action for
Road Safety; to improve road-safety legislation and
regulations; and to address road-safety issues through
international cooperation.
In order for us to enhance international efforts and to
work together towards our common goal of saving lives
and promoting international interaction on road safety, I
am pleased to be able to recommend the adoption of the
draft resolution by the General Assembly.
Mr. Jónasson (Iceland): On 2 March 2010, the
General Assembly adopted resolution 64/255, which
proclaimed the Decade of Action for Road Safety 20112020, with the goal of stabilizing and reducing the rates
of road-traffic fatalities around the world. The draft
resolution before us today (A/66/L.43) follows up that
resolution with a number of important actions aimed at
improving and strengthening road-safety data collection,
the implementation of new car assessment programmes
and improving road management systems.
Road safety is a problem shared by every State.
Costing around $500 billion and 1.3 million deaths a
year, a figure that is estimated to reach close to 2 million
by 2020, the impetus for action it presents is clear.
In the context of the Decade of Action for Road
Safety, Iceland is in the process of developing a national
plan for the Decade to complement the current national
road-safety strategy for 2011-2020.The Icelandic action
plan is based on five pillars of national activities in line
with the Global Plan: road safety management, safer
roads and mobility, safer vehicles, safer road users and
post-crash response, taking into account the specific
road safety situation in Iceland.
Real results can be achieved. In Iceland we have
managed to halve the number of road traffic deaths
during the past decade, from an average of 25 deaths
a year for 2002 to 2006 to an average of 13 deaths for
2007 to 2011. That makes Iceland the European country
with the least number of fatalities per capita and vehicle.
We also need to look at those who survive and are
left with serious injuries. Allow me to highlight one
serious injury in relation to traffic accidents that my

4

Government is committed to raising awareness and
understanding of, both nationally and internationally.
Almost half of those who acquire spinal cord injuries do
so in traffic accidents. It is estimated that between 4 and
5 million people around the world now live with spinal
cord injuries, and most of them are between the ages of
20 and 40.
The Government of Iceland has supported the
Institute of Spinal Cord Injury in Iceland in its work
towards alleviating the suffering of those living with
such injuries. The Institute aims at gathering scientific
knowledge in one faculty to be available for research by
prominent doctors and scientists.
This initiative has received support from the Nordic
Council, which has agreed to establish a working
group of doctors and scientists to review Nordic and
international research and methods of treatment of spinal
cord injuries, with the aim of making recommendations
for enhanced work in the field of treatment.
We encourage Member States, as a part of their
national efforts, to take similar steps in increasing
knowledge of serious injuries caused by traffic accidents
and ways to more effectively treat, or even cure, them.
In addition, we stand ready to share our knowledge with
all those interested through our national Road Safety
Directorate and the Institute of Spinal Cord Injury in
Iceland.
Finally, we would like to thank Oman, for placing
this issue on the agenda of the United Nations, and the
Russian Federation, for continuing to promote collective
efforts to ensure the safety and needs of all road users.
We know first-hand that real results can be achieved in
saving lives and alleviating the suffering of those left
behind with serious injuries.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): At the outset, allow me to
commend the President of the General Assembly for
convening this very important meeting.
Mortality and serious injuries caused by road
accidents have become one of the most pressing public
health problems facing the international community
today. For that reason, I wish to congratulate the
Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation for its
leadership on the issue and for its successful chairmanship
of the negotiations that will lead to the adoption of draft
resolution A/66/L.43, entitled “Improving global road
safety”.

12-29933

A/66/PV.106

Brazil is glad to join as a sponsor of the draft
resolution and to lend its full support to the initiative.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the presence of Their Excellencies
Mr. Hugo Leal and Mr. Sebastido Bala Rocha, members
of the Brazilian Parliament, the Deputy Minister of the
Ministry of National Integration, Mr. Alexandre Garcia,
and a delegation made up of members of the Brazilian
Senate, public administration and academia, all involved
in the subject and interested in a positive outcome.
Congressman Hugo Leal is the President of the
Parliamentary Front in Defence of Road Safety and
the author of a national law that aims at restraining
the consumption of alcohol by vehicle drivers through
improved enforcement and increased criminal penalties
for offenders.
Motorized road transport has changed the face of
economic affairs, trade, employment and health care,
bringing benefits to all countries and societies around
the globe. Food and other products reach more markets
in a more efficient way. Patients can be transported
with life-saving speed to hospitals and receive urgent
health-care services. Emergency relief can now be sent
more promptly to disaster-affected sites. Those benefits
should be seen as routine aspects of our societies,
and working daily towards their improvement is our
responsibility.
Contemporary reality still draws our attention to
the fact that more needs to be done to prevent accidents
and improve road safety. Very sadly, over the course of
this year, the tragic news of a death on the road will be
delivered to more than 1 million families and friends.
Many more will suffer from injuries caused by
traffic-related accidents. The suffering those events will
cause is unfortunately very well-known throughout the
world, particularly in poorer countries, where 90 per
cent of the annual deaths caused by road accidents
occur, according to World Health Organization (WHO)
estimates.
Every year in Brazil, road accidents cause more than
70,000 injuries. Traffic-related accidents claim the lives
of more than 6,000 Brazilians a year. We are therefore
especially determined to advancing national legislation,
improving surveillance and enforcement and increasing
public awareness of the harm caused by road accidents.
We believe that improving road safety requires
adopting multidisciplinary actions and addressing the

major road safety risk factors, such as the non-use
of safety belts and child restraints, the non-use of
helmets, driving under the influence of alcohol and
drugs, inappropriate and excessive speed, and texting
and inappropriate use of cellphones while driving, as
highlighted in the draft resolution before us today.
Brazil is deeply engaged in a number of international
initiatives targeted at enhancing cooperation to improve
road safety, in line with the United Nations Road Safety
Collaboration set up by the WHO. We are also convinced
that the Decade of Action for Road Safety 20112020 provides the ideal framework for international
cooperation and support to the development of national
plans as a complement to any current national road
safety strategies already in place.
With that goal in mind, Brazil has been an active
member of the Friends of the Decade of Action for Road
Safety 2011-2020, an informal group of Governments
and international agencies committed to making the
Decade a success.
Finally, we are pleased to support draft resolution
A/66/L.43, and we believe that it will provide yet
another excellent contribution to the overall goal of
underlining the importance of road safety and improving
international cooperation in this matter.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): My delegation would
like to express its appreciation to the World Health
Organization, the United Nations regional commissions
and other partners of the United Nations Road
Safety Collaboration for presenting a thorough and
comprehensive report on improving global road safety
(A/66/389), as well as the recommendations contained
therein to achieve the goals of the Decade of Action for
Road Safety 2011-2020.
On behalf of the Government of Malaysia, I
would also like to thank the Russian Federation for
spearheading draft resolution A/66/L.43, entitled
“Improving global road safety”, to assess the progress
achieved during the first year of the implementation of
the Decade, provide new impetus and outline priorities
for further global road safety cooperation. Malaysia is
pleased to be a sponsor of the draft resolution.
Malaysia has actively advocated road safety issues
for many years. Realizing the urgency of addressing
the issue in a systematic and planned manner, the
Government of Malaysia, in September 2004, set up the
Road Safety Department in the Ministry of Transport as
a one-stop agency to coordinate, monitor and implement

12-299335

A/66/PV.106

road-safety programmes. Furthermore, through the
Ministry of Transport, a road safety plan for the period
2011-2020 was drafted to include guidelines and
initiatives for road safety in Malaysia and provide six
road safety strategies. The 10-year road safety plan also
gives an overview of Malaysia’s vision as well as the
challenges and risks that need to be overcome in order
for the plan to achieve its goals.
To further save lives in Malaysia, the Government
formulated a long-term policy called the Zero-Fatality
Vision, which is a safety policy and philosophy that
covers all aspects of safety, including driver, vehicle,
roadway infrastructure and environmental safety. The
ultimate aim of the Vision is that no one should be killed
or seriously injured in the road environment as a result
of preventable road traffic accidents.
Malaysia has also established various platforms,
such as the Malaysian Institute of Road Safety Research
as a one-stop centre for the dissemination of road safety
information through print media and a concessionary
training programme. The Institute carries out studies
and evaluates current procedures on road safety to
generate information that will form the core of its
evidence-based intervention programmes to enhance
road safety. Additionally, Malaysians Unite for Road
Safety (MUFORS), a community-driven project that was
established in September 2009, empowers Malaysians to
voice their thoughts and concerns on road safety in the
country. More importantly, it also serves as a platform
for every Malaysian to think about how they can play his
or her part to improve road safety and save lives.
MUFORS has been instrumental in giving road safety
advocacy a fresh approach by involving Malaysians from
all walks of life to take ownership of road safety. Over
a period of two years, MUFORS has initiated various
programmes to get an increasing number of Malaysians
to be involved in improving attitudes and making roads
safer for everyone. In short, MUFORS is a movement of
the people, by the people, for the people.
To make a difference for safer roads, Malaysia
has implemented the International Road Assessment
Programme (IRAP), a charity active in more than 70
countries worldwide whose vision favours a world free
of high-risk roads. The IRAP programme in Malaysia
has the potential to prevent almost 32,000 deaths and
serious injuries over 20 years.
Malaysia is proud to have a fellow Malaysian,
Hollywood star Michelle Yeoh, as the Global Ambassador

6

for the Make Roads Safe campaign. Michelle Yeoh has
led the campaign’s call for a Decade of Action prior to
the first United Nations conference on road safety in
November 2009 and addressed the General Assembly
in 2010 (see A/64/PV.74) as it proclaimed the United
Nations Decade of Action for Road Safety.
Every day, more than 3,500 people are killed in
road traffic accidents worldwide, and nearly 1.3 million
people in the world die each year of such accidents.
Road trauma is a serious and rapidly worsening public
health crisis. The crisis affects developing countries in
particular, where 9 out of 10 road deaths and injuries
occur. Road traffic accidents are the leading cause of
death in young people aged 10 to 24 worldwide; a global
killer, the number of deaths it causes is similar in scale
to those caused by malaria or tuberculosis.
Road safety is indeed one of the most important
issues that will continue to affect each and every of us in
one way or another. In most cases, road traffic accidents
are predictable, and therefore preventable. Malaysia will
therefore continue to promote and introduce road safety
initiatives and programmes for members of the public
to create an awareness and safety culture among them.
Malaysia also wishes to reiterate that the United Nations
should continue to play a major role in addressing this
highly preventable but deadly public safety issue.
Mr. Goddard (Barbados): Barbados is pleased to
join with a significant and diverse group of Member
States in sponsoring draft resolution A/66/L.43, entitled
“Improving global road safety”.
As a small State with limited resources, Barbados
can ill afford the economic and social costs caused by
traffic accidents. The available statistics for collisions in
Barbados between 1980 and 2009 reveal that accidents
increased from 4,200 in 1980 to 8,317 in 2009. While
the statistics in Barbados may not be as startling as in
some other countries, it remains true that the number of
road accidents is nevertheless much too high.
Internationally, the statistics on vehicular accidents
are staggering. It is difficult to imagine that across the
globe as many children die on the roads annually as
the entire population of Barbados. The World Health
Organization has predicted that, by the year 2015,
road crashes will be the leading cause of premature
deaths and disability for children aged 5 and above.
Ninety per cent of such casualties take place in lowand middle-income countries in Latin America and the
Caribbean. It is against that backdrop and in the light of

12-29933

A/66/PV.106

the increasing number of accidents on our roadways that
the Government of Barbados took the decision last July
to establish the Barbados Road Safety Council.
Given the importance of the Council’s work, the
Cabinet of Barbados decided that the Prime Minister
would chair the Council, the Minister of Transport and
Works would serve as Vice-Chair and that the Minister
of Health would also sit on the Council, in view of the
direct relevance of road safety to individual and societal
health. Given the many stakeholders involved in the
area of road safety, care was taken to ensure that the
composition of the Council would be as diversified as
possible. Hence the Council includes representatives
from the private sector, labour unions, the insurance
industry, petrol dealers, car importers, the health and
education sectors, the police, private transportation
operators and non-governmental organizations doing
work in the area of road safety.
The mandate of the Council is twofold: first, to advise
the Government on road safety issues, and, secondly,
to develop and implement road safety promotional
activities and conduct public education programmes.
The overall aim is to reduce the number and severity
of collisions on our roadways, as well as to lower the
financial, emotional and social costs to society. In
addition, the Government of Barbados is seeking to
build on legislation such as that enacted in 2002 that
introduced the requirement for seat belts, which has
significantly reduced fatalities and injuries resulting
from vehicular accidents. After a comprehensive review
of the Road Traffic Act, the Cabinet approved several
amendments to the Act and its regulations. Those
amendments will deal with issues such as emissions,
the frequency of inspection of both private and public
service vehicles as well as breathalyser testing, and will
introduce additional speed-limit restrictions.
Another major issue with which Barbados is very
concerned is the matter of the use of cellphones while
driving, including texting. The issue of “distracted
driving”, as it is referred to by the World Health
Organization, is one of great concern to local authorities
and is being addressed within the framework of the
amendments to the Road Traffic Act.
Barbados reiterates its strong support for the
adoption of this draft resolution as an expression of
the will of the international community to make a
meaningful impact on improving global traffic safety.

It is for that reason that we urge full support for its
adoption and implementation.
Mr. Cervantes Trejo (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I welcome this opportunity to address the General
Assembly at its sixty-sixth session in order to express
Mexico’s support for the draft resolution (A/66/L.43)
on the global road safety crisis, introduced by the
Russian Federation. This is an issue to which Mexico
has attached the highest priority for more than five
years now. I should like also, on behalf of our President,
Felipe Calderón Hinojosa, to convey the greetings of our
Secretary of Health, Salomón Chertorivski Woldenberg.
Mexico is no stranger to the problem of road safety
and traffic accidents, which affect nations throughout
the world. The report on the world situation of road
safety issued by the World Health Organization
indicates that 10 countries account for 62 per cent of
the deaths caused by traffic accidents. Unfortunately,
Mexico ranks seventh among those countries. That is
why since 2007 Mexico has been an active member of
the United Nations Road Safety Collaboration, and in
March 2008, at the sixty-second session of the General
Assembly, Mexico acknowledged that each year traffic
accidents account for more than 17,000 deaths in our
country. That type of accident is the number-one cause
of death among children, adolescents and young adults
aged 5 to 35.
In addition, every year traffic accidents cause more
than 350,000 major injuries requiring hospitalization
and more than 1 million injuries requiring medical
attention. Traffic accidents are the second cause of
permanent motor disabilities in our country, with more
than 860,000 Mexicans living with such a disability
for that reason. Traffic accidents are the number-two
factor causing children to be orphaned in the country,
The epidemic is exacerbated by socio-economic and
cultural factors, including the fact that 80 per cent of
our population is urban and that the number of vehicles
has doubled in the past 10 years, reaching 33 million
cars, according to official figures.
More recent estimates indicate that the economic
costs of deaths and injuries caused by traffic accidents
in Mexico total more than $10 billion a year, or about
1.7 per cent of gross domestic product, Given that
situation, in 2007 Mexico established a road safety
action plan that includes multisectoral activities and
follow-up action. Better observation and monitoring
mechanisms were set up, and national and State road

12-299337

A/66/PV.106

safety centres were established. So as to strengthen
police capacity, a national programme was launched to
monitor the consumption of alcohol in the context of
driving.
Infrastructure has been improved through a national
network of road safety inspectors, and educational
programmes have been promoted, with media-based
public-awareness campaigns geared particularly to
children. As a result of the plan, compared with 2006
figures, by 2010 we had managed to significantly reduce
the number of reported road accidents by 9 per cent; the
number of people hospitalized owing to such incidents
by 5.6 per cent; the number of deaths among minors
under age 15 by 16.3 per cent; and the number of people
seriously injured in highway accidents by 14.9 per cent,
among other positive results. While those figures are
encouraging, we acknowledge that there is still much
to be done. That is why we commend the fact that, on
11 May 2011, the United Nations declared the Decade of
Action for Road Safety 2011-2020, and that more than
100 countries participated in that event.
At that time, Mexico held a regional meeting in order
to mark the Decade of Action with the participation of
representatives at the ministerial and vice-ministerial
levels from 29 countries in Latin America and the
Caribbean. More than 1,000 other participants
from various sectors, including the World Bank,
the Inter-American Development Bank, the Andean
Development Corporation, the national automobile
association and more than 60 non-governmental
organizations also participated. On the basis of that
meeting, President Calderón launched the national
strategy for road safety 2011-2020 in the presence of
representatives of five ministries — public safety,
health, communications and transportation, education
and foreign affairs.
The national strategy, which is now law, is in line
with the five pillars for action set out in the United
Nations Global Plan for the Decade of Action. Our
strategy is a milestone when it comes to the ambitious
goals set for our country during the Decade. Those goals
include reducing by 50 per cent by the year 2020 the
number of deaths, injuries and disabilities caused by
road accidents. Achieving that would save more than
60,000 lives and prevent more than 120,000 people
from being disabled and more than 1.5 million serious
injuries. Those benefits would result in a savings of
more than $50 billion, the amount associated with the

8

direct and indirect costs of this pandemic in the next
decade.
These actions have helped launch an unprecedented
social movement in Mexico, involving the Government
sector at the federal, state and local levels, as well
as key actors in the private sector and civil society
organizations. National efforts have included initiatives
such as the eleventh Ibero-American Forum of People
Responsible for Traffic and Road Safety, which was
held in Buenos Aires, Argentina, in March. That
event marked the beginning of the functioning of the
Ibero-American Road Safety Observatory, which will
enable us to follow up the efforts of Ibero-American
countries working to integrate data collection and
standardization mechanisms in this field.
Furthermore, at the thirteenth Summit of Heads
of State and Government of the Tuxtla Mechanism for
Dialogue and Coordination, held in Mérida, Mexico, on
5 December 2011, the leaders of Belize, Colombia, Costa
Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua,
Panama, the Dominican Republic and Mexico agreed
that road safety would be a priority for the region and
instructed their ministers of health and transportation to
set up a road safety programme for Central America.
We have begun the technical work needed to organize
the programme and expect that a regional road safety
initiative will be presented and adopted at the next
Summit of the Tuxtla Mechanism, in October, in the
presence of the 10 Heads of State, in order to benefit the
more than 200 million inhabitants of the 10 countries
that make up the Central Amerian region, potentially
preventing more than 50,000 deaths in the next decade.
While significant progress has been made, there
is still much to be done. Mexico recognizes that
the road-safety crisis is a serious development and
public-health issue, and is committed to implementing
actions that will help promote road safety, as set out in
the Global Plan for the Decade of Action. Mexico would
like to thank the Sultanate of Oman for promoting this
topic. We firmly support draft resolution A/66/L.43,
on improving road safety, which was introduced today
by the delegation of the Russian Federation. Mexico
hopes that its adoption today will demonstrate the firm
commitment and continuing political support needed to
speed up the implementation of the commitments we
have made for the Decade of Action.
Mexico reaffirms that promoting road safety is a
fundamental step in our countries’ ability to achieve

12-29933

A/66/PV.106

the objectives of sustainable development and the
Millennium Development Goals. Through it we may be
able to prevent more than 5 million deaths and 50 million
serious injuries over the next decade, and our peoples
are counting on us to do so.
Mr. Jawhara (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): On behalf of my delegation, I would like to begin
by welcoming the Russian Federation’s commendable
initiative in introducing the draft resolution (A/66/L.43)
on improving global road safety, an enormously
important issue that affects people all over the world. I
would also like to thank the Secretariat and the various
international organizations for their reports.
The Syrian Arab Republic is pleased to join others
in sponsoring the draft resolution, particularly as it
concerns the Decade of Action for Road Safety 20112020, which fosters cooperation between Member
States and the bodies of the United Nations, along with
the participation of non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and the private sector, in ensuring road safety
at the highest levels. We would particularly like to thank
the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific for the Decade’s launch event, held on 17 May
2011.
Syria supports international efforts to make road
safety a reality across the world. We are party to the
relevant United Nations and international conventions
on road and traffic safety. We attach great importance
to road safety, which has such a major impact on human
health. We have created a high-level committee at
the prime-ministerial level with the participation of a
number of NGOs and representatives of civil society.
Together they have outlined a strategy for road safety.
In Syria, the public institutions in charge of roads work
to ensure that international road-safety standards are
implemented, drawing up an annual action plan for
road safety, as well as one for the short term and others
that are more forward-looking in nature. Our highway
department is in the process of improving standards for
traffic circulation and road networks. In addition, those
bodies ensure that road construction and safety conforms
to international standards; they work to improve systems
for collecting road-safety data and management; and
they ensure that standards are in line with road-safety
codes and agreed on with the relevant ministries.
My delegation would like to call attention to a
significant issue, that is, the support that developed
countries, organizations and United Nations funds and

programmes should provide for financing and ensuring
the transfer of technology in order to strengthen and
build developing countries’ capacity to improve road
safety, thus having a positive impact on the development
of those countries and their populations. We feel that
one of the greatest impediments to Governments’ ability
to carry out improvements in road safety, now and in
the future, are the economic limitations imposed on
certain Governments or institutions, which contribute
to difficulties in implementing road-safety plans due to
lack of funding.
I should like to reiterate that my country continues
to be a victim of terrorist attacks perpetrated by
armed groups against public and private institutions.
We would note in that respect roads, which are often
commandeered, and travellers, who are targeted and
who must travel under dangerous conditions. That
in turn leads to accidents, causing casualties among
dozens of innocent people who are killed or injured, and
leading to serious impacts on development and trade,
given that the commercial sector also uses roads.
Mrs. Cizare (Ethiopia): Let me begin by thanking
the President of the General Assembly for convening this
important debate on improving global road safety. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his note (A/66/389)
transmitting the comprehensive report and useful
recommendations on improving and strengthening road
safety.
There is no doubt that road transportation is a very
important tool for growth and the development of nations
regardless of their size, population, industrial capacity
or level of technological development. It enhances the
movement of people, goods and services from one place
to another and is critical for the sustenance of strong
economic and political ties.
It has been acknowledged that the major challenges
facing the road sector across the globe are the menace
of road traffic crashes and the attendant deaths and
injuries sustained by victims. That has been a challenge
facing the entire world, but it is more pronounced in
developing and low-income countries, and, of those,
Ethiopia is one of the worst hit. The death rate is
currently high. Economic losses due to road accidents
are also significant. The reality, however, is that road
traffic crashes and injuries are preventable.
Ethiopia attaches great importance to addressing the
problem of road traffic safety. We are also conscious of
the impact of road accidents on the health and well-being

12-299339

A/66/PV.106

of our people. In that connection, the Ministry of Health
of Ethiopia is developing a three-year strategic plan
for injury prevention and emergency medical services.
In accordance with the World Health Organization
(WHO) global road safety report recommendations
(see A/66/389), Ethiopia has established a national
road safety coordinating office. The office has recently
developed a 10-year strategic national road safety plan
based on the Decade of Action for Road Safety 20112020.
Furthermore, the office organizes various awareness
programmes in collaboration with civil society in order to
develop a culture of road safety in the country. Children’s
traffic safety education has been incorporated into the
basic and extracurricular education syllabus of schools
for grades 1 to 8. Mass media participation in road safety
publicity campaigns and community awareness creation
programmes are at encouraging stages. Road safety
committees have been established at both the federal
and regional levels. A drivers’ licence law and traffic
control law have been revised and enacted. We have also
established a national road safety council.
As a result of such interventions, there has been a
sustained reduction in road accidents. Despite Ethiopia’s
efforts to improve and make our country’s roads safe,
the lack of strong road safety institutions and inadequate
resources still remain a challenge. In that regard, we
would like to emphasize the importance of cooperation
in the area of capacity-building and exchange of best
practices.
In conclusion, we strongly support the call for a
Decade of Action for Road Safety and the adoption of
the draft resolution before us (A/66/L.43).
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): In
accordance with resolution 49/2, of 19 October 1994, I
now call on the observer for the International Federation
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
Mr. Jilani (International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies): Often when we speak about
the global road crash crisis, we talk in big numbers:
1.3 million, the number of people killed in road crashes
each year; 50 million, the number of people injured in
road crashes each year. But these numbers do not tell
the full story of loss. In addition to the sheer scale of
the numbers, these losses affect whole communities, and
they disproportionately claim the lives of young people,
breadwinners and parents.

10

In the time since Member States adopted the
resolution creating the Decade of Action for Road
Safety 2011-2020, in March 2010 (resolution 64/255),
more Governments, civil society organizations and the
private sector are working together to try to prevent
road crash-related deaths and injuries. The International
Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement’s long-term
commitment to road safety, along with the depth and
breadth of its volunteer network, was a key reason that
Red Cross and Red Crescent national societies were
recognized as important partners in resolution 64/255.
Red Cross and Red Crescent volunteers are often
first responders in many emergencies, including road
accidents. As a global network, the International Red
Cross and Red Crescent Movement continues its
commitment to road safety by aligning its efforts with
the Decade of Action goals and taking an active part in
work to prevent road crashes.
In November 2011, at the thirty-first International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, held in
Geneva, national societies reaffirmed their commitment
to road safety as a vital humanitarian concern. In addition,
a number of national societies and the Governments of
Cambodia, Côte d’Ivoire, Madagascar, Monaco, the
Philippines, Romania and Zambia pledged to work
together to improve road safety and to mobilize new
resources to implement evidence-based multisectoral
programmes.
The International Federation of Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) was one of the first
organizations to recognize the road crash crisis as a
global humanitarian emergency with its 1998 World
Disasters Report. The following year, the IFRC agreed
to host the world’s first global multisectoral partnership
dedicated to reducing road crash deaths and injuries in
low- and middle-income countries. It is estimated that
approximately 85 per cent of annual road crash deaths
occur each year in low- and middle-income countries,
costing those countries between 2 and 3 per cent of their
gross national product per year.
Twelve years later, the Global Road Safety
Partnership continues to work with Governments,
the private sector and civil society to implement road
safety programmes. For example, in Hungary, the
Partnership has helped national and local Governments
to develop comprehensive seat belt and pedestrian
safety campaigns. In South Africa, the Partnership has

12-29933

A/66/PV.106

helped in efforts to get children safely to school in areas
of increased risk.
The Partnership also engages in capacity-building.
In the past year alone, the Partnership has been active
on five continents, working to enhance road safety
management systems and facilitate training on speed
management, the enforcement of drunk driving laws
and social marketing, and promoting and enforcing seat
belt and helmet use. In countries as diverse as Poland,
Brazil, China, Viet Nam and Cambodia, the Partnership
is involved in programmes that are yielding quantifiable
reductions in road crash-related deaths and injuries.
In north-eastern Poland, for example, one regional
government working with the Partnership was able to
reduce annual road crash deaths by 49 per cent in the
past six years. In the city of Teresina, in northern Brazil,
local officials believe a new Partnership approach is
a major reason that road crash deaths were reduced
by 22 per cent during the first quarter of 2011, when
compared to the same time period in 2010.
In the humanitarian world, we often refer to crises
that do not receive an adequate response as “forgotten”
or “neglected”. For too long, the road crash crisis has
been a forgotten disaster. Even today, given the scale
of the problem, funding levels remain far too low. One
year into the Decade of Action for Road Safety, we
see there are signs that this is starting to change. That
is great news, but it is just the beginning. Much more
can and must be done. We must remember that unless
our response is rapid, comprehensive and grounded in
multisectoral partnership, the crisis will in fact worsen
as millions of additional people start using motorized
transport each year.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): We
have heard the last speaker on this item. The General
Assembly will now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/66/L.43 entitled “Improving global road safety”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in the
document, the following countries have become sponsors
of draft resolution A/66/L.43: Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the Dominican

Republic, Ecuador, Finland, Honduras, Hungary, India,
Italy, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Malaysia, Malta,
Mongolia, Morocco, Nicaragua, Panama, Poland, Qatar,
San Marino, Spain, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkmenistan, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
and Viet Nam.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): May I
take it that the General Assembly wishes to adopt draft
resolution A/66/L.43?
Draft resolution A/66/L.43 was adopted (resolution
66/260).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 12?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(f) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Conferences
Note by the Secretary-General (A/66/107/Rev.1)
The Acting President: Members will recall that at
its 63rd and 83rd plenary meetings, on 22 November
and 12 December 2011, respectively, the Assembly took
note of the appointment of the Congo, France, Namibia,
the Philippines and the Russian Federation as members
of the Committee on Conferences for a period of three
years beginning on 1 January 2012.
Members will further recall that there remained one
vacant seat from among the Asia-Pacific States to serve
for a period of three years beginning on 1 January 2012,
and two vacant seats from among the Latin American
and Caribbean States for a period of three years, one
beginning on 1 January 2011 and the other beginning
on 1 January 2012. On the recommendation of the Chair
of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States,
the President of the General Assembly has appointed
Uruguay as a member of the Committee on Conferences
for a period beginning on 19 April 2012 and ending on
31 December 2013.
May I take it that the Assembly takes note of that
appointment?

12-2993311

A/66/PV.106

It was so decided.
The Acting President: With regard to the remaining
vacant seats from among the Asia-Pacific States and
the Latin American and Caribbean States, I urge those
regional groups to submit their candidatures as soon as
possible.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (f) of agenda item 115.

12

Programme of work
The Acting President: I wish to inform members
that the consideration of agenda item 19, entitled
“Sustainable development”, to take action on the draft
decision issued as document A/66/L.44, previously
scheduled for this meeting, is postponed to a later date
to be announced.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

12-29933
