S/PV.8771

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8771st meeting

Monday, 19 October 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia/Ms. Evstigneeva . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Aougi
Mr. Brisbane
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Roscoe
Mr. Hunter
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic (S/2020/994)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-27543 (E)
*2027543*

S/PV.8771

The situation in the Central African Republic

provide a strategic framework for the promotion of an
environment that enhances the physical protection of
the population and better enables them to exercise their
rights, especially their political and civic rights.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central
African Republic (S/2020/994)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic; Mr. Smaïl Chergui,
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security;
and Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa,
European External Action Service.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2020/994, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ndiaye.
Mr. Ndiaye (spoke in French): Today, on the eve
of the Council’s deliberations on the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA), I am very pleased to
be introducing the Secretary-General’s report on the
situation in the Central African Republic (S/2020/994).
As members are aware, the presentation of this report is
taking place at a crucial juncture for the men and women
of the Central African Republic, who will be electing
their President and deputies in a little over two months.
This is a unique opportunity to leverage the democratic
gains of the 2015 elections, consolidate constitutional
order and pursue efforts to stabilize the country.
Twenty months after the signing of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic between the Government
and 14 armed groups, noteworthy progress has been
achieved, particularly in the areas of political reform,
the restoration of State authority and transitional
justice. The peace agreement makes it possible to
2/17

19/10/2020

Since 2019, MINUSCA and the international
partners of the Central African Republic have
supported the efforts of stakeholders to draft an
electoral code. Today the country has a computerized
electoral roster, which was set up despite the health
crisis and a number of technical, operational and
security challenges. MINUSCA continues to work to
ensure that all segments of Central African Republic
society can participate in the elections in peace and a
calm environment. In that spirit, we encourage refugee
participation in the electoral process.
While taking note of the challenges that the
Government faces, we continue to encourage the
national authorities and neighbouring countries to
pursue, with the help of the international community,
efforts to create conditions conducive to the voluntary
and dignified return of refugees and to ensure their full
participation in the socioeconomic and political life of
the country.
To date, the National Electoral Authority has an
electoral roster of some 1,859,890 Central African
Republic eligible voters in 16 prefectures around the
country and 13 countries in the diaspora. I am pleased
that the registration of women has reached 46 per cent.
With the publication of the 14 October electoral list
and the convening of the electoral body scheduled for
28 October, the Central African Republic is definitely
on its way to holding successful elections, which
requires the commitment of all actors and respect
for the authority of the Constitutional Court, the sole
arbiter of the elections.
We therefore urge all political actors, the media and
other opinion leaders to refrain from disinformation
campaigns and messages of stigmatization, which
MINUSCA will document and present to the Council.
Through concerted and coordinated efforts with the
international community, MINUSCA is determined to
facilitate three important elections. I invite the States
Members of the United Nations to help the Central
African Republic fill the financial gap. We are still short
$4 million for the basket fund managed by the United
Nations Development Programme for the presidential
and legislative elections, and some $17.7 million for the
20-27543

19/10/2020

The situation in the Central African Republic

elections as a whole, including local elections planned
for 2021.
Local elections will be critical for the development
of local governance and the effective restoration of State
authority, as well as the advent of decentralization and
the restoration of the social contract between the State
and the people it governs. They will make it possible for
us to set in motion a gradual transfer of responsibilities
back to the State.
The political situation remains tense. To date, there
are 16 candidates for the presidency, including three
women and the incumbent. The first electoral round is
planned for 27 December. Some candidates have already
cast doubt on the viability of the peace agreement and
are even proposing to renegotiate it if elected. The
main opposition coalition recently took over regional
mechanisms in order to contest the legality of legislative
reform adopting exemption provisions with respect to
the electoral code.
However, those tensions have not jeopardized the
possibility of holding elections in accordance with
constitutional timelines. We must do more to encourage
all candidates to adhere to a code of conduct to ensure
peaceful elections and a peaceful electoral campaign in
order to build confidence among all political actors and
preserve the peace agreement.
I call on stakeholders to see the upcoming elections
as an opportunity to consolidate the democratic
process and politically transform the current crisis
in the country with a view to reaching sustainable
solutions. Through my good offices, I continue to
encourage political dialogue in support of creating
an environment conducive to the holding of inclusive,
free, fair, transparent, credible and peaceful elections
by engaging the international community, including
the group of five plus, and Central African actors in
Bangui. The coordinated and continuous support of
international partners to stakeholders will be key to the
success of the presidential and legislative elections.
The road to peace is slow and winding. Through a
robust and deterrent posture, MINUSCA has been able
to use force to open up a space for dialogue, which,
together with the guarantors of the peace agreement,
namely, the African Union and the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), has
enabled voter registration to be brought back to life in the
north-western region of the country. While significant,
the progress in disarmament, demobilization and

S/PV. 8771

reintegration, with 2,094 ex-combatants having been
disarmed and demobilized, the establishment of two
joint special security units, comprising 562 elements,
in the west, and the redeployment of defence and
security forces are reassuring in that they constitute
the first steps towards the dissolution of armed groups,
in accordance with the requirements of the peace
agreement. We will need to accelerate the pace so as to
better maximize the positive impact on the peace and
security of the country.
MINUSCA continues to support the Government
in implementing its strategy for the restoration of State
authority, including by facilitating the deployment of
local authorities and building their capacity. Recently,
the presence these local authorities has enabled them to
expand their role in the prevention of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) and the resolution of local
conflicts, including those related to transhumance. The
Mission’s support in sequencing this deployment makes
it possible to help with the gradual and sustainable
return of local authorities so that they may serve the
populations and provide the basic social services to
which these populations are legitimately entitled.
I also welcome the establishment of the new
European Union Advisory Mission in the Central
African Republic to support the country’s security
sector reform, which will strengthen the work of
MINUSCA and such bilateral partners as France,
Russia, the United States and China. We must encourage
the Central African Government and all security sector
reform partners to invest more and together in the
democratic control and governance of the defence and
security forces, which are factors of national cohesion.
We must continue to support the fight against
impunity and for justice reform, the deployment of the
criminal justice chain, the strengthening of judicial
services and the demilitarization of the penitentiary
system. In this regard, we must continue to provide
technical and financial support to the Special Criminal
Court. The Government’s willingness to promote
transitional justice also involves the operationalization
of the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Reconciliation, which plays a critical role in national
reconciliation by giving concrete expression to the
legitimate aspiration of victims for justice, truth
and reparation.
The predominance of elections and political
activities should not overshadow the humanitarian

20-275433/17

S/PV.8771

The situation in the Central African Republic

emergency in the country, including the COVID-19
pandemic, which has exacerbated the Central African
Republic’s socioeconomic vulnerabilities. The aim in
this regard is to take into account the growing needs of
the population and to provide the necessary support to
humanitarian partners who provide vital assistance to
more than 1.3 million people every month.
I condemn in the strongest possible terms attacks
against humanitarian workers, which are all the more
unacceptable as they have had the effect of aggravating
the situation of people in need. In view of the increase
in such attacks, MINUSCA will continue to take all
measures necessary to protect not only civilians but
also civilian infrastructure and humanitarian workers.
This is essential to promote the creation of conditions
conducive to unhindered access to humanitarian
assistance, including in the most remote areas. I appeal
to the generosity of donors to continue funding the
2020 humanitarian response plan.
We must allow the people to express themselves
through elections. Despite the fragility in some areas
and the security situation, encouraging results have been
achieved, thanks, inter alia, to the military operation
launched by MINUSCA. One peacekeeper lost his life on
13 July. This crime will not go unpunished and will have
to be investigated by the Central African justice system
as soon as possible. I take this opportunity to pay the
highest tribute to the peacekeepers who have lost their
lives in the service of peace. Needs remain immense
in the face of the security challenge, particularly in
dealing with the danger of newly discovered landmines,
particularly in the west of the country. With the signing
of the integrated election security plan by the Prime
Minister on 2 October, the Government and MINUSCA
have adopted a harmonized approach to securing the
electoral process throughout the country.
I wish to commend the foresight of the Security
Council in giving MINUSCA a robust electoral mandate
and adequate resources that will enable us to effectively
assist in the presidential and legislative elections. It is
now more than recommended that this same mandate
be extended to the local elections, which have not
been held in the Central African Republic since 1988.
They are indispensable for grassroots democracy, local
governance and the deployment of local authorities.
Despite the negative impact of the pandemic on our
operations, MINUSCA has continued to implement its
mandate. We currently have only four active cases in
4/17

19/10/2020

the Mission — two civilian and two military — and
evolving measures have been put in place to protect
personnel and avoid transmission within our premises
or to the population. On 30 September, all our
personnel returned to duty. Indeed, MINUSCA is
able to continue supporting the authorities in the fight
against COVID-19, in particular through logistical and
material assistance. Faced with the health crisis, we
have also adapted the way we conduct our operation
across the country.
I should like to conclude by thanking the President
of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Faustin Archange
Touadera, the Prime Minister and all members
of the Government for their efforts towards the
implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. I
commend the contribution of the technical and financial
partners of the Central African Republic. I welcome
the high-quality work carried out by the group of five
plus, the consultative framework that brings together,
in addition to the United Nations, the United States,
France, Russia, the European Union, the African Union
and the World Bank.
The subregion’s support has proven its effectiveness
and complementarity with the Mission’s actions. The
forthcoming visit to the Central African Republic, from
27 to 30 October, of the African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security, Mr. Smaïl Chergui; the ECCAS
Chair, Mr. Gilberto da Piedade Veríssimo; and the
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, JeanPierre Lacroix, who invited the European Union to
join the visit, is eagerly awaited. I would also like to
take this opportunity to particularly thank the African
Union and ECCAS for the continuous and assiduous
monitoring of the implementation of the political
agreement and for the excellent cooperation between
these two institutions and the United Nations.
As I have said so many times, this imminent visit is
welcome and very timely and will, I am sure, contribute
to raising the awareness of all political and social
actors of the need to create an environment of peace
and serenity conducive to the smooth conduct of the
presidential and legislative elections. I know that the
people of the Central African Republic can, as in the
past, count on the renewed unanimous support of the
Security Council.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Ndiaye for his briefing.
20-27543

19/10/2020

The situation in the Central African Republic

I now give the floor to Mr. Chergui.
Mr. Chergui (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for having scheduled this meeting
to discuss a country that is dear to us, the Central
African Republic.
As we are holding this meeting, the Central African
Republic is entering a decisive phase for peace, stability
and reconciliation, for which the mobilization of the
international community has been remarkable. This
was recently expressed during the virtual high-level
ministerial meeting held on 1 October on the Central
African Republic, on the margins of the seventy-fifth
regular session of the General Assembly.
There have been some promising developments, and
we hope that the people of the Central African Republic
can take up the challenge of holding elections within
the constitutional timelines and while implementing
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic.
The progress in preparing for the elections is
also significant. For example, since the adoption, on
23 September, of the law amending and complementing
the new provisions of the electoral code, the National
Electoral Authority has taken advantage of the additional
time to reach voters on the ground and throughout the
diaspora within a very limited time frame. We welcome
the publication by the Authority of the electoral lists.
Almost 2 million voters, 97 per cent of the votingage population, have already been registered. It can be
said that the context seems favourable to the convening
of the elections by 28 October by the Head of State, in
accordance with the amending law.
Furthermore, we take note of the statement by the
Government on the insurmountable obstacles facing
refugees in terms of this election. We owe them an
explanation for this, and attention must be given to the
difficult circumstances that they face until they are able
to return to their country.
With regard to the implementation of the political
agreement, the African Union welcomes the joint
mission organized by the facilitators and guarantors
on 5 October in the north-west of the country. That
mission helped to ease tensions in that part of the
country and in the resumption of the suspended
registration in the north-western communes, which
will contribute to a more conducive environment for
the holding of elections, in particular the deployment

S/PV. 8771

of electoral operations in that area, to the benefit of the
local population.
The African Union in particular welcomes the
release of the two police officers who were taken hostage
by the Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation movement
and calls for the immediate and unconditional release
of the remaining hostage, who is still detained. The
African Union also expects that the armed groups will
continue to adopt a positive attitude to avert violence
and tensions, because all efforts must be aimed more
than ever towards implementing the peace agreement.
We have noted a significant decrease in the
violence following the measures taken by MINUSCA
and the Central African Armed Forces and the effective
deployment of all State authorities across the national
territory, with the support of the African Union and the
Economic Community of Central African States.
I also take this opportunity to welcome the
initiative of the Government to adopt on 2 October,
in coordination with the Armed Forces of the Central
African Republic, MINUSCA and the internal security
forces, a security plan for the elections to ensure they
are held peacefully and on schedule. As the elections
approach, members of the opposition party and certain
civil-society organizations have complained about
a lack of consultation on subjects of concern that
continue to fuel debate and disagreement, in particular
refugee voting, the electoral timetable and the uptake
of their functions by incoming members of the National
Electoral Authority.
I would like to echo the words of my dear brother
Mankeur and call on all the people of the Central African
Republic to distance themselves from any appeal that
risks jeopardizing the climate of peace, in particular,
to steer clear of fake news and rumours; and to trust
the Government and the international community,
which is supporting the country during this extremely
important period.
The African Union welcomes the latest
developments on these issues, which yielded positive
outcomes in building trust between the parties in
the Central African Republic with the appointment
on 14 October of 11 new members of the National
Electoral Authority, who will take up their functions on
19 October. The African Union urges the Government
and the Authority to expedite this process.

20-275435/17

S/PV.8771

The situation in the Central African Republic

In that regard, we welcome the dialogue launched
by President Faustin Archange Touadera and the
efforts of the political class and civil society in the
Central African Republic to maintain an ongoing
dialogue, in accordance with the desire expressed by
the Government to work with all stakeholders and with
the support of the international community to maintain
a climate of peace.
The holding of elections in accordance with the
constitutional timelines and the implementation of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic must be a top priority for
the Government and all political actors in the country
since they are essential preconditions for the success
of the national recovery and peacebuilding plan for the
Central African Republic, which must be focused on
social-impact projects.
With regard to what has been said about
strengthening humanitarian assistance for those
internally displaced by conflict and, now, the victims
of the coronavirus disease pandemic, I believe that they
deserve the strongest show of increased solidarity from
the members of the Security Council.
We would also like to commend those countries of
the subregion that have, either bilaterally or through
ECCAS, continued to provide support for lasting peace
and stability in the Central African Republic. I also
welcome the cooperation among various international
organizations — the United Nations, the African Union,
ECCAS and the European Union — and with other
bilateral partners, which has made it possible to achieve
progress through joint efforts in seeking a lasting
solution to the crisis in the Central African Republic.
I welcome the fact that in just a few days, I will meet
once again in the Central African Republic with my
friend Jean-Pierre Lacroix; the President of the ECCAS
Commission; and, potentially, the Vice-President of the
European Commission to support the Government and
other Central African Republican stakeholders to assist
the country on its path towards peace and development.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Chergui for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Vervaeke.
Mr. Vervaeke: I am honoured to brief this meeting
on behalf of the European Union (EU) at such a critical
time for the future of democracy and peace in the
Central African Republic. The upcoming elections
6/17

19/10/2020

provide a unique opportunity to firmly entrench the
country on its democratic path. The past months have
seen increased political tensions over the process. That
was to be expected. However, it reminds us that only a
transparent, credible, peaceful and inclusive electoral
process that favours dialogue and consensus, respects
the constitutional order and ensures acceptable quality
standards can guarantee its credibility and set the basis
for a brighter future for the people.
The next steps will be even more crucial following
the recent modification of the electoral law. As has been
said by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, we continue to encourage the participation of
refugees in that process.
As the Council knows, the European Union is
providing more than half the budget for the preparations
of the elections, as well as expertise to strengthen the
capacity of Central African institutions. All political
stakeholders — the majority, the opposition and civil
society — should act responsibly, and the authorities
should double their efforts to ensure a credible electoral
process in a constructive and open spirit and in close
coordination with its partners and donors.
In such a febrile context, we witness disinformation
campaigns in the media with concern. Government
and political actors should do everything to ensure
the transparency of the media. We are ready to work
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) to document such campaigns.
I now turn to the peace and reconciliation process.
Since the signature of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
important progress has been made. But we have also
seen continued violations perpetrated by some armed
groups. We welcome MINUSCA’s actions in that
respect. Dialogue among parties, the re-engagement
of both sides — the Government and the armed
groups — and the revitalization of the agreement, in
particular relaunching the follow-up mechanisms, seem
more necessary than ever. The agreement needs new
impetus, but without compromising on its message — no
impunity, meaning that those that violate it should pay
the price. In that regard, we call on the guarantors, as
well as the facilitators and the region, to redouble their
efforts in support of the effective implementation and
respect for the agreement.
20-27543

19/10/2020

The situation in the Central African Republic

The EU will continue to be one of the strongest
supporters of the Central African authorities and
population in their efforts towards peace, reconciliation,
democracy and recovery. To that end, we are mobilizing
all our efforts — political, humanitarian, cooperation
development, security and crisis management,
including, as was mentioned, through a new civilian
Common Security and Defence Policy mission to
contribute to security sector reform. All such efforts are
to accompany the Central African Republic on the path
of State-building, the rule of law and the realization
of its economic opportunities — a path where civil
society, women and young people need to be given a
greater role.
In all those efforts, we are more than ever
committed to closely cooperating with the United
Nations, the African Union and the Economic
Community of Central African States, as well as all
partners involved, including in particular neighbours of
the Central African Republic. On this occasion, I would
like to pay tribute to the work of MINUSCA and of
its leadership. The EU supports the recommendations
of the Secretary-General to extend the MINUSCA
mandate for another year.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Vervaeke for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members
wishing to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Representative Mr. Ndiaye, Mr. Chergui and
Mr. Vervaeke for their briefings.
The Central African Republic still faces significant
challenges. The humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate, with food insecurity but also the coronavirus
disease pandemic, measles and malaria in particular.
Violations of human rights and children’s rights persist
at alarming levels. Sexual and gender-based violence
and violence against civilians, the security and defence
forces and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) are unacceptable. France
strongly condemns such violations and calls for the
perpetrators to be prosecuted and tried.
We will not stop reiterating that respect for
international humanitarian law is binding on all parties.
Attacks on humanitarian and medical personnel must
cease and humanitarian access must be guaranteed.

S/PV. 8771

France once again stresses the need to ensure an
inclusive, transparent and peaceful electoral process,
in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.
The international partners clearly recalled such
expectations at the meeting on 1 October, co-chaired
by the Central African Republic, the African Union and
the Economic Community of Central African States,
in which the French Minister for Europe and Foreign
Affairs, Jean-Yves Le Drian, participated together with
the Secretary-General.
Despite the reform of the electoral code, which
has shortened certain statutory timelines, preparations
for the elections have been delayed, which is likely to
undermine the standard of the entire process and its
credibility and create tensions. Given that situation,
dialogue among the various stakeholders is essential
so as not to further fuel tensions in the country. The
smooth conduct of the electoral process is currently the
most urgent matter, but that must not cause us to lose
sight of the long-term issues at stake, in particular the
implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
Violations of the agreement are jeopardizing
national reconciliation. The Security Council has
demonstrated its resolve by sanctioning the leader
of one of the armed groups that did not respect its
commitments. We encourage all parties to redouble
their efforts, in particular with regard to the deployment
of joint security units, which will have an important
role to play in protecting all Central Africans. Finally,
support for the redeployment and professionalization
of the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic
and the formation of a garrison army must remain a
fundamental objective of the international community’s
support for the Central African authorities.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the United
Nations, in particular the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General; the African Union; and the
Economic Community of Central African States,
for their support for the Central African Republic.
Their joint visit, which is planned for the end of the
month, will be an important step in demonstrating
that the mobilization in support of the Central African
Republic remains strong at a pivotal moment in spite of
the pandemic.
It is in that same spirit that France will submit a
draft resolution to renew the mandate of MINUSCA,
which expires on 15 November.

20-275437/17

S/PV.8771

The situation in the Central African Republic

19/10/2020

Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, allow me
to thank the briefers, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Mankeur Ndiaye, Head of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA);
Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa at
the European External Action Service; and later on,
hopefully, when technology permits, Ambassador
Smaïl Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace
and Security. Following the United Nations high-level
meeting earlier this month, their briefings are indeed
crucial, even more so as we approach the mandate
renewal of MINUSCA and the upcoming election
in December.

step up and follow up their cries with real and tangible
assistance to the country.

Allow me to focus my comments on three points.

Indonesia will work together with Council
members and other relevant stakeholders in the renewal
of MINUSCA’s mandate. We should maintain the
Security Council’s unity in supporting the people of
the Central African Republic and help them face the
insurmountable obstacles mentioned by President
Touadera at the high-level meeting.

First, we need to ensure peace and stability in
the Central African Republic during and beyond the
elections. We welcome the Government’s efforts to
maintain the electoral deadline of 27 December and
recognize its various challenges. The democratic process
is anything but easy. It is a vast logistical undertaking
that requires thorough planning to anticipate all
challenges, especially amid the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and its aftermath.
We continue to call on all stakeholders to continue
to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Central African Republic and provide ample space
and sufficient trust for democracy to take place in the
Central African Republic.
Beyond the elections, the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, signed in Bangui, remains the primary
framework for sustaining peace in the country.
National ownership is the key to success. The presence
and ability of the Government to enforce it are indeed
crucial. Technical and financial assistance is needed.
Secondly, we should never forget our commitment
to saving the people of the Central African Republic.
The most recent report (S/2020/994) shows that
approximately 2.6 million people require humanitarian
assistance; more than 2.3 million people are foodinsecure; intercommunal tensions and attacks against
civilians continue to impair the humanitarian situation;
and the COVID-19 pandemic has worsened the
country’s socioeconomic conditions. On top of that,
attacks towards humanitarian workers persist. We call
on partners and those who remain doubtful about peace
being established in the Central African Republic to
8/17

Thirdly, the role of MINUSCA is more important
than ever. MINUSCA will be pertinent in creating an
environment conducive to a peaceful electoral process.
For MINUSCA to successfully carry out its mandate,
attacks against it must stop. As the largest personnel
contributor to MINUSCA in the Council, Indonesia
will continue to make the safety, health and security
of peacekeepers its top priority. At the same time,
we reiterate our commitment to the professionalism
of peacekeeping and to protecting civilians through
community engagements.

As an elected member of the Security Council,
Indonesia has followed closely the progress in the
Central African Republic, including the Bangui
peace agreement of February 2019. In the past two
years, Indonesia has supported the establishment of
a benchmark on the lifting of the arms embargo, as
well as the three Council resolutions that ease the
embargo in the Central African Republic. We also
continue to support MINUSCA inside and outside the
Council through our peacekeeping engagements and
contribution. Indonesia is committed as a true partner
for peace for the Central African Republic even beyond
its time in the Council.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I wish to thank you,
Sir, for convening today’s meeting. I would also
like to express my gratitude to the briefers for their
valuable insights.
In particular, I would like to commend the actions
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), which has shown great determination
in implementing its mandate, despite the coronavirus
disease pandemic. I was particularly impressed to
hear that thanks to the efforts of MINUSCA, voter
registration has taken place in several areas where it
would have otherwise been obstructed by armed groups.
The upcoming elections will be a crucial opportunity
20-27543

19/10/2020

The situation in the Central African Republic

to consolidate the country’s democratic foundations for
lasting peace.
The future Government of the Central African
Republic will meet with high expectations from its
people. Moreover, as half of all registered voters are
women, it should be evident that the country can only
benefit from the full and meaningful participation of
women in political and peace processes.
Next, I would like to commend the work done to
extend State authority and services in the country. The
expansion of national disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration operations and the appointment of
new judges and magistrates are encouraging steps, as
is the promulgation of the child-protection code, which
criminalizes the recruitment and use of children by
armed forces. Furthermore, we look forward to the
operationalization of the Commission on Truth, Justice,
Reparation and Reconciliation.
Alongside many positive developments, violence
and the abuse of human rights in the Central African
Republic continue. Distressingly, there has been a
marked increase in attacks against humanitarian
aid providers. Attacks on civilians and the abuse of
human rights are direct violations of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic and, as such, are unacceptable. The
vast majority of these attacks have been attributed to
signatory armed groups, in particular the Mouvement
patriotique pour la Centrafrique and Retour, réclamation
et réhabilitation. In that regard, we continue to support
the call of the Secretary-General to take a firm and
unequivocal stance regarding the application of
sanctions under article 35 of the agreement. I would
like to further recall that attacks against United Nations
peacekeepers may amount to a war crime.
I would like to end my statement by stressing
what many have already expressed here today: full
implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic
is the only path towards lasting peace in the Central
African Republic.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): It is my
honour to make this statement on behalf of the Niger,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa and
Tunisia (A3+1). We would like to thank Mr. Mankeur
Ndiaye, Mr. Smaïl Chergui and Mr. Koen Vervaeke for
their briefings.

S/PV. 8771

The year 2020 represents a crucially important
stage for the people of the Central African Republic,
who will, in the general elections to be held in
December after several years of crisis, exercise their
right to choose their own leaders. The holding of the
elections will constitute a major step towards the
normalization of the security situation in the country
and, in turn, contribute to positive momentum in the
subregion. We therefore commend the efforts of the
authorities of the Central African Republic, with the
assistance of partners, in making progress in restoring
State authority in some areas and in professionalizing
and redeploying the security apparatus, territorial
administration and judicial institutions, despite the
significant difficulties the ground.
We commend the efforts deployed through the
National Electoral Authority in registering a large
number of voters, despite the many technical and
logistical challenges, as well as the difficulty in
reaching certain areas due to insecurity. We note that
recent revisions to the electoral code do not allow for
the registration of a considerable number of persons
of voting age because they have been displaced to
neighbouring countries.
The A3+1 welcomes the efforts of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA),
the United Nations Development Programme and UNWomen in helping to register women to voters and
encouraging their full participation in the democratic
process, as voters and candidates alike. Those efforts
will undoubtedly help to attain the goal of a minimum of
30 per cent of elected offices being occupied by women.
In the light of those positive developments, it is
vital that all political actors and armed groups refrain
from hampering in any way the electoral process that is
under way. We thus call on them to seize the opportunity
presented by the reviving of the consultative framework
in order to overcome any difficulties through dialogue
and consensus.
We welcome the support of the United Nations
Development Programme for the basket fund and
the electoral assistance projects, and we encourage
all partners of the Central African Republic and the
international community to support the electoral
process in order to avoid any possible problem in terms
of the process or of respect for constitutional timelines.

20-275439/17

S/PV.8771

The situation in the Central African Republic

We note with regret that the security situation
remains precarious in the north-eastern part of the
country, with ongoing attacks against civilians,
peacekeepers and clashes among armed groups. We
remain convinced that inclusive dialogue among the
people of the Central African Republic is key in order
to put an end to the crisis. We welcome also in that
respect the initiatives undertaken by the authorities of
the Central African Republic aimed at promoting peace
and reconciliation at the local level, in cooperation with
MINUSCA.
We join the Secretary-General’s call on armed
groups to halt their expansionist activities and to join
the democratic process under way through mediation
and reconciliation, and we also call for the speeding up
of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process as a whole as well as security-sector reform.
given the need to quickly fill the strategic gaps in the
implementation of special mixed units.
The A3+1 commend the authorization by the
African Union’s Peace and Security Council of the
deployment of the African Union military observation
mission in Central African Republic in July. Those
initiatives will no doubt bolster the country’s security
capacity.
We commend also the efforts of humanitarian
workers, especially in helping women and children with
a view to alleviating the inequalities exacerbated by the
coronavirus disease crisis and to bringing a measure of
comfort to that vulnerable segment. We call upon the
donor community to provide greater support for their
efforts in order to fill the $272.4 million funding gap in
the humanitarian response plan.
We commend the efforts of the African Union and
the Economic Community of Central African States, in
their capacity as guarantors of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, in the quest for a way out of the crisis, and
we call on non-signatory armed groups to commit to
the political process as a whole and cease their acts of
violence and intimidation throughout the territory.
We welcome also the efforts undertaken by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of MINUSCA for his good offices and his
support for the process of reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, and we support MINUSCA’s ongoing
presence in the country through the renewal of its
mandate for an additional year.
10/17

19/10/2020

In conclusion, we welcome the holding on 1 October
of the high- level meeting on the Central African
Republic and echo the joint call on actors to engage
in a political dialogue geared at credible and peaceful
elections, with respect for constitutional timelines, and
we reiterate our support for the Government and the
people of Central African Republic in their quest to
achieve peace and stability.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): I should like at the outset to thank
the briefers for the information that they have shared
with us.
The Dominican Republic welcomes the progress
made in preparations for the general elections scheduled
for 27 December, and we hope that the tensions and
mistrust regarding the electoral calendar can be
overcome. Also, despite the fact that approval of several
draft laws by the National Assembly, in particular the
revised electoral code, represent a positive sign, we
regret that the draft did not include provisions that
would have allowed refugees from the Central African
Republic in neighbouring countries to vote.
We also believe that the inclusion of young
people, women and refugees represents the basis
for consolidating democracy in the Central African
Republic. The upcoming elections represent a major
opportunity to build peace, and that is why it is
important to redouble efforts to create an environment
conducive to the holding of peaceful, transparent, just
and inclusive elections.
We welcome the initiatives of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), the United
Nations Development Programme and UN-Women to
encourage the participation of women as both voters
and candidates in the electoral process. We should like
also to see young people be given opportunities for
necessary representation in order for them to actively
and equitable participate in the process. On the other
hand, we deplore the fact that in spite of the efforts
undertaken to improve strategic communication,
disinformation campaigns in the media aimed at
MINUSCA have continued.
As we have stated on previous occasions, in order
to consolidate peace in the country, it is important to
continue monitoring and complying with the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic. On this point, we commend the
20-27543

19/10/2020

The situation in the Central African Republic

efforts of Special Representative Ndiaye, along with
national stakeholders and international partners, to
promote a constructive and inclusive political dialogue
in order to preserve the agreement.
We also commend the enactment of the four
laws adopted by the National Assembly, in line with
the commitments made by the Government in the
framework of the Political Agreement, as well as the
promulgation of the two-part decentralization law,
which establishes the legal framework for the local
elections scheduled for the end of 2021.
We should like to express our concern at the
security situation in the Central African Republic,
where signatory armed groups continued to perpetrate
acts of violence against civilians, humanitarian workers
and peacekeeping personnel. Those responsible for
such acts must be brought to justice, and civilians must
be protected.
The humanitarian situation in the Central African
Republic is also a source of considerable concern.
Currently more than half of the population requires
humanitarian assistance, and humanitarian activities
continue to be inadequately funded. It is necessary
to support the Government of the Central African
Republic by contributing to the humanitarian response
plan in order to help the most vulnerable.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has
exacerbated the vulnerabilities caused by the existing
crisis in the country. In that respect, I encourage
donor countries to increase their official development
assistance and support for financial and innovative
debt-relief programmes for the countries most affected
by the pandemic and its devastating consequences.
Likewise, we should like to make an appeal so that
a vaccine and other health technologies needed to tackle
COVID-19 are made available in an equitable manner
and that their global distribution is ensured. To that
end, the role of the World Health Organization, donor
countries and the private sector is vital and should be
based on the principles of cooperation, solidarity and
justice.
To conclude, we should like to acknowledge the
work done by MINUSCA, the international community
and the guarantors of the peace and reconciliation
agreement for their efforts in seeking a lasting and
sustainable peace in the Central African Republic.

S/PV. 8771

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I should like first to
thank all the briefers.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) has Germany’s full support and, as my
Indonesian colleague said in his intervention, it is more
important than ever, and we look forward to the renewal
of its mandate.
We very much regret, among other things, what
the Ambassador of the Dominican Republic just
mentioned — that is, the disinformation campaign
against MINUSCA. We must fight that.
The elections are the most important date, as the
three African States members of the Security Council,
namely, the Niger, Tunisia and South Africa, as well as
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, have said. I should
like to reiterate one point that was made by several
other speakers, including the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General: the right of the refugee
communities abroad to participate in the elections.
Their rights must be respected.
I also welcome the fact that half of registered
voters are women. We hope that women are also elected
to serve on legislative bodies. The Central African
Republic has had a woman president before. We would
welcome another female president, as well as female and
youth representatives elected to leadership positions in
the Central African Republic.
After the election, we need to return to the
implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
That issue needs to remain at the top of the agenda, as
Mr. Vervaeke said today. We need to relaunch, revitalize
and give new impetus to the peace agreement. At the
same time, we must ensure that those who have violated
the peace agreement are held responsible.
On financial support, the European Union, as we
learned, provides half of the funds for the electoral
budget. The humanitarian response plan is very
important. Germany is the second-largest donor
of humanitarian aid, and we also participate in the
United Nations Development Programme basket fund
mentioned by Special Representative Ndiaye. We call
on everyone to contribute to those funds, including
actors that provide the Central African Republic with
a great deal of arms.

20-2754311/17

S/PV.8771

The situation in the Central African Republic

In addition, we believe that it is very important
to strengthen the Special Criminal Court in order to
combat impunity for human rights and other violations,
including sexual violence. As in all countries, there can
be no reconciliation in the Central African Republic if
we do not fight impunity.
Finally, we join our French colleague and others in
condemning the attacks on the Blue Helmets and other
humanitarian workers. As the Special Representative
confirmed, if we are to create a favourable environment
for humanitarian relief, MINUSCA needs to protect
humanitarian workers.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset to thank the briefers for their
illuminating presentations.
Today, I would like to make three points.
First, with regard to the political situation and
the elections, Belgium welcomes the measures taken
to put the country on the path to elections, obstacles
notwithstanding. Despite the delays, the timetable
remains under control. We call on all actors concerned
to refrain from any action or statement that could
undermine this democratic exercise. Only a peaceful,
transparent and inclusive process can guarantee the
credibility of the elections. We welcome the almost
equal representation of men and women on the
registered voter lists. The European Union has made
available significant financial assistance to support the
electoral process.
But elections are only one step in the long-term
goal of stabilizing the Central African Republic. The
February 2019 Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic is the
only way to anchor peace. Its implementation will also
be the responsibility of the future Government. The
people of Central Africa do not want more violence.
The country’s armed groups are signatories to the
peace agreement and must honour their commitments.
Perpetrators of violence must be brought to justice.
Belgium is particularly concerned about violations
involving children, and supports the work of Special
Representative Gamba de Potgieter and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
in that regard. Armed groups must also cease their
predatory activities. There will be consequences for
serious violations of the agreement.
12/17

19/10/2020

There are some challenges to the implementation
of the agreement. However, we welcome the ongoing
meetings of the follow-up mechanisms for the agreement,
which are taking place via video-teleconference due
to the pandemic. We also see encouraging progress
in the redeployment of State authority, as well as in
legislative work.
Secondly, I would like to touch upon the fate of the
people of the Central African Republic, who need peace
and want to live in dignity and prosperity. The statistics
remain alarming. More than half of the population is
in need of humanitarian aid and more than 1 million
people are displaced in the Central African Republic
or in neighbouring countries. By raising the cost of
living, the pandemic has exacerbated the situation.
School closures are further exposing children to the
risk of recruitment by armed groups. Moreover, it is
unacceptable for humanitarian workers to so often be
victims of violence and theft.
The people of the Central African Republic also
thirst for justice. In that regard, Belgium supports the
work of the Special Criminal Court and is prepared
to second a Belgian magistrate. We also welcome
the signing of decrees to launch the establishment
of the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Reconciliation.
Thirdly, I note that MINUSCA is also facing
significant challenges. The incidents of recent months
demonstrate that its mandate to protect civilians is still
relevant. Belgium therefore remains in favour of a robust
mandate. MINUSCA’s good offices and promotion of the
peace process also play a crucial role in supporting the
restoration of State authority and security sector reform.
In that regard, good coordination among the country’s
partners is a critical factor. In our view, MINUSCA can
help coordinate those efforts. Nevertheless, Belgium
regrets the current disinformation campaign against
MINUSCA in the country.
In the discussion on MINUSCA’s mandate, we must
defend the interests of the people of the Central African
Republic. Belgium’s support is also part of a broader
European and United Nations effort, and Belgium will
continue to actively support the people of the Central
African Republic even after it no longer sits on the
Security Council.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): I thank our briefers
for their valuable insights. I was struck today, as ever,
20-27543

19/10/2020

The situation in the Central African Republic

by the consensus in their contributions, in terms of both
their analyses and their prescriptions.
I wish to begin by paying tribute to the dedication
and courage of all the men and women serving in
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) and to the memory of all those who have
made the ultimate sacrifice. We condemn, in particular,
the deadly attacks against MINUSCA personnel in July,
just as we condemn all attacks on all peacekeepers. I
also reiterate our solidarity with the Government and
the people of the Central African Republic in their
pursuit of peace, stability and development.
As we have said time and again, the 2019 Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic is the only viable framework for
sustainable peace in the Central African Republic. The
agreement must be protected, including through the
Council’s continued imposition of sanctions against
violators. We call on all armed groups to end their
violence against civilians. In particular, we condemn
the scale of conflict-related sexual violence against
women and girls. Impunity for sexual assault and all
human rights abuses must end.
Elections in the Central African Republic later
this year offer a significant opportunity to consolidate
constitutional order. All stakeholders have a role to play
in supporting peaceful, inclusive and free elections.
While we welcome the preparations made to hold
elections on time in December, we regret that provisions
have not been made to ensure the participation of
all the people of the Central African Republic. All
citizens, including internally displaced persons and
refugees, deserve the right to be heard in both these
and subsequent elections, .
We are trying to help. As announced by the United
Kingdom’s Minister for Africa at the SecretaryGeneral’s recent high-level event, the United Kingdom
is contributing well over half a million dollars to the
United Nations Development Programme elections
fund to promote the participation of women, youth and
underrepresented groups. We urge other partners to
contribute to that fund.
As others have said today, the scale of the
humanitarian crisis in the Central African Republic
underlines just how vital it is that all stakeholders
fulfil their responsibilities in the coming months. As
we heard again today, humanitarian needs have been

S/PV. 8771

exacerbated by coronavirus disease, with more than
half the population now facing food insecurity. This
year, the United Kingdom has committed approximately
$35 million to the humanitarian effort in the Central
African Republic, including extra funding towards
famine prevention and Ebola preparedness. We will
continue to play our part, and we join Germany in
calling on all others to do the same.
As we look ahead to the renewal of MINUSCA’s
mandate next month, highlighted by the representative
of France, I want to voice the United Kingdom’s support
for maintaining a robust mandate, with the protection of
civilians at its heart, alongside the provision of support
for the peace agreement and the electoral process. A
sustainable peace will not be won by MINUSCA alone,
however, nor will peace be wone through humanitarian
support alone. The recommitment of all parties to full
implementation of the peace agreement and to fair,
inclusive and peaceful elections is the only way to
assure long-term stability.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the Secretary-General for his most recent
report on the situation in the Central African Republic
(S/2020/994). China also thanks Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ndiaye, African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security Chergui and
Managing Director for Africa of the European External
Action Service Vervaeke, for their briefings.
At present, the situation in the Central African
Republic is showing positive general trends. The
Government of the Central African Republic is actively
advancing the implementation of the peace agreement
and has made positive progress in consolidating
Government authority, security sector reform and
socioeconomic development. China commends the
people and the Government of the Central African
Republic for their unstinting efforts in this regard.
At the same time, the Central African Republic
is faced with daunting challenges in security, the
humanitarian situation, the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, and, by the end of the year, is
going to have a new round of presidential and national
assembly elections. The international community should
continue to follow the situation and lend its support.
Having heard the statements made by colleagues before
me, I would like to make the following points.
First, this year’s election will be the first after
the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace and

20-2754313/17

S/PV.8771

The situation in the Central African Republic

Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. It
is important for consolidating the peace process.
The current Government overcame a multitude of
difficulties and challenges and actively prepared for the
election, registering close to 2 million voters, almost
half of whom are women. I trust that all parties in the
Central African Republic will continue to advance in
the preparations of the elections in an orderly manner
and see to it that the elections take place smoothly and
as scheduled.
The participation of refugees has entailed many
difficult complications, some of which are beyond
the control of the country’s Government. We respect
the relevant decisions made by the country’s National
Electoral Authority. China has provided two batches of
electoral aid materials to the Central African Republic
and would like to work together with the international
community to provide more assistance to the country
for election preparation.
Secondly, at present, we are seeing violence among
the armed groups in the country. A secure and stable
environment is what the country needs. China calls on
the armed groups to respond positively to the SecretaryGeneral’s global ceasefire initiative, immediately cease
violence and effectively abide by the peace agreement.
This past July, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) suffered casualties in the
western part of the country from landmines. China
is concerned with this and appeals to all parties
to increase coordination with MINUSCA and to
implement resolution 2518 (2020) to ensure the safety
of peacekeepers.
The Secretary-General points out in his report
that the country’s national defence and security forces
and administrative authorities have been deployed to
Bamingui-Bangoran prefecture for the first time since
2013. China welcomes this because it is significant
for the consolidation of Government authorities and
maintenance of social stability.
The international community should support the
Central African Republic in strengthening capacity and
security and in gradually taking up the responsibility
of protecting its own people. In this regard, China
reiterates that the Security Council should lift its arms
embargo against the Central African Republic at an
early date.
14/17

19/10/2020

Thirdly, durable stability in the Central African
Republic requires integrated measures and increased
input in development. The international community
should support the Government of the country in
implementing its national recovery and peacebuilding
plan, assisting the Central African Republic in
strengthening its building of infrastructure, ensuring
employment and improving people’s livelihoods.
The COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated the local
humanitarian situation and affected its socioeconomic
development. The international community should lend
its helping hand and assist the Central African Republic
in effectively bringing the pandemic under control.
The Council’s timely adjustment of the sanctions
against the relevant economic entities in the country
is conducive to unlocking its own economic resources.
The Government of the Central African Republic has
recently voiced a specific request to the related Security
Council sanctions committee, and the sanctions
committee should make a positive general response.
In conclusion, China commends MINUSCA for
the important role it played in maintaining stability
and advancing the peace process in the Central African
Republic. China supports the work of the Special
Representative and that of MINUSCA and supports the
Council in acting, in accordance with the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation, to renew MINUSCA’s
mandate for a year.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to thank the
briefers for their insightful briefings.
The number one priority in the Central African
Republic today is the elections, which are coming
very soon. I think it is very important to maintain an
environment conducive to the proper preparation and
organization of successful elections. With that in mind,
allow me to make the following points.
First, with regard to the political and security
situation in the Central African Republic, our delegation
takes note with encouragement the continued efforts of
the Government to implement the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic. We also note the commitments made by
the Government to ensure national stability and a
calm political environment despite ongoing tensions,
including efforts aimed at preparing for the upcoming
elections and the important work of the legislative
branch and the National Electoral Authority.
20-27543

19/10/2020

The situation in the Central African Republic

S/PV. 8771

However, we remain deeply troubled by the
increased number of violations of the peace agreement
in this reporting period. These violations, particularly
by various armed groups, have led to serious concern
over protection issues, with civilians being the targets
of more than half of the violations recorded. This is not
beneficial, especially when the country is in the final
stages of the electoral process.

We take this opportunity to express our condolences
to the people of the Central African Republic,
MINUSCA and the families of those who lost their
lives while trying to protect civilians on the ground. We
call on the Government and MINUSCA to strengthen
efforts and cooperation to combat violations against
women and children as mentioned in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2020/994).

In this regard, Viet Nam would like to re-emphasize
the vital importance of the full implementation of the
peace agreement. We reiterate that the agreement is
the one and only viable path towards sustainable peace
and stability for the country. We therefore urge the
agreement’s signatories to refrain from any action that
could further deteriorate the situation and to heed the
Secretary-General call for a ceasefire. As the upcoming
elections are pivotal to the political process, it is crucial
that all parties engage in constructive political dialogue
to build trust and create favourable conditions for longterm stability in the country.

Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank the
Special Representative for his briefing today, and I also
thank the briefers from the African Union and from the
European Union.

Secondly, the situation in the Central African
Republic requires continued support from the
international community in all areas. Assistance,
both technical and financial, is needed to help fill
the funding gap for the organization of the upcoming
elections, improve the socioeconomic and humanitarian
situation, and most urgently, alleviate the impact
of the coronavirus disease pandemic. We call on the
country’s international partners to strengthen their
generous support for the Central African Republic at
this critical juncture.
Thirdly, we always attach great importance to the
contribution of regional stakeholders, including the
African Union (AU) and the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), to consolidate peace
and stability in the Central African Republic. We also
welcome the cooperation among the AU, ECCAS, the
United Nations and the European Union in assisting
the Central African Republic in responding to the
country’s needs.
And last but not least, our delegation would like to
reiterate its support for the work of the United Nations
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) in the country. We would also like to
highlight the importance of ensuring safety and security
of peacekeepers and humanitarian workers.

The Central African Republic has faced significant
difficulties in the past year. That includes challenges
responding to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and
the arduous work of implementing the 2019 Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, as well as preparing for a free, fair
and democratic election. However, as we said during
the 1 October high-level meeting on the Central
African Republic convened by the Secretary-General,
the United States remains a strong partner, ready to
support the country and to foster its potential. Today
I will focus my remarks on the three challenges most
directly affecting the Central African Republic’s future.
First, on the implementation of the peace agreement,
the United States calls on all political actors inside
and outside the Government to respect the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation. The peace
accord was not signed with any one political party but
by the sovereign Government of the Central African
Republic. With the support and good offices of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA),
the Government has made significant progress in
fulfilling the peace agreement’s commitments.
In that regard, we call on the Central African
Republic’s neighbours and other facilitator countries to
acknowledge their responsibilities and work with the
Government to put in place functioning border controls,
re-establish legitimate commerce and stop the flow of
weapons into the Central African Republic.
We also urge the Government to demonstrate its
commitment to fighting impunity by expeditiously
standing up and implementing justice mechanisms,
including the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Reconciliation and the Special Criminal Court. The
United States will continue to help in those important

20-2754315/17

S/PV.8771

The situation in the Central African Republic

efforts through our assistance in developing the
country’s security and judicial institutions. All Central
Africans deserve access to justice.
Secondly, I want to stress the importance of free,
fair, inclusive and transparent elections in December.
Those elections will be an opportunity for Central
Africans to demonstrate the strength and resilience
of their democratic institutions as they choose their
Head of State and National Assembly representatives.
We are encouraged by the United Nations efforts to
ensure that women are both on the ballot and registered
to vote. We encourage the Government to keep up that
momentum to ensure the full, effective and meaningful
participation of women in the elections. Local elections,
which have not been held since 1988, will also be an
important gauge of the success of the decentralization
initiatives adopted by the National Assembly. While
we were disappointed that voting for Central African
refugees was not included in the amended electoral
code, the United States will continue working with the
Government and our international partners to ensure
the success of the upcoming elections.
Thirdly, I will touch on the challenges that
the Central African Republic is facing because of
COVID-19. This pandemic has affected the country’s
economy, and further economic difficulties lay ahead.
That is why the Trump Administration has provided
more than $13.6 million in COVID-related emergency
assistance as part of nearly $120 million in humanitarian
assistance in 2020. We encourage others to join us
and do more to support the country’s struggle against
this pandemic.

19/10/2020

United Nations and they undermine the credibility of
peacekeeping. MINUSCA had the highest number of
allegations of all missions in 2019 and in 2020. We
urge all troop- and police-contributing countries to
enforce the United Nations zero-tolerance policy and
to swiftly and credibly address criminal allegations
of sexual exploitation and abuse. The United Nations
must increase its already strong efforts to prevent
sexual exploitation and abuse, including by repatriating
individuals and units who commit such crimes, as
mandated by resolution 2272 (2016).
We acknowledge MINUSCA’s success in reducing
overall violence in the Central African Republic and
its multifaceted efforts of negotiation, good offices and
kinetic action to reduce the threat of armed groups.
The United States salutes MINUSCA’s relentless focus
on protecting civilians, the outstanding work of the
Humanitarian Coordinator to make MINUSCA an
agile and responsive partner for responding to needs
on the ground, and the overall leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
In that highly demanding context, where the
stakes are so high and mission effectiveness is so
critical, we fully agree with the Secretary-General
that MINUSCA’s presence is key to maintaining peace
and stability in the Central African Republic, and we
note his recommendation for the Security Council to
extend the mandate of MINUSCA for one year, until
15 November 2021.
We should all continue to do everything that we
can to ensure a prosperous future for the people of the
Central African Republic.

The United States recently concluded a four-week
virtual monitoring and evaluation review of MINUSCA.
The operational and security challenges in the Central
African Republic are formidable by any measure. The
scope of MINUSCA’s mandate is daunting. In fact, a
recent evaluation of MINUSCA by the Effectiveness
of Peace Operations Network noted that MINUSCA
has the most complex of all peacekeeping mandates. In
that context, we urge that attention be paid to ensuring
full staffing for MINUSCA leadership positions,
particularly as we enter this critical election period.

The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

Unfortunately, despite many efforts by the Mission
to prevent it, we still see far too many instances
of MINUSCA peacekeepers engaging in sexual
exploitation and abuse. Those abuses are unacceptable.
They destroy lives, they erode public trust in the

However, we are concerned that certain armed
groups are not fulfilling their commitments, which
seriously complicates the national reconciliation
process and exacerbates the already difficult situation.
All parties must strictly adhere to the provisions of the

16/17

We thank our
information provided.

briefers

today

for

the

It is encouraging to note that the Political
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic of 6 February 2019 is functioning. It
has already led to a reduction in the general level of
armed violence in the country.

20-27543

19/10/2020

The situation in the Central African Republic

Political Agreement and refrain from undermining the
political situation in the country. Regional partners,
including the guarantors of the agreement, also have an
important role to play in supporting the peace efforts.
We trust that the country’s leadership will successfully
overcome the challenges, including those related
to the coronavirus disease pandemic, and continue
to implement the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation programme for former
combatants, as well as the formation and deployment of
joint security units.
We are convinced that it is in the interests of the
Central African Republic to hold peaceful, free and
transparent presidential and parliamentary elections
in accordance with the national legislation and the
constitutional timeframes. We highly appreciate the
efforts of President Touadera in de-escalate political
tensions, including his initiative to hold a frank dialogue
with national political actors and partners of the Central
African Republic in preparation for the elections.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
remains a key element in ensuring security in the
country. We trust that peacekeepers will provide the
necessary technical and logistical support to Bangui
during the electoral cycle.
At the request of the Government of the Central
African Republic, the Russian Federation is helping
to strengthen the capacity and training of national
security agencies. The work of the Russian trainers
was highly commended by the authorities in Bangui.
In addition, we continue to provide military equipment

S/PV. 8771

to the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic.
Armoured reconnaissance and patrol vehicles are
currently being delivered to the country.
At the same time, we see that the rigorous sanctions
regime does not allow Central Africans to effectively
strengthen the capacity of their security institutions
and combat rampant crime. The Security Council
must ensure that sanctions are commensurate with the
political context and do not hamper conflict resolution.
In addition, we consider it essential to pay close
attention to Bangui’s efforts, including its delisting
requests, which will improve the engagement of the
Central African people with the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the
Central African Republic.
We believe that resolving the problems facing the
Central African Republic requires the concerted efforts
of all actors in the country based on the principle of
mutual respect, while taking the interests of all parties
into account. We will continue to work closely with
the Central African Republic in coordination with the
country’s leadership, its international partners and the
African Union, as well as the United Nations, including
the Security Council.
I resume my function as President of the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting so that the
Council can continue its discussion on the subject in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

20-2754317/17
