S/PV.8971

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8971st meeting

Tuesday, 22 February 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia/Ms. Evstigneeva . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Juul
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Eckersley
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African Republic
(S/2022/119)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-26396 (E)
*2226396*

S/PV.8971

The situation in the Central African Republic

Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
by renewing its mandate and constantly adapting it
to the context and requirements of the situation on
the ground.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central
African Republic (S/2022/119)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Central
African Republic to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Sylvie Valérie Baipo Temon, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Francophonie and Central Africans Abroad of
the Central African Republic.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Mankeur
Ndiaye, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Central African Republic and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic;
His Excellency Mr. Bertino Matias Matondo, African
Union Special Representative and Head of the African
Union Office in the Central African Republic; and
Mr. João Samuel Caholo, Executive Secretary of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/119, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ndiaye.
Mr. Ndiaye (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, as well as the SecretaryGeneral, for once again giving me the honour to take
the floor today to present his report on the situation
in the Central African Republic (S/2022/119), pursuant
to the relevant provisions of resolution 2605 (2021) of
12 November 2021.
At the outset, I would like to welcome the Council’s
continued interest in the situation in the Central African
Republic and its unanimous support for the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
2/27

22/02/2022

I take this opportunity to reiterate my
congratulations and wishes of success to the new Prime
Minister of the Central African Republic, Mr. Félix
Moloua, and his Government, which certainly has
many challenges to address. Those challenges include
the implementation of the Political Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, the organization of the republican dialogue
and the restoration of State authority and services, in
accordance with the requirements of the rule of law
in order to provide effective care for the populations
affected by the crisis.
There is no need to point out that those populations
aspire only to resume their socioeconomic activities and
benefit from the relaunch of development programmes,
especially in light of the current post-coronavirus
disease recession that is weakening the social fabric.
The same applies to the holding of local elections, long
awaited since 1988. In that context, MINUSCA and
the United Nations country team have been and will
remain fully mobilized alongside the Government and
the people of the Central African Republic, together
with all its partners.
I would once again like to express our gratitude to
the members of the Council for their decisive support
during the electoral crisis, in particular through the
increased ceiling of military and police contingents.
I express my appreciation to Headquarters for efforts
to expedite the deployment of the new military and
police capabilities, the most essential of which have
begun to arrive and should endow the Mission with a
greater ability to protect the civilian population and
fulfil its mandate. While reiterating my gratitude for
their continued support to MINUSCA, I encourage
troop- and police-contributing countries to honour
their commitments to deploying troops.
Progress towards peace and stability in the Central
African Republic has been noted and continues in the
face of ever-present challenges. Following the adoption
of the joint road map of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region on 16 September and the
declaration of a unilateral ceasefire by President
Touadera on 15 October, representatives of that
subregional organization paid a follow-up visit to Bangui
22-26396

22/02/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

on 14 January to advance the effective implementation
of the road map for peace and reconciliation in the
Central African Republic.
I thank all regional and international partners and
the States of the subregion involved in that initiative and
call for their continued support in order to achieve the
desired objectives. That initiative, it should be recalled,
would benefit from being more firmly anchored in the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic. I therefore call on the
Government to further demonstrate its commitment to
advancing the peace process through the adoption of
concrete and rapid measures. In particular, with regard
to the road map, it is necessary to define follow-up
mechanisms by making them operational and ensuring
they are backed by a clear timetable, as well as by
holding each and every stakeholder to account.
The road map will succeed only if there is
strong political will and all actors unequivocally
and irreversibly demonstrate their common desire to
overcome the crisis by carrying out all their obligations
in good faith. The Central African people are still
waiting for a peace dividend. It is urgent that the
political process alleviate the suffering of the people,
who are victims of the violence of a conflict that has
lasted far too long.
The Central African Republic’s partners — with
MINUSCA at the forefront — continue to play a
proactive role in supporting the conditions for the peace
process to continue. The complementarity between the
joint road map and the political agreement of 6 February
2019 should facilitate synergistic interactions and
promote the revitalization of the agreement.
To that end, the visit to Bangui in mid-February by
Rwandan and Angolan experts from the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region enabled the
establishment and development of the terms of reference
of a follow-up working group, in close coordination
with the national authorities and international partners.
That working group is responsible for monitoring three
aspects of the Luanda road map agreed at the latest
summit of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, namely, engagement with armed groups,
the effects of the unilateral ceasefire declaration by the
Head of State and the strengthening of the Government’s
operational capacity in disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration. The working group should then allow
for a coordinated reinvigoration of the peace process

S/PV. 8971

and seize any new opportunities to pool expertise and
resources in the interest of peace and security.
MINUSCA is working to remobilize all partners
and is making optimal use of its good offices and its
force to increase the contribution of international
partners to the peace process, as well as to ensure,
with all stakeholders, the credibility and integrity of
the agreement. It is in our common interest to work
with the Government to ensure that the guarantors and
facilitators of the political agreement of 6 February
2019 are fully involved in the process of revitalizing
the agreement through the implementation of the road
map for peace and reconciliation.
Therefore, the Mission, through its good offices,
is contributing to advancing the political process
in the Central African Republic. Together with its
partners, MINUSCA has worked with the Government
and the political opposition to establish a climate of
trust in order to break the deadlock that had arisen
in preparations for the republican dialogue, owing to
the opposition’s withdrawal from the process. I am
delighted that that collective investment has led to the
return of the democratic opposition to the organizing
committee of the republican dialogue, which has
resumed its work. I call on all political actors to
maintain that positive momentum in order to contribute
to the holding of a sincere, inclusive and constructive
republican dialogue that can generate agreements for
stability and national reconciliation.
In accordance with its mandate, MINUSCA
will continue to support the preparatory process and
establish the necessary conditions for the successful
holding of the dialogue, which the Government plans to
hold in March. Expectations are high. The aim is to find
lasting political solutions and create a political climate
conducive to the successful holding of local elections.
The sincere commitment of all stakeholders will be the
key to success.
With its electoral assistance mandate, the Mission
continues to support the national authorities and work
with the international community to ensure the proper
holding of the local elections, which will greatly
contribute to the deepening of the democratization
process by promoting inclusive local governance.
In that regard, the Mission is working with all
political stakeholders to maintain a peaceful political
climate and to strengthen trust in order to make
it possible, when the time comes, for the people

22-263963/27

S/PV.8971

The situation in the Central African Republic

22/02/2022

to participate fully, without any obstacles, in that
democratic exercise.

authorities of their principal responsibility to protect
the civilian population.

The success of those much-awaited elections
will also contribute to deepening the process of
decentralization as well as to the extension of State
authority and the broadening of the political space
throughout the country. For that process to fully
meet the expectations of and serve the population as
a whole, I encourage the Government to make every
effort to pacify the political climate. I also call on the
international community to continue to provide support
for the holding of the elections, in accordance with the
provisions of the Political Agreement. Approximately
$10 million would be necessary to ensure the full
financing of the elections.

It seems to me more urgent than ever, in terms of the
significant extension of State authority, to encourage
the Government to explore a more balanced path that
tempers the predominance of military operations by
continuing political and peace processes. Military
action is necessary but not sufficient in itself to provide
lasting political solutions to the crisis. There will be no
exclusively military solution to the crisis; the solution
can only be political, as has always been said. That is
all the more so because the use of additional supports
by the armed forces of the Central African Republic, if
no care is taken, could compromise the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) initiatives
under way, erode the gains made in the process of
reforming the security sector, weaken efforts at
national reconciliation and create a climate of mutual
suspicion that would heighten tensions of an ethnic and
religious nature.

Despite the declaration of a unilateral ceasefire in
October 2021, the security situation remains concerning.
In some parts of the territory, military operations are
under way against armed groups that are members of
the Coalition des patriotes pour le changement.
To those military operations are added retaliation
by armed groups against both the national security
forces and the people. I take note of the progress made
during those operations to retake control of the territory
previously occupied by armed groups. I nevertheless
deplore the fact that violations of human rights and
of international humanitarian law continue to be
committed by all parties to the conflict, including the
excessive use of force as well as the targeting of some
communities in theatres of operation and sexual and
gender-based or conflict-related violence, as well as the
recruitment, abuse and use of children by armed groups.
I call on the authorities of the Central African Republic
to conduct the investigations necessary to prosecute the
perpetrators of those violations and to bring justice to
the victims. I encourage the national authorities to take
tangible and immediate measures to prevent the human
rights violations committed by the defence and security
forces and other security personnel.
I also stress the need to combine resumed control
of the territory with an effective restoration of State
authority by deploying services for the people. The
restoration of State authority and its corollary, the
extension of its control over national territory, give the
Government, the United Nations and all international
partners an excellent opportunity to breathe new life
into the process of the gradual assumption by State
4/27

I call on the national authorities to maintain the
integrity of DDR and repatriation efforts by respecting
the current single framework and the programme for
the reduction of community violence by preventing
any parallel initiatives that might undermine all
those efforts. I reiterate that the State has the main
responsibility for protecting the civilian population.
To that end, the deployment of national and internal
security forces must be sustainably supported,
under more effective command and control and on a
structural basis, in order to achieve full functionality
in their sovereign mission of protecting the people and
ensuring the integrity of the territory. That calls for
in-depth institutional reform that itself would be the
result of strong political will, with the concerted and
transparent involvement of all strategic partners of the
Central African Republic.
I congratulate the national authorities on their
will to implement the national security-sector reform
road map approved by the Head of State in August
2021. Those framework documents, particularly the
national policy for security and the national securitysector reform strategy, are currently being reviewed
and updated. That is a positive prospect that is part
of a dynamic of democratic and citizen-controlled
accountability and governance in the security sector.
I would draw attention to the increasing use
of explosive devices by the parties to the conflict,
22-26396

22/02/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

particularly in the western part of the country. I
strongly condemn the use of improvised explosive
devices (IEDs), which have tragic consequences, and
call on stakeholders in the conflict to renounce their
use immediately.
In that context, access to those needing humanitarian
assistance and protection should be facilitated. Because
of the increased use of IEDs in the Central African
Republic, I call on the Government to explore, with
the support of partners, the implementation of a
national anti-mine mechanism. I welcome the fact that
President Touadera has agreed to work towards the
implementation of a national authority to combat the
use of mines.
Justice must go hand in hand with reconciliation
in order to promote a lasting peace. I encourage the
national authorities, with the support of international
partners, to continue their efforts to strengthen the legal
system so as to ensure respect for the law in an impartial
and independent fashion. I commend the holding of
the first public hearing of the Special Criminal Court,
which reflects the progress made in the fight against
impunity. I call for respect for the independence and
impartiality of the Special Criminal Court. It is vital
to create an environment that makes it possible for the
Court to fully comply with its mandate, particularly
when it comes to investigations and prosecutions.
With the support of the Government’s international
partners, the structures and the bases of the fight
against impunity have been laid. But justice can serve
reconciliation only if judgments are handed down. I
therefore call for all necessary measures to be taken to
ensure the execution of the arrest warrants issued by
the Special Criminal Court.
I would like to raise, as a positive development
that I welcome, the efforts made by the Government
to make operational the Commission on Truth, Justice,
Reparation and Reconciliation. Its members, who were
appointed on the basis of gender parity, are working hard
to make it possible for the Central African Republic to
reach a decisive turning point in the promotion of the
rights of victims to truth, justice and reparations, which
is vital for national reconciliation. We believe that the
Central African Republic, through the Commission, is
entering an era of a comprehensive focus on transitional
justice, which deserves the support of all strategic
partners at a time when the resources necessary to the
smooth functioning of its operations are scarce despite

S/PV. 8971

the efforts of the Government, which continues to
take responsibility for the salaries of the members of
the Commission.
I deplore the negative climate that is being created
by disinformation campaigns, which undermine the
relations between the Government, the people and
MINUSCA and fuel hostile behaviour by certain
segments of the population, the armed forces and the
internal security forces. I call on the Government to
fight those actions, including through prosecutions, to
strengthen our cooperation, in an atmosphere of trust,
in the implementation of the mandate that the Security
Council has given us. I also deplore the persistent
violations of the headquarters agreement, with
17 violations documented between 1 October 2021 and
1 February 2022.
I nevertheless commend the reaction of the President
of the Republic to the status-of-forces violations
submitted to his attention. I invite the Government
once again to continue its dialogue with MINUSCA in
the interests of the security and safety of peacekeeping
personnel. I welcome the availability of the new Prime
Minister, Mr. Moloua, in that respect.
Furthermore, I wish to stress the progress made in
dealing with incidents relating to sexual exploitation
and abuse. MINUSCA has undertaken a strategic
audit whose the main objective is to improve its
management of the risk of sexual exploitation and
abuse in the framework of a more comprehensive and
proactive focus.
Progress has been made in the Central African
Republic, but many challenges remain. The active
role of MINUSCA remains essential to support the
necessary adjustments to the peace process, which is
shaped by the peace agreement, the joint road map, the
national dialogue and the upcoming local elections.
Those tools for peace must be fully embraced and used
skilfully, with the primary concern always being the
protection of the civilian population. I once again call
on the Government and the international community to
support the implementation of resolution 2605 (2021) in
order to peacefully bring about stability, social cohesion
and development for all Central Africans.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Ndiaye for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Matondo.

22-263965/27

S/PV.8971

The situation in the Central African Republic

Mr. Matondo: (spoke in French): I have the honour
to express my deep gratitude for this opportunity
to address this important meeting of the Security
Council, the convening of which once again attests to
the Council’s ongoing interest in the development of the
situation in the Central African Republic, where peace
and security continue to be a prerequisite that merits
our full attention.
The African Union’s assessment of the current
situation in the Central African Republic is made
through the lens of the main developments that have
taken place, particularly at the political level, the
preparations for the national dialogue, the security
situation and the ongoing efforts in the pursuit of
peace and stability in the Central African Republic,
which cannot be overlooked given that they remain
key priorities.
There are many issues, linked in particular to the
political tensions surrounding the preparations for the
national dialogue, that have highlighted the need for
the stakeholders to show a genuine spirit of cooperation
in order to achieve a widely accepted compromise and
bring the crisis to a definitive end. It is important to
stress that, despite the efforts made by the political and
social actors in the Central African Republic and the
Government’s policy of reaching out, tensions between
the main political and social actors persist.
In the current context, where the Central African
Republic is eagerly waiting to hold a national dialogue,
it is fitting to welcome the consensus dynamic that
prevailed during the consultations between the
Central African authorities and the political parties
of the opposition, including those grouped within the
main political opposition platform, the Coalition of
Democratic Opposition 2020.
Today that compromise seems to be mutual in
order to maintain the possibility of a viable dialogue
based on positive outcomes for a common, peaceful
and harmonious future during the meetings planned for
March, which we hope will result in concrete solutions
and create conditions of hope for all Central Africans.
The African Union has taken careful note of
the return of the representatives of the democratic
opposition and the resumption of the work of the
organizing committee for the national dialogue on
9 February after more than three months of deadlock.
The African Union supports the continuation of the
work of the organizing committee for the national
6/27

22/02/2022

dialogue and sincerely hopes that the dialogue will be
held during the planned period, from 14 to 21 March.
Allow me to commend the efforts of religious
leaders, civil society groups, women and young people
who are sparing no efforts and continue to work to
raise awareness among the population towards their
active participation in this dialogue and peace and
reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
Meanwhile, the funding of the national dialogue
remains a challenge. Although a large part of the
budget is provided by the Central African Government,
contributions from partners are eagerly awaited.
While awaiting agreement on the date of the national
dialogue, much remains to be done regarding some
important issues, including the topics, the presidium of
the national dialogue and the list of participants. The
African Union therefore calls on all partners of the
Central African Republic to continue to provide their
material and technical support for the timely holding of
the dialogue and for its success.
In the same vein, expectations remain just as high
for the Central African Republic, which is continuing the
country’s democratization phase after the presidential
and legislative elections of 2020 and 2021 and is making
further progress towards the holding of regional and
municipal elections, scheduled for September this year.
In terms of the peace process, three years have
passed since the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic was
signed between the Government and 14 armed groups
in Bangui on 6 February 2019. We have continued
to take a critical and objective look at the progress
in implementing the Political Agreement. At the
twelfth ordinary meeting of the Executive Monitoring
Committee, held on 14 February, the Government,
the armed groups, civil society representatives and
the guarantors and facilitators of the peace agreement
took stock of the progress and challenges relating to
its implementation. The overall assessment is positive
in terms of respect for the commitments of the
Government and the armed groups set out in articles 4
and 5, respectively, of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation.
However, what remains to be done in the context
of the implementation of the Agreement is still very
important and should not be overlooked. I would like to
welcome the initiative of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and the efforts made in
22-26396

22/02/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

the context of the joint road map to mobilize, in the
broadest sense, the subregion in promoting dialogue
in the Central African Republic, more specifically
regarding contacts with the leaders of the Coalition des
patriotes pour le changement (CPC), the regrouping of
its combatants and its disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) within the broader context
of the Central African Government’s national
DDR programme.
For the African Union, the joint road map plays a
critical role in expediting the implementation of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation,
particularly with regard to the conduct of the CPC and
its leaders. The ceasefire declaration by the President
of the Central African Republic on 14 October 2021,
calling for an end to military operations and all armed
action throughout the territory, was a positive effort
to strengthen stability and security in the Central
African Republic. That ceasefire measure was shortlived, although it encouraged a process of spontaneous
demobilization, which may serve as a springboard for
DDR priorities. It is clear that, as long as there is no
ceasefire or cessation of hostilities, the DDR process
will not be effective.
In the same vein, the follow-up meeting of the
Luanda process, held in Bangui on 14 January, made
it possible to take stock of the objectives of that joint
road map and the concrete actions related to it. In
that regard, it is important that coordination between
the mechanisms for implementing and monitoring the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic and the joint road map
be further strengthened, bearing in mind the role of the
African Union, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the countries of the subregion as
guarantors and facilitators of the Political Agreement.
It is worth pointing out that, despite this glimmer of
hope regarding the implementation of the Agreement,
its completion and the prospect of a national dialogue
being held in the near future, developments in the
security situation are still marked by the ongoing
challenges in reducing the capacity of armed groups,
which continue to pose a threat to the Central African
Republic and the region, as evidenced by the persistent
tensions and the continued presence of armed groups,
especially in the north-western, northern and central
areas of the Central African Republic. In addition,
there are several illegal cross-border activities.

S/PV. 8971

In military terms, the offensive by the Forces armées
centrafricaines, supported by bilateral forces, is under
way and seeks to decrease the potential trouble-making
of armed groups. Nonetheless, as underscored several
times by its Peace and Security Council, the African
Union remains convinced that a military solution to
the current political and military crisis in the Central
African Republic, as promoted by some stakeholders,
risks becoming a mirage if it is not accompanied by a
political compromise or consensus. The consequences
of such violence have had a negative impact on the
civilian population, who, in addition to suffering
reprisals and forced displacement, find themselves in a
very vulnerable situation and face food insecurity.
Approximately 2.5 million people, more than half
of the population of the Central African Republic,
are without adequate humanitarian assistance due
to, inter alia, the inaccessibility of certain sites for
displaced persons.
Situations of armed conflict and respect for human
rights are often uneasy bedfellows, and the Central
African Republic is no exception. The African Union
would like to express its deep concern about reports
of gross human rights violations perpetrated against
civilians, in particular in areas in which military
operations are under way. In the same vein, the use of
landmines and improvised explosive devices against
the contingents of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA) and civilians is also
a reprehensible act that the African Union strongly
condemns. Such acts should be meticulously documented
so that political and judiciary responsibility is brought
to bear to allow perpetrators and their accomplices to
be identified.
In conclusion, looking ahead, I would like to
underscore that taking specific measures to ensure the
successful implementation of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic and the joint road map; the timely holding
of the inclusive republican dialogue; the dissolution
of armed groups and continued disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration initiatives, in
particular the operationalization of the mixed
security units; the promotion of improved regional
cooperation on peace initiatives and in the area of
cross-border security and collaboration on efforts to
stabilize the Central African Republic; cooperation
and harmonization of positions among the various

22-263967/27

S/PV.8971

The situation in the Central African Republic

stakeholders and international partners of the Central
African Republic; the prosecution of those in violation
of human rights law and international humanitarian
law; and the participation of all partners of the Central
African Republic in post-conflict reconstruction,
without neglecting humanitarian needs — those are all
priorities that can help the Central African Republic
once and for all turn the page on perpetual political and
military instability and embark upon the path of peace,
stability and effective economic revitalization.
On behalf of the African Union, I take this
opportunity to thank the countries of the region,
MINUSCA, the Economic Community of Central
African States, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, the European Union and other
international partners for the cooperation among our
various organizations and for their support to the
Central African Republic. We implore them to continue
their solidarity with the country.
I cannot end my remarks without paying tribute to
my dear brother His Excellency Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye
for his decisive role at the head of MINUSCA for the
past three years. I have been in daily contact with him,
which has been characterized by courtesy, candour
and respect. That has helped the African Union and
MINUSCA to engage in robust cooperation as we seek
to achieve our respective objectives.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Matondo for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Caholo.
Mr. Caholo: At the outset, allow me to congratulate
the Russian Federation on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February. I
also extend my gratitude to the Russian Federation,
through its Permanent Representative, His Excellency
Mr. Vassily Nebenzia, and his team for the able
leadership exhibited thus far and for inviting me to
address the Council.
It is always an honour to speak to the Security
Council. As per the invitation, I am required to present
my perspective on the situation in the Central African
Republic. I will therefore provide an update on the
major developments in the Central African Republic, in
particular political developments and the security and
humanitarian situation. I will conclude by providing
some recommendations for consideration by the
Security Council.
8/27

22/02/2022

The genesis and political and social economic
ramifications of the conflict in the Central African
Republic are already well known by the Security
Council. Those negative social, economic and political
ramifications and spillover effects to the region
impelled the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region (ICGLR), through His Excellency
Mr. João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, President of the
Republic of Angola and Chairperson of the ICGLR,
to take a keen interest in finding a solution to the
deterioration of the political and security situation in
the Central African Republic.
The ICGLR has thus far hosted three mini-summits
of Heads of State and Government of the Conference
on the political and security situation in the Central
African Republic, namely, on 29 January 2021, 20 April
2021 and 16 September 2021. As members will recall,
at the third mini-summit, held in Luanda, the Heads of
State and Government of the ICGLR adopted a joint
road map for peace in the Central African Republic,
in which participants called for an inclusive dialogue
in support of the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic and
urged the Government to declare a ceasefire.
Furthermore, members will recall that, as a result of
the resolutions of the third mini-summit, on 15 October
2021, the President of the Central African Republic, His
Excellency Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera, declared a
unilateral ceasefire and the cessation of fighting against
armed groups, thereby signalling his Government’s
commitment to revitalizing the peace process and
promoting peaceful dialogue. That generated some
momentum in the peace process. Incremental progress
in the context of mitigating political and civil tensions,
resolving the humanitarian crisis and further preventing
human rights violations continued to be observed.
We note with satisfaction that, six months into
the ceasefire, the Government of President Touadera
continues to adhere to the political agreement for peace
and reconciliation. His Government also continues to
be committed to implementing the joint road map for
peace in that country. Furthermore, his Government is
inclusive in nature and has established and inaugurated
the organizing committee of the republican dialogue
framework, comprising the political opposition, armed
groups, religious leaders and civil society.
Unfortunately, the implementation of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
22-26396

22/02/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

Central African Republic faces challenges, owing to
many interlinked factors, some of which are beyond
the control of the Government. The Government’s
institutional capacity to expeditiously implement
the agreement is hampered by both financial and
non-financial challenges.
The Government has limited human resources
capacities, owing to the negative ramifications of
insecurity and political instability in the country. There
is also the demotivation of civil servants, including
military personnel, owing to the delayed payment of
salaries. The situation is affecting the expeditious
implementation of the demobilization, disarmament,
reintegration and repatriation (DDRR) processes,
which was one of the critical recommendations of the
third mini-summit of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region.
The Government has established the necessary
political and administrative structures, such as the
appointment of a Minister of State for Demobilization,
Disarmament, Reintegration and Repatriation and
a Minister for Humanitarian Action and National
Reconciliation, and has formally designated the
executive monitoring committee to monitor the
implementation of the agreement. It has also identified
approximately 4,205 elements of armed groups, which
will benefit from the DDRR programme. However, due
to limited fiscal space and institutional capacities, the
process has slowed down, causing concern and panic
among the beneficiaries.
Members will recall that on 14 September 2021,
the Government of the Central African Republic
announced the adoption of the electoral calendar for
the municipal, regional and senatorial elections. The
Government pledged to hold municipal, regional and
senatorial elections on 11 September 2022, the first in
more than three decades, since 1988.
While we applaud that move, we express concern
that the country lacks the resources to carry out the
critical activities that are required for holding inclusive
credible and fair elections, such as voter registration
and education. Currently, the registration of citizens,
including internally displaced persons, refugee
returnees and newly eligible adults are yet to be fully
on course, and the country may not complete the task by
30 April unless it manages to mobilize approximately
$10 million. That is a recipe for political and electoral

S/PV. 8971

violence arising from disputed results, owing to
inadequate preparation.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, we note
with concern that approximately 3 million people,
representing 63 per cent of the population, continue
to be in urgent need of protection and humanitarian
relief. Additionally, due to violence and conflict,
there are approximately 641,300 internally displaced
persons in the country. Generally, poverty and youth
unemployment remain at very high levels in the
country. We in the ICGLR are of the view that it is
time that we engaged young people in a real process
of transformation. The youth must be considered as
active partners for the implementation of development
projects and programmes.
The security situation in the Central African
Republic remains unstable. Although the ceasefire
was signed, the Unité pour la paix en Centrafrique and
the Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation movements
continue to perpetuate abuses against civilian
populations and attacks against the defence and security
forces. We have written time and again, through the
ICGLR presidency, calling for the armed leaders and
groups to respect their commitments and condemn the
use of anti-personnel mines.
We have also noticed that the Government has yet
to strengthen its command-and-control mechanism.
The country currently lacks a dynamic and adaptive
social-technical system configured to design and
execute joint regional actions. The country has very few
security troops and State police officers with the right
skills, necessary equipment and capacity to protect
civilians from large-scale outbreaks of violence. That
has contributed to inadequate public service provision,
the inability to implement regional programmes and the
deteriorating security situation.
As I conclude, allow me to say that there is a need
for the Security Council, through the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic, to work with the
Government of the Central African Republic to pursue
vigorous country-driven security sector reforms to help
the country better address complex security challenges.
In the same vein, I call on cooperating partners to
fully honour their pledges so that the Central African
Republic can fully support National Electoral Authority
and hold credible and fair elections. Furthermore,
importantly, allow me to reiterate the request of His

22-263969/27

S/PV.8971

The situation in the Central African Republic

22/02/2022

Excellency Mr. João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço,
President of the Republic of Angola and Chairperson
of the ICGLR, that the Security Council needs to
reconsider the arms embargo, which continues to
impinge on the security forces’ ability to safeguard the
territorial integrity of the Central African Republic
and restore and maintain law and order in the country.
Political stability and economic development can be
brought about only with the improvement of the security
and humanitarian situation of the country.

The path of arms chosen by all the protagonists
is not the solution. The repeated violations of the
ceasefire by the armed groups and FACA do not offer
a path to sincere dialogue. However, that path does
exist. It is the Luanda road map, supported by the
ICGLR, the Economic Community of Central African
States, Angola and Rwanda. I call on the authorities
of the Central African Republic and the armed groups
to implement their commitments without delay. It is
imperative that the ceasefire be implemented.

We in the ICGLR will remain committed to
facilitating long-term stability in the Central African
Republic and the entire region. We applaud the
Government and all stakeholders’ commitment to
promoting peace, bolstering institutional stability
and restoring security in the country and the region.
We fully support and will continue to fully support
the implementation of the Pact on Security, Stability
and Development in the Great Lakes Region, which
serves as a legal framework and agenda for creating
the conditions for security, stability and development
among its member States.

The return to peace will also require an effective
disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation
and
reintegration process. I welcome the demobilization
of more than 400 combatants since October by the
Government, with the support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). We
must continue in this direction. This process must be
conducted in a transparent manner, by the Government
authorities themselves and with the support of
MINUSCA, the region and the international community.
France is concerned about the ad hoc recruitment of
anti-balaka militias by FACA, with the help of Wagner
Group mercenaries. This parallel and opaque process
bears the seeds of new intercommunal violence.

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Caholo for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the Special Representative of the African Union and the
Executive Secretary of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) for their briefings.
I welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Francophonie and Central Africans Abroad of
the Central African Republic, Ms. Baipo Temon. I thank
her for coming to reaffirm before the Security Council
the commitment of the Central African Republic to
finding a lasting solution to the problems caused by
armed groups.
I will say it unequivocally — armed groups
represent a serious threat. The Secretary-General’s
report (S/2022/119) once again condemns their actions
towards civilians, the Forces armées centrafricaines
(FACA), State institutions, Blue Helmets and
humanitarian personnel. The international community
must do its full part in imposing the sanctions set out
in the peace agreement against those groups. That is
why, in December, France proposed to the Council to
sanction Ali Darassa.
10/27

On the political level, France notes with satisfaction
the imminent resumption of the republican dialogue,
through which the Government and the opposition are
showing that they can compromise in the interest of
the country. That must continue. The local elections
in September must be organized in a collaborative
manner and with respect for freedom of expression
and information. The unarmed opposition must find a
political space for expression and freedom without fear
of reprisals.
Thirdly, I call on the Government authorities to step
up their efforts in the fight against impunity. I welcome
that 26 investigations are under way against perpetrators
of attacks on MINUSCA, as well as the start of public
hearings of the Special Criminal Court. The Court must
be able to carry out its mandate independently, without
political interference. There is still one actor who is not
being prosecuted: the Wagner Group. In Aïgbando in
mid-January, more than a dozen civilians were killed.
The evidence is clear — these people were executed
by Wagner Group mercenaries. After the event,
mercenaries laid mines around the village to prevent
MINUSCA from investigating. This is not an isolated
incident. This violence is systematic and deliberate. It
22-26396

22/02/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

is part of a pattern of terror to control and profit from
certain territories. We know that some FACA have been
abused by the Wagner Group. We know that jammers
are being used to prevent MINUSCA from acting; we
have little doubt as to who is responsible. I call on the
Central African Republic to prosecute all perpetrators
of violence, whoever they may be.
I will conclude with some observations on the arms
embargo. While United Nations reports show that the
violence in the Central African Republic over the past
year has further escalated, it remains clear that the
spread of arms is part of the problem. Changes to the
sanctions regime must be part of an overall strategy
that takes into account political progress in the Central
African Republic, regional efforts and progress in
achieving the arms control objectives set by the Council.
France regrets that the operation of the Panel of
Experts on the Central African Republic, whose work
sheds light on the situation, remains blocked by the
Russian Federation. Finally, I would like to commend
the work of MINUSCA and that of its Head, Special
Representative Ndiaye. We greatly appreciate the work
he has done over the past three years under the most
difficult conditions.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to thank this meeting’s
participants for their briefings and statements, and
I welcome Foreign Minister Baipo Temon to the
Security Council.
Today I will focus on three issues that Mexico
considers central to supporting efforts to stabilize the
Central African Republic.
First, we must take into account developments in
the security situation. The Secretary-General’s most
recent reports indicate significant changes in the
presence of the international community in the Central
African Republic, specifically with regard to the
arrival of new actors to the country. That complicates
an already precarious situation. In addition, the socalled Coalition des patriotes pour le changement has
become fragmented. Despite the unilateral ceasefire
declared in October by President Touadera, we see an
alarming increase in the use of anti-personnel mines
by armed groups. We also see the persistence of illicit
arms trafficking despite the current arms embargo.
Mexico is of the view that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in

S/PV. 8971

the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), in close
coordination with the national authorities, must focus
on helping the Central African Republic overcome
its challenges. Let us therefore adapt its mandate
accordingly. We also request that the Government
authorities fully collaborate with us in that regard.
Secondly, we are convinced that we must prioritize
the strengthening of the justice system. In that regard,
we see encouraging signs, such as the establishment
of the Special Criminal Court. The Government is
obligated to investigate and punish those who violate the
legal frameworks. There can be no true peace without
justice for the victims. In that context, transitional
justice systems must be set up with the support of the
partners of the Central African Republic.
Thirdly, we reiterate the deeply held conviction
that the only viable solution to the conflict is a political
one. We therefore welcome the agreements reached
between the Government and the opposition in order
to promote dialogue. We also welcome the mobilization
of partners, such as the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and the African Union, to facilitate
that dialogue. We call on the Government authorities
to ensure an inclusive process throughout the national
territory, with the active and equal participation of
women. Mexico believes that republican dialogue is an
opportunity for actors to commit to necessary reforms
to improve State governance, particularly as it relates
to decentralization. Republican dialogue must proceed
in that direction.
Finally, I want to recognize the work of the Special
Representative Ndiaye as Head of MINUSCA over
the past few years and wish him every success in his
future endeavours.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank
Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, Ambassador Bertino Matias
Matondo and Mr. João Samuel Caholo for their
valuable briefings. I welcome the participation of Her
Excellency Ms. Sylvie Baipo Temon, Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Francophonie and Central Africans
Abroad, in this meeting.
My country supports efforts aimed at de-escalating
tensions in the Central African Republic, which lacks
stability. The country is witnessing deteriorating
humanitarian and economic conditions and, against that
backdrop, I would like to make the following points.

22-2639611/27

S/PV.8971

The situation in the Central African Republic

22/02/2022

First, the United Arab Emirates stresses that
achieving sustainable and lasting peace in the Central
African Republic requires, first and foremost, a full
commitment to the ceasefire. In that regard, we regret
that the announcement by President Touadera of a
unilateral ceasefire last October was not respected and
that armed groups have continued to launch attacks,
exacerbating the humanitarian and security situations
in the country.

In conclusion, we stress the importance of continued
regional and international initiatives and efforts to
achieve stability in the Central African Republic and,
subsequently, stability and security throughout the
entire region.

Secondly, engaging in a meaningful and inclusive
political dialogue, as well as implementing the 2019
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic and the Luanda road
map, remains critical to strengthening peace, security
and sustainable development in the country. We hope
that regional efforts will continue to support peace and
help make tangible progress in the implementation of
the agreement, including through continued dialogue
between the Governments of the Central African
Republic, Angola and Rwanda, as guarantors of the
Luanda road map.

Since the previous briefing in October (see
S/PV.8882), we have witnessed some setbacks and
fragile progress. Allow me to mention some examples.

Further, I note that we must strive to empower
women and young people to effectively contribute to
the peace process. To that end, we commend the efforts
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) in fostering the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in the upcoming local elections.
Thirdly, we stress the importance of improving
and developing policies aimed at protecting civilians,
particularly women and children, given the alarming
escalation in violence, including sexual and genderbased violence despite the tireless efforts of
MINUSCA to prevent and respond to conflict-related
sexual violence.
Finally, my country expresses great concern at the
increase in the number of people in need of protection
and humanitarian assistance in the Central African
Republic. We call on all parties in the country to
guarantee humanitarian access and to refrain from
attacks on humanitarian personnel and peacekeepers.
My country condemns and deplores such attacks.
The Government’s continued efforts to explore
economic and financial partnerships are critical to
addressing both economic recovery and long-term peace
and stability. The United Arab Emirates continues to
provide the necessary support to that end.
12/27

Ms. Dautllari (Albania): Let me thank all of the
briefers for their insights and welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Francophonie and Central Africans
Abroad of the Central African Republic.

First, we have sadly observed how the unilateral
ceasefire has not produced the expected results in terms
of ending hostilities. Albania reiterates the need for all
actors to effectively abide by the ceasefire and calls on
the Government to accelerate the implementation of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes road
map within the framework of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic of 2019.
Secondly, Albania underscores the importance of
making further progress in the republican dialogue,
welcoming the return of members of opposition
to the committee. We expect that, during the next
dialogue scheduled for March, all parties will set
their differences aside in order to reach a tangible and
inclusive agreement.
In that vein, preparations for local elections in
September 2022 are encouraging. Albania reiterates its
call for credible elections, which will ensure the equal
participation of women and youth.
Thirdly, we remain deeply concerned about the
persistent human rights abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law by all parties. We
condemn in the strongest manner the killing of innocent
civilians, the recruitment of children, gender-based and
conflict-related sexual violence against women and
children, and attacks on schools and hospitals. Albania
is particularly alarmed by regular operations similar to
those conducted in Aïgbando from 16 to 18 January by
national security forces and the Wagner Group, which
resulted in several civilian deaths and displacements.
Accountability for criminal acts committed by any
party must never be sacrificed for the sake of security
provisions. In that vein, we welcome the Special
Criminal Court and call on national authorities to
22-26396

22/02/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

spare no effort in bringing those responsible to justice,
starting with immediate and credible investigations
into human rights violations and abuses.
We are very troubled by the effects of the
security situation on the humanitarian front. We are
following with great concern the continued targeting
of humanitarian personnel and call on all parties to
provide a secure environment and unhindered access
for humanitarian workers providing critical assistance
to civilians.
We commend the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) and its Head in supporting the
peace process and ensuring the protection of civilians.
We regret that, in carrying out its mandate, MINUSCA
still faces immediate challenges, as mentioned by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Albania encourages the national authorities to
further engage and fully cooperate with the Mission to
get to the bottom of recent cases of signal losses for
United Nations aircraft, and welcomes the 26 ongoing
investigations into attacks against peacekeepers.
Finally, I would like to express Albania’s support
for the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013). We hope
that the members of the Panel of Experts are appointed
as soon as possible, in order to do their work.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): It is my
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council (A3), namely,
Gabon, Ghana and Kenya.
We welcome the participation of Her Excellency
Ms. Sylvie Baipo Temon, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Francophonie and Central Africans Abroad of the
Central African Republic in this debate. We thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, as well
as the African Union Special Representative and Head
of the African Union Office in the Central African
Republic, Mr. Bertino Matias Matondo, and the
Executive Secretary of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, Mr. João Samuel Caholo, for
their respective briefings.
The matter of debate today is crucial for the A3
because it concerns the stability and security of a vast

S/PV. 8971

region in the heart of Africa. The Central African
Republic finds itself in a pivotal phase in terms of laying
the foundations for lasting peace and stability. We must
maintain consensus within the Council and propose
realistic, concrete solutions on the political, security
and humanitarian fronts that are commensurate with
the scale of the crises and distress plaguing the Central
African population.
On the political front, it is important to highlight
the efforts of the Central African authorities in
implementing the Luanda road map arising from the
2019 Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic. Those efforts are
characterized in particular by the announcement of
a ceasefire by President Touadera, as well as by the
decision to hold a republican dialogue in March and local
elections in September. We also note the decision by
the Central African Government to suspend the judicial
prosecution of certain members of the opposition with
the aim of securing détente.
We welcome the support provided by partners
of the Central African Republic — in particular the
United Nations, the African Union and subregional
organizations, especially the Economic Community of
Central African States and the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region — to the republican
dialogue. It is essential that the dialogue be inclusive
and organized in a calm environment where the voices
of all components of Central African society can be
heard. Only the reappropriation of the political process
by Central Africans themselves will lead to solutions
that are compatible with the realities on the ground and
the aspirations of the population for sustainable peace.
The A3 invites the Central African political class
to demonstrate realism and underlines that a military
solution will not serve to restore peace and stability in
Central Africa. We must take advantage of international
mobilization and seize the opportunity that the national
dialogue and the reconciliation process present to
end the cycle of violence. The holding of municipal
and regional elections for the first time in more than
30 years represents an opportunity to revive democracy
in the Central African Republic and to spur enthusiasm
and interest on the part of the population in the political
process. The A3 therefore encourages the political
parties to involve themselves further and to work for
the effective participation of women and young people
throughout all electoral processes.

22-2639613/27

S/PV.8971

The situation in the Central African Republic

In security and humanitarian terms, the situation
in the Central African Republic remains concerning.
It is extremely difficult to hold credible and peaceful
elections in a highly volatile security situation. Another
area of concern is protecting the population against acts
of violence by the heavily armed rebel groups that target
them and, regularly, their supplies, and are intensifying
the use of improvised explosive devices.
The A3 firmly condemns the attacks committed
by armed groups against civilians, Blue Helmets
and humanitarian workers. Such heinous acts are
unacceptable, and those who commit them should be
prosecuted. Thus the implementation of a national
special investigation commission to shed light on
serious crimes and violations of human rights and
humanitarian law must be welcomed.
The A3 underlines the fact that beyond those various
legal mechanisms and instruments, an urgent solution
must be found to the proliferation of weapons, which
clearly fuels insecurity in the country and throughout
the region. It would be unacceptable to stand by and not
react to the sad spectacle of armed groups and terrorists
making use of increasingly sophisticated weapons and
causing suffering to the people, whose exodus is also
exacerbating humanitarian tensions. That persistent
insecurity in one part of the Central African Republic
continues to worsen the living conditions of the people,
who resent the forces on the ground.
We must have a more decisive commitment on
the part of the international community to truly
cut off sources of supply for armed groups. That
means adequate financing from the international
community for programmes aimed at the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants.
The A3 underscores the need to lift the arms
embargo imposed on the Central African Republic
by the Security Council in order to allow the country
to strengthen the capacities of its armed forces to
effectively discharge their constitutional mandate to
defend the country. The Central African Republic must
be able to protect its own people and territory. Allied
forces and MINUSCA are not to remain the country
forever; that is not their job.
Restricting the military capacities of the legitimate
authorities of the country today means condemning the
country to powerlessness and to making its instability
chronic. The A3 welcomes the outstanding efforts and
the commitment of MINUSCA to protect the population.
14/27

22/02/2022

However, given the alarming humanitarian situation
and the ongoing humanitarian crisis, MINUSCA needs
a more robust mandate. A reinforcement of its personnel
and its operational capacity will certainly allow it to
improve the security environment.
We welcome the efforts at coordination between
the authorities of the Central African Republic and
MINUSCA. We encourage further cooperation
between the country and neighbouring States, as
well as the resolution of border conflicts through
dialogue in a climate of calm. Partnerships between
the United Nations, the African Union and subregional
organizations such as the Economic Community of the
Central African States and the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, as well as bilateral partners,
have a real impact on political progress, in particular in
terms of peacebuilding, and should be welcomed.
The ongoing security problems are being worsened
by extreme weather and have had severe impacts on the
humanitarian situation and increased tensions in the
Central African Republic. We commend the efforts of all
humanitarian stakeholders and encourage international
and regional donors, as well as the country’s partners,
to overcome the financing deficit for humanitarian
activities. It is vital that we support the Government of
the Central African Republic in building the State and
in peacebuilding to respond to the aspirations of the
people over the long term.
It is clear that there is a need to offer prospects to
the people of the Central African Republic by ending
the root causes of conflict, encouraging economic
development and setting up robust institutions to ensure
equitable justice and genuine national reconciliation.
In conclusion, the A3 reiterates its firm commitment
to the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the Central African Republic — and the
corollary is non-intervention in the domestic affairs
of the country — while also underlining the scale of
what is at stake and the interconnection of the security
challenges in that country, located at the edge of
the Sahel.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Allow me to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mankeur
Ndiaye and the other briefers for their insightful
remarks. I am also pleased to welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic,
Ms. Baipo Temon, here today. I look forward to working
22-26396

22/02/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

with her Government in bringing peace to the Central
African Republic.
When President Touadera announced a unilateral
ceasefire in October, we had all hoped that that would
lead to greater security and much-needed progress in the
political process. Unfortunately, the fighting continues,
and a genuine, inclusive dialogue has not yet started.
The rebels are certainly to blame, but the Government’s
choice of partners also affects the prospects of
sustainable peace in the Central African Republic.
Norway commends the region, in particular Angola
and Rwanda, for its continued engagement, which
seems to have led to a renewed impetus and a date for
the long-awaited republican dialogue. We encourage
all actors, especially the Government, to finally make
that happen.
Only a dialogue that addresses the grievances
of all segments of society — including with the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women — can
lead to sustainable peace. We also underscore that the
protection of civilians, including children, is critical to
averting new cycles of violence.
Reports of continued high levels of gross violations
and abuses of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law are frustratingly familiar. Norway is
particularly appalled by the reported high number of
incidents of gender-based and conflict-related sexual
violence, reported grave violations against children and
the targeting of religious minorities. We also condemn
in the strongest terms the targeting of humanitarian
workers. The main perpetrators continue to be the
armed groups of the Coalition des patriotes pour
le changement.
But reports show that the Forces armées
centrafricaines and their partners — the Russian
Wagner Group — continue to commit numerous
violations and abuses of human rights and violations
of international humanitarian law. Incidents such as
the ones in and around Bria are particularly shocking
because the Forces armées centrafricaines and their
partners should be held to a higher standard than
armed groups. We call on the authorities of the Central
African Republic to investigate all incidents and hold
the perpetrators accountable.
We are also worried by reported new trends such
as the recruitment of ex-combatants as proxies against
armed groups; the dangerous and unacceptable jamming

S/PV. 8971

of the navigation signals of the air assets of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA);
and the use of explosive devices.
We welcome the improvement in the Government’s
implementation of the status-of-forces agreement.
Good working relations between the authorities of the
Central African Republic and MINUSCA are essential.
That being said, Norway is very worried about the
multiple reports of the obstruction of and denial of access
to MINUSCA by the Forces armées centrafricaines and
the Wagner Group. MINUSCA must be allowed to do
its work, including in the investigation of incidents
involving alleged violations and abuses of human rights
and violations of international humanitarian law.
Finally, Norway would like to express its concern
about the continued absence of a Panel of Experts on the
Central African Republic. After a hold of more than six
months, one Member State has rejected the nominated
experts. We urge the Secretariat to swiftly propose new
names, and we hope that the Panel can resume its work
as soon as possible.
Allow me to conclude with special thanks to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ndiaye for his hard work and commitment to the
Central African Republic. We wish him all the best in
his future endeavours.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I would like to start by thanking Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ndiaye,
African Union Special Representative Matondo and
Executive Secretary of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region Caholo for their comprehensive
remarks. As Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ndiaye’s time comes to an end at the helm
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), we commend him for his leadership
over the past three years, and we wish him well in his
next chapter. We look forward to working with his
successor to further strengthen and support MINUSCA
in the future.
I also welcome the participation of the Foreign
Minister of the Central African Republic. I visited
the Central African Republic several times in my
former position as Assistant Secretary for Africa. I
am saddened that the situation in the Central African

22-2639615/27

S/PV.8971

The situation in the Central African Republic

22/02/2022

Republic continues not to significantly improve, but
I look forward to working with the Foreign Minister
and her Government towards a peaceful solution to the
situation in the Central African Republic in the future.

horrific acts and trampling over the human rights that
we have fought so hard to preserve, including for the
people of the Central African Republic, who deserve to
have their human rights respected.

Today I would like to address three aspects of the
situation in the Central African Republic: the work and
safety of MINUSCA; the threat that Wagner Group
forces pose to human rights in the Central African
Republic; and progress towards a political solution to
the conflict.

We call upon the Government of the Central African
Republic to cooperate fully with MINUSCA and other
partners to investigate all allegations transparently
and hold those responsible for such heinous acts
accountable. The initial steps taken by the special
commission of inquiry, led by the Central African
Republic’s Minister of Justice, are positive. Now is the
time to follow through on the investigations.

First, let me start by saying thank you to the
women and men of MINUSCA and to the troop- and
police-contributing countries for their commitment
to peace in the Central African Republic. I know that
they have been under attack — both physically and
with disinformation — and I condemn those attacks in
the strongest terms. MINUSCA has done a significant
job attempting to restore security to the Central
African Republic. As the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/119) notes, its increased operations ousted
armed groups in Boyo, as well as other areas.
However, we must remain firm in supporting the
peacekeepers whom we have collectively sent into
harm’s way, call out those who are willing to harm them
and hold those individuals and entities accountable.
In particular, we must address the disturbing news
from the Secretary-General’s report that the Forces
armées centrafricaines (FACA), working with the
Kremlin-supported Wagner Group, perpetrated 17
violations of MINUSCA’s status-of-forces agreement
in the past four months. That is simply unacceptable.
Together, as the Security Council, we must call on the
Central African Republic and the Wagner Group to stop
threatening and obstructing MINUSCA personnel and
their work.
That leads me to my second point: we must address
and take on the threat to human rights that the Wagner
Group forces pose. National defence forces and Wagner
Group contractors, referred to as “other security
personnel” in the report, perpetrated over 40 per cent
of all violations documented during the reporting
period. For that reason, we find it hard to even think
about lifting an arms embargo where arms could be
used against innocent citizens. In particular, credible
sources have reported that Wagner Group forces in the
town of Aigbado massacred more than 30 unarmed
civilians on 16 and 17 January, and that included over 20
execution-style killings. Those forces are committing
16/27

We are deeply concerned by reports that FACA and
Wagner Group forces continue to target predominantly
Muslim communities in their military operations. That
poses grave risks to the country’s delicate social fabric,
and it contributes to further destabilization.
That leads me to my third, and final, point: there is
no military solution to the crisis in the Central African
Republic. That point was aptly made by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. The only
durable way forward is through the full implementation
of the 2019 peace agreement, justice for victims and
inclusive political dialogue. To that end, we call upon
the Government of the Central African Republic to
abide by its 15 October ceasefire and immediately stand
up and enforce a ceasefire monitoring mechanism.
We commend the Government of the Central African
Republic for its decision to lift immunity for the
political opposition, and we welcome further progress
towards the organization of an inclusive republican
dialogue process.
To further prepare for local elections in September,
we call on the Government of the Central African
Republic to launch and staff the Cadre de concertation
and to implement the April 2020 decentralization law.
That is an opportunity for the newly appointed Prime
Minister, Félix Moloua, whom I want to congratulate
here today.
The United States remains a committed partner of
the Central African Republic, and we look forward to
working with it to realize the promise of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, the republican dialogue and the
country’s first local elections in 34 years.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): At the outset, let
me thank Special Representative of the Secretary22-26396

22/02/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

General Mankeur Ndiaye for his briefing regarding the
progress made on the implementation of the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) and for updating the Security Council on
the recent political developments in the Central African
Republic. I also thank the African Union (AU) Special
Representative and Head of the AU Office in the
Central African Republic, His Excellency Mr. Bertino
Matias Matondo, and the Executive Secretary of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region (ICGLR), Mr. João Samuel Caholo, for their
respective briefings. I also welcome the presence of the
Foreign Minister of the Central African Republic, Her
Excellency Ms. Sylvie Valérie Baipo Temon.
The challenges faced by the Central African
Republic remain significant. While the overall
political situation is stable, a new Prime Minister was
recently appointed. We hope that this development will
facilitate the reform process and the national dialogue.
The Government is planning to hold local elections
in September. They will be crucial in deepening the
democratic process across the country. We hope that
the necessary legislation will soon pave the way for that
process to begin.
The holding of the national dialogue, scheduled
next month, will be important to capitalize on the
gains of the unilateral ceasefire, which was announced
by President Touadera last October. We hope that the
withdrawal of prosecutions against the opposition
members on 31 January will help to fast-track the
process of national dialogue. The implementation of the
2019 Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic will be possible only
once the six signatory groups, including factions of
the Coalition des patriotes pour le changement that are
based outside the Central African Republic, engage in
good faith.
In that context, we welcome the holding of the
executive and follow-up committee meeting of the
Political Agreement on 14 February. We look forward to
the early commencement of the work of the Commission
on Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation. We
also commend the regional efforts in the peace process
through the ICGLR initiative.
The security situation has remained volatile,
particularly in the north-western regions of the country,
with continued fighting between the opposition groups

S/PV. 8971

and national defence forces. The lives of ordinary
civilians, particularly women and children, continue to
be at risk, with increased displacement and abuses. We
hope that progress in the national dialogue will lead to
an improvement in the security situation in the coming
days. There is also the need to expedite the process
of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation, as well as that of security sector reform.
The implementation of the status-of-forces
agreement improved over the past four months.
That is a clear indication of enhanced cooperation
between MINUSCA and the Central African Republic
authorities. Unfortunately, peacekeepers remained the
victims of targeted attacks during the reporting period.
We strongly condemn attacks on peacekeepers and
hope that the leadership of the Mission will take the
required measures to ensure the safety and security
of peacekeepers. Resolution 2589 (2021), adopted by
the Council in August 2021, requested the SecretaryGeneral to report on certain key tasks reflected in
paragraph 4 of the resolution, concerning crimes
against peacekeepers. We look forward to the reporting
on those issues in upcoming MINUSCA reports.
The Central African Republic is at an important
juncture in its tenuous journey towards peace. The
continuing support of the international community,
including the United Nations, the African Union, the
Economic Community of the Central African States
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, is crucial.
India has assisted the Central African Republic
through development partnerships, including lines of
credit for industrial and mining projects, the supply
of buses and hydroelectric projects, as well as through
capacity-building programmes. We will continue to
support the people of the Central African Republic in
these challenging times.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start
by thanking Special Representative Ndiaye, Special
Representative Matondo and Executive Secretary
Caholo for their briefings.
I welcome Her Excellency Ms. Sylvie Valérie Baipo
Temon, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central
African Republic, to today’s meeting.
The points my delegation will raise today focus on
the security situation, peace talks and the republican
dialogue. In a very succinct and direct way, it is our

22-2639617/27

S/PV.8971

The situation in the Central African Republic

view that security remains a concern in the Central
African Republic. As described in the SecretaryGeneral’s most recent report (S/2022/119), armed
groups continue to destabilize local communities on a
large scale. Sexual violence, the lack of humanitarian
access and the recruitment of children in armed conflict
are troubling realities.
The most recent report on children and armed
conflict (S/2021/437) depicts growing cases of serious
violations. Even if armed groups provoke the vast
majority of the abuses, it is critical that the Government
of the Central African Republic draw on the Child
Protection Code in response. Ongoing investigations on
the perpetrators of attacks against the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) are
also laudable.
My second point relates to peace talks. The
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
initiatives are particularly urgent. At present,
unfortunately, the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2127 (2013), concerning the Central
African Republic, cannot take advantage of the
intelligence provided by the Panel of Experts. The
Central African Republic should make extensive use
of MINUSCA’s resources and expertise to accelerate
weapons collection.
We also call on all stakeholders to step up their
efforts to implement the joint road map for peace,
designed by the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region. We commend the work done by Angola
and Rwanda to establish the Luanda road map.

22/02/2022

immense efforts on the Luanda joint road map initiative.
That is positive progress. The political agreement
remains the only way to achieve long-term peace and
stability for the citizens of the Central African Republic.
Secondly, the United Kingdom remains deeply
concerned about the continuing deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in the Central African
Republic and the ongoing threats to civilians. The
high levels of displacement and conflict-related sexual
violence, highlighted in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2022/119), are unacceptable. The ongoing
targeting of humanitarian personnel and denial of
humanitarian access must stop. Sadly, reporting shows
that violations of international humanitarian law and
violations and abuses of human rights by all parties to
the conflict continue.
The United Kingdom deplores the indiscriminate
killings of unarmed civilians and targeting of the
Fulani and Muslim communities by the Forces armées
centrafricaine and the Russian mercenary Wagner
Group, as we have heard from others. The Wagner
Group plays a destabilizing role in the country. Its
presence undermines the work of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), to
the detriment of the citizens of the Central African
Republic. We call on the Government to ensure the full
application in the country of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law and that all
perpetrators of violations or abuses are held to account.

Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
African Union Special Representative and Mr. Caholo
for their briefings.

Thirdly, I would like to touch upon threats to the
safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers.
We note the decrease in violations of the statusof-forces agreement in the latest reporting period.
However, we continue to call for clarity regarding the
attack on a United Nations police bus last November,
which resulted in United Nations casualties and a
civilian death. We are also deeply concerned about
the jamming of MINUSCA’s GPS signals and satellite
communications. That requires urgent investigation.
Any delay in resolving the issue will put United Nations
civilian and uniformed personnel at unacceptable risk.

First, the United Kingdom is concerned about the
fact that the continued violence in the Central African
Republic undermines the chance for inclusive political
dialogue. We urge all parties to respect the ceasefire.
We also welcome the return of opposition parties to
the republican dialogue process and acknowledge the

I would like to once again emphasize that the arms
embargo exists to prevent weapons falling into the
hands of armed groups and fuelling violence. It is not
intended to prevent the Government from obtaining
the equipment it needs for defence and security sector
reform. Indeed, to date, the Committee has approved

We commend the resumption of the national
republican dialogue. We also hope it will lead to better
understanding among political actors in the Central
African Republic. We also commend its organization
before the September local elections.

18/27

22-26396

22/02/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

all exemption requests submitted under the framework
of the arms embargo. We welcome any progress the
Government has made with regard to meeting the
Council’s benchmarks, but it is critical that the block
on the Panel of Experts be lifted soon.
Finally, if I may, I would like to add my voice to
that of my Council colleagues to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his tireless
work and service over the past three years and wish him
the best in his future endeavours.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland) (spoke in French): I,
too, would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ndiaye, the African
Union Special Representative, Mr. Matondo, as well
as Executive Secretary, Mr. Caholo, for their very
informative briefings this morning.
I would like to acknowledge the presence at
today’s meeting of Her Excellency Ms. Sylvie Valérie
Baipo Temon.
I take this opportunity to commend and sincerely
thank Mr. Ndiaye for his invaluable work in extremely
difficult circumstances in the Central African Republic.

S/PV. 8971

and conflict-related sexual violence against women.
Moreover, we have seen yet another increase in the
number of grave violations against children. The
significant level of human rights violations committed
by national security forces and other security personnel
is particularly concerning. We once again urge the
authorities to ensure that there are thorough, impartial
and effective investigations into all alleged violations
and abuses, and we urge the authorities to hold those
responsible to account, regardless of their nationality
or affiliation.
Ireland is deeply concerned about the reports of
serious human rights abuses and violations involving
other security personnel in the Central African Republic,
particularly the Wagner Group. Accountability is key
to ending the cycle of conflict. We take note of the
announcement yesterday that the International Criminal
Court has scheduled the opening of the trial in the
case against Mahamat Said Abdel Kani for war crimes
and crimes against humanity allegedly committed in
Bangui in 2013. That should serve as a reminder to all
parties that severe crimes must not go unpunished.

Last October (see S/PV.8882), we welcomed
the announcement of a unilateral ceasefire in the
Central African Republic, which represented a very
important step towards peace, as well as a return to the
conditions of the 2019 Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
It is regrettable that progress has stopped there and
that civilians suffer the most. I recall the SecretaryGeneral’s call for all parties to commit to a ceasefire
and engage in a genuine dialogue for peace, with the
full and meaningful participation of women.

Today a staggering 3.1 million people — 63 per
cent of the population — are in need of humanitarian
assistance and protection. We condemn continuing
attacks against humanitarian actors and obstructions to
the delivery of humanitarian assistance in the strongest
terms. Progress on the investigation into attacks against
United Nations personnel is welcome, and we encourage
the authorities of the Central African Republic to
advance their efforts to bring those responsible to
justice. We remind all parties involved in hostilities
of their obligation to comply with international law,
including humanitarian law, in all circumstances.

A political solution based on a constructive and
inclusive national dialogue represents an opportunity
to advance peace and security, which the people of the
Central African Republic fully deserve. We welcome
the return of opposition leaders to the organizing
committee of the republican dialogue, and we urge all
political actors in the country to engage constructively.

Continuing
status-of-forces
violations
are
unacceptable, as are disinformation campaigns against
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
and international partners. It is ultimately the people of
the Central African Republic who suffer the most when
the Mission is not free to fulfil its mandate.

(spoke in English)

The local elections represent an opportunity for
progress in the Central African Republic. We urge all
actors to work to create an environment conducive to the
peaceful holding of the local elections later in the year.
We welcome efforts to promote the full participation of
women in elections, both as voters and candidates.

Human rights violations and abuses and violations
of international humanitarian law continue to be
perpetrated by all parties to the conflict. Suffering
in the Central African Republic has intensified. We
are seeing higher levels of gender-based violence

22-2639619/27

S/PV.8971

The situation in the Central African Republic

We have repeatedly insisted across many dossiers
here in the Security Council that women’s participation
is not a luxury or an optional extra. It is crucial to
achieving and sustaining peace. It is the right of all
women to be in the rooms and at the tables where key
decisions are made for the future of their countries and
local communities. We also encourage efforts to ensure
the inclusion of returnees and displaced persons in the
forthcoming elections.
(spoke in French)
Sanctions are an important tool used by the Council
to support the restoration of peace and security in the
Central African Republic. I reiterate Ireland’s support
for the Sanctions Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) and once again call for ending
delays in appointments to its Panel of Experts.
In conclusion, the region’s engagement has greatly
contributed to the efforts to restore peace and security
in the Central African Republic, including support
for mediation efforts. The Council should continue to
support such initiatives in the pursuit of peace in the
Central African Republic.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I welcome
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Diaspora of
the Central African Republic, Ms. Baipo Temon, at
our meeting today. I also thank Mr. Ndiaye, Special
Representative of the Secretary General, Mr. Matondo,
Special Representative of the African Union, and
Mr. Caholo, Executive Secretary of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), for
their briefings.
With regard to the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/119), I would like to make the
following comments.
Currently, the situation in the Central African
Republic is generally improving. China welcomes the
fact that the Government of the Central African Republic
has taken a series of measures in maintaining political
stability, improving the security situation, resuming
economic development and conducting exchanges with
other countries. The republican dialogue is about to
begin, and preparations for local elections are under
way. China welcomes those developments.
We expect that all parties in the Central African
Republic will actively participate in the dialogue,
bridge differences, enhance mutual trust and inject
new impetus into realizing a comprehensive ceasefire
20/27

22/02/2022

and accelerating the implementation of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic. China supports the mediation efforts
by regional and subregional organizations, appreciates
the leading roles played by countries such as Angola,
the Congo and Rwanda. We hope that the ICGLR will
enhance communication with the Government of the
Central African Republic in the implementation of the
road map and strive to form synergies based on the
reality on the ground and its needs.
Since President Touadera announced the ceasefire
on 15 October 2021, the security situation has
generally improved thanks to the great efforts made
by the Government of the Central African Republic
and relevant parties. The recent political turmoil in
some African countries has repeatedly demonstrated
that safeguarding their territorial integrity and
protecting their own citizens are the basic requirements
underpinning sovereign countries. In the final analysis,
the achievement of lasting peace in the Central African
Republic depends on the strength of the country.
According to the needs of the Government of the Central
African Republic, the international community should
help the country’s armed forces improve their security
capabilities, counter threats posed by armed groups and
respect the right of the Government to independently
conduct security cooperation with other countries.
In carrying out its duties, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) should focus
on helping the Central African Republic expand State
authority, strengthen the deployment of security forces
and promote security sector reform. The Government
of the Central African Republic and countries of the
region have repeatedly stressed that the arms embargo
is the main obstacle to the enhancement of the security
capabilities of the Central African Republic and have
therefore called for lifting it as soon as possible. China
urges the Security Council to help fulfil their aspiration
by lifting the arms embargo at an early date and
providing support for the Government of the Central
African Government to address security challenges and
safeguard national stability.
The improvement of the security situation in
the Central African Republic has brought about the
recovery of economic development to some extent, but
the country continues to face multiple challenges, such
as financial constraints and the coronavirus disease
pandemic. The humanitarian situation is not positive,
22-26396

22/02/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

with 3.1 million people in need of humanitarian.
assistance. The international community, especially
the major Powers, should provide financial assistance
in a timely manner to help overcome difficulties. At the
same time, it is necessary to help the country restore
its economy, improve people’s livelihoods and turn
its advantages in natural resources into development
advantages to lay a solid foundation for peace through
sustainable development.
In November 2021, Foreign Minister Baipo
Temon, in her letter to the President of the Council,
laid out important views and suggestions concerning
MINUSCA’s mandate and performance. Respecting
the views of the countries concerned is a prerequisite
for peacekeeping operations to carry out their work
with positive results. MINUSCA should continue to
listen fully to the opinions of the country, align its
work with the needs and priorities of the country and
rebuild trust with the Government and all sectors of
society to form synergy. No one wants to see security
incidents involving peacekeepers in the Central African
Republic. MINUSCA and the Government of the
Central African Republic have been actively engaging
in communication and coordination recently to jointly
safeguard the status-of-forces agreement, which has
achieved good results. We hope that the two sides will
work in the same direction and enhance the safety
of peacekeepers.
In conclusion, I thank Mr. Ndiaye for his last
briefing to the Council as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. China will, as always, support the
work of the Mission and hopes that the Mission will
make a greater contribution to comprehensive peace,
stability and development in the country.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
We thank Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, Mr. João Samuel
Caholo and Mr. Bertino Matias Matondo for their
briefings. We welcome the participation of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic,
Ms. Sylvie Valérie Baipo Temon.
We are closely monitoring developments in the
Central African Republic. We believe that there has
been success overall in stabilizing the situation in the
Central African Republic and in limiting the military
potential of illegal armed groups. We therefore welcome

S/PV. 8971

the announcement by President Touadera on 15 October
2021 of a ceasefire regime.
State authority is gradually being strengthened
in the region. The judicial system is getting back to
work, and the number of law enforcement officials
deployed around the country is increasing. There are
also preparations for municipal elections in September
2022.
We are convinced that the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic of 6 February 2019 is the base document
for achieving lasting peace and security. We note the
efforts of the authorities to carry out the President’s
initiative to organize the republican dialogue. It is
important that the authorities are committed to the
principle of inclusivity when implementing the road
map on actualizing the political agreement, which was
developed with regional assistance.
We welcome the active involvement of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and
the Economic Community of Central African States in
the efforts being undertaken by the United Nations and
Bangui’s foreign partners to stabilize the situation in
the country. We believe that any mediation initiatives in
the format of subregional organizations must be agreed
with the Government of the Central African Republic.
We believe it important to be guided by the
priorities outlined by the President of the Central
African Republic at the Security Council meeting
held on 18 October 2021 (see S/PV.8882). Those
priorities include the cessation of military activity, the
dissolution of illegal armed groups, the implementation
of programmes for the demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration of militants, security sector reform,
the strengthening of national borders and gradual
progress on the political process.
We note that the illegal armed group Coalition des
patriotes pour le changement and its various splinter
groups have not ruled out continuing the armed
struggle or their plans to seize power by force. We
are also concerned by the high-tech weapons in their
possession. In those conditions, we think it important
to help strengthen the capacity of the legally elected
authorities. We believe that without effective support for
the leaders of the country in strengthening the military
capacity of the national armed forces, it may take a long
time to overcome the domestic crisis. We are convinced
that the presence of a well-armed and well-trained army

22-2639621/27

S/PV.8971

The situation in the Central African Republic

and law enforcement is an important condition for longterm stability in the Central African Republic.
Considering the functions that peacekeepers carry
out, including in combating illegal armed groups as
part of their civilian protection measures, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
should be an important element in guaranteeing
security in the country. We advocate closer cooperation
between MINUSCA and Bangui and with bilateral
partners on the ground. We are convinced that the full
implementation of the peacekeeping mission’s mandate
will be possible only with trust-based dialogue and
mutual understanding with the authorities of the
country of deployment. We hope, therefore, that the
planned changes to the leadership of MINUSCA will
have a positive effect on the relations between the
Mission and Bangui.
We abstained in the voting on 12 November 2021 on
resolution 2605 (2021), on the extension of MINUSCA’s
mandate. In so doing, we sent a signal to its leadership
about the need to overcome the shortcomings in its work,
first and foremost establishing the proper cooperation
with the authorities in Bangui.
At the same time, we must also realize that
MINUSCA cannot and should not replace the efforts
of the national authorities. It is they who bear the
major responsibility for the fate of the country and
for protecting civilians. In that regard, there is a need
to continue to strengthen the capacity of the Central
Africans themselves. That task is being impeded by
the arms embargo. The Security Council sanctions
regime must therefore be adapted in timely fashion to
the situation on the ground. Russia has consistently
advocated a relaxation of the arms embargo until such
time as it is fully lifted. Resolution 2588 (2021) adopted
on 29 July 2021, at the request of Bangui, makes
provisions for additional easing of the sanctions regime.
There is a need to take further steps in the direction of
the official authorities.
Our country is helping Bangui to strengthen its
military capacity. With the knowledge of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013), we have
repeatedly supplied the Central African Republic with
military products. In addition, some 94 citizens of
the Central African Republic are being trained in our
military academies. There are also Russian instructors
working in the country. The campaign to discredit
22/27

22/02/2022

them is bewildering to us, to say the least. We repeat
that specialists from Russia are present in the Central
African Republic on the basis of a request from the
legally elected Central African authorities. Russia
strictly complies with all the restrictions introduced
by the Security Council with regard to the Central
African Republic.
Today we have once again heard accusations against
Russian specialists. In the light of recent international
events, including in Africa, we are struck by the level of
hypocrisy in the statements of some of our colleagues.
While stressing the sovereign right of countries to select
partners for cooperation and alliances, in other cases,
if the partners do not suit our Western colleagues, they
become hysterical, claiming that the sovereign State in
question does not have a right to cooperate with such
partners. In one case, when regional organizations
support Western decisions or policies, that is good. In
other cases, as with the Central African Republic, the
assessments of regional organizations are ignored and
their position on lifting the arms embargo is not taken
into account.
A number of countries represented at the Security
Council table have for a number of years provided socalled military assistance to African States — and
not only African States. Then, a few years later, they
simply abandoned those countries to their fate. That
was the case in Afghanistan, and today we will also
discuss a range of other African issues. Thereafter, it
seems that suddenly everybody is guilty except those
countries that were there for several years.
Colleagues in the Security Council today have
repeated, one after another, unverified information
about cases of violations of human rights and other
crimes. Why do they not demand from each other the
results of investigations into the air strike in Kabul that
killed seven children, or air strikes in Iraq, Hajin and
Baghouz, in which 80 people were killed, but nobody
was punished for these crimes? Was no one responsible?
Why are those questions not raised on a regular basis?
I would also like to note that this is Mr. Ndiaye’s final
briefing to the Security Council in his current capacity.
I thank him for his briefing and to wish him every
success in the future, whatever his chosen endeavours.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
22-26396

22/02/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Francophonie and Central Africans Abroad of the
Central African Republic.
Ms. Baipo Temon (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): I am particularly honoured to be able
to participate in this meeting of the Security Council to
consider the periodic report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/119). Before presenting the remarks of the
Central African Republic, I wish to extend to you,
Madam President, my sincere congratulations on your
country’s presidency of the Council this month. Since
I have the floor, I take this opportunity to thank the
technical and financial partners of the Central African
Republic, both bilateral and multilateral. I also wish to
thank the representatives of the States members of the
Council, the organ responsible for the maintenance of
peace and security in the world. Their presence here
today demonstrates their commitment to the cause of
the Central African Republic and the efforts to build
peace in my country. I thank all speakers for their
contribution, for the expression of their concerns and
for their support to the mechanisms and processes of
peace in the Central African Republic.
It is important to note that, despite a difficult
security and political situation, the Government, under
the guidance of the President of the Republic and Head
of State, Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera, has continued
to make the efforts necessary to significantly improve
the security and political situation in the Central
African Republic. In that regard, courageous steps have
been taken at the political level by the Central African
Government to speed up the peace process, particularly
the implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, as
well as the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region road map.
Steps have also been taken to move the political
and socioeconomic situations forward, including the
unilateral ceasefire declared by the President of the
Republic and Head of State in accordance with the
Luanda road map; the suspension of criminal prosecution
of some leaders of the democratic opposition, thereby
accelerating the republican dialogue process; the
launching of the process of regional and local elections,
with the help of bilateral and multilateral partners;
improvement of the social climate via ongoing dialogue
with social partners and the reassessment of the
guaranteed minimum wage; the conclusion, through
dialogue with technical and financial partners, of

S/PV. 8971

an expanded facility programme; and the extension
of the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan to
2023, pending a new framework of reference for the
mobilization of resources.
We note the calls to speed up the implementation
of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region road map. It is
important to recall, as evidence of the Government’s
will to make progress in the peace process, that all
peace process initiatives, either defined or ongoing,
were born of the calls of the Central African authorities,
either bilaterally or multilaterally. All those calls
were motivated by the sole desire of the Government
to strengthen peace and stability and to improve our
people’s daily lives and prospects for a better future.
That commitment to peace, to calm and to
development has not changed. On the contrary, it has
been strengthened in the face of the unacceptable
injustice of seeing Central Africans deprived of their
rights when elsewhere there is unanimous condemnation
of the terror and misery of some people caused by the
tyranny and oppression of others. That resolve and
commitment to emerging from decades of subjection to
violence are strong — very strong. That is why, aware
of our situation of precarity and weakness, the Central
African Republic calls on partners, friendly countries
and organizations that have the capacity and whose
fundamental principles are to support those who are in
situations of difficulty and our efforts in a committed,
practical and non-bureaucratic way, taking into account
the realities on the ground in order to avoid unrealistic
goals and conditions that would block the various peace
processes, in particular the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) road map. That will
depend upon our ability to work together in workshops
where our differences in terms of visibility must be
overcome if we are to reach our shared objective to
emerge collectively, as opposed to individually, as
winners. That will also depend upon our will to remain
committed, in solidarity, when faced with the enemies
of peace — that is, armed groups.
Allow me to raise a point regarding the initiatives
taken within the framework of the Luanda road map,
and in particular at the initiative of the Central African
Government, in accordance with the communiqué that
emerged from the 16 September 2021 mini-summit
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region. The Government of the Central African

22-2639623/27

S/PV.8971

The situation in the Central African Republic

22/02/2022

Republic was requested to establish a mechanism to
monitor the implementation of the joint road map. At
the initiative of the Government, a meeting to monitor
the implementation of the joint road map was organized
on 14 January in the country. Gathered there was a
ministerial committee established in the framework of
the summit of the ICGLR Heads of State, comprising
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Angola, Rwanda
and the Central African Republic, assisted by a group
of technical experts set up by the ministerial committee
to conduct and lead useful workshops to complete the
implementation of the road map, in complement with
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation.
As I said, the meeting was also held in accordance
with the communiqué indicating that responsibility
for the monitoring and implementation mechanism fell
to the Central African authorities in order to establish
coordination with technical and financial partners
of the Central African Republic, with the support
of representatives of the ICGLR and the Economic
Community of the Central African States (ECCAS).

summit of ICGLR Heads of State, not recommended
by them.

I call for the unequivocal support of the international
community and the member States represented here
today for the proper functioning and implementation of
the joint road map. From this point forward, we must
work together on the recommendations and challenges
that were raised at the meeting on 14 January. It will
also be a question of working together to reach the goals
set by the six thematic areas of the road map, which I
will recall here.

Simply put, I would say that we should make the
aspirations of the Central African people a common
objective. The republican dialogue, to be held next March,
as already mentioned, is intended to be inclusive and
respecting of the principle of saying no to impunity — a
cherished principle on the basis of which we want to
build the rule of law in the Central African Republic. The
dialogue, linked to the frame of reference recognized
by everyone as the sole instrument for peace — the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic — should, as the report
of the Secretary-General indicates, reinforce national
ownership over peace and the political process, without
any interference whatsoever.

The first is the commitment of armed groups.
First and foremost, armed groups must be brought
to reason. They must renounce violence and adhere
to the peace process. The second is the ceasefire to
create a climate of trust in the peace process. The third
is the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration,
repatriation processes for the Coalition des patriotes
pour le changement, with the commitment of the leaders
in the framework of the ICGRL initiative. The fourth
is a reform of the defence and security sector, taking
into account respect for sovereignty when it comes to
designing and setting up the national army. The fifth
is securing the borders by implementing bipartite
or tripartite agreements defined with neighbouring
countries. And the sixth is the political process, broken
down into the restoration of State authority over the
entire Central African territory and support for the
presidential initiative for the republican dialogue. On
the latter, I want to specify that it was supported by the
24/27

A first implementation analysis took place on
14 January. With the goal of being practical, we focused
on the first three thematic areas in order to take stock,
identify the challenges and make recommendations
by means of which all partners should work together
in solidarity. A failure by armed groups to respect
the commitments they undertook under the first
thematic area to renounce violence; violations of
the unilateral ceasefire declared by the country’s
President; difficulties in carrying out the processes
of demobilization, disarmament, reintegration and
repatriation for members of the Coalition des patriotes
pour le changement; and a lack of willingness by armed
groups to respect the process — all of that now obliges
us to remain firm in our decision to support the peace
process and the initiatives by the subregion so that
ultimately, beyond keeping the peace — in fact, even
before — we can actually achieve the peace so yearned
for by the Central African people.

When it comes to the security situation, bearing in
mind the concerns mentioned in the report presented
here and the fact that the security situation continues
to be unstable, we should recognize that it has indeed
reached a level of stability thanks to the joint efforts
made by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) and allied forces. The Central African
Republic welcomes the decrease in the crime rate in the
city of Bangui. The process of disengagement by armed
groups remains faithful to the Political Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation — for instance, with regard
to the special mixed security units — and continues
to take place, such as in Bouar and Paoua. Moreover,
22-26396

22/02/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

it should be noted that the weakening of the rebellion
by the Coalition des patriotes pour le changement was
driven further by significant dissent among its own
armed elements who are turning away from violence
and from their leaders. The rebuilding of the defence
and security forces is continuing apace in line with
the national defence plan and the support of the
international community and partners.
Alleged human rights violators are being
systematically prosecuted and sentenced by the relevant
military tribunals of the Forces armées centrafricaines,
without prejudice to the pursuit of disciplinary
measures by the Inspector General of the armed
forces. The decrease in human rights and international
humanitarian law violations during the reporting period
was due to convictions and disciplinary measures
taken by the competent authorities. Operations to
secure mining sites are intended to take back control
from armed groups and to combat the illicit trade in
natural resources and the unauthorized presence of
foreign nationals.
There must be no doubts as to the efforts made to
entrench peace. Central African authorities have not
just chosen not to opt for a military approach alone, they
have made a choice as recommended by the Charter
of the United Nations as well as Security Council
resolutions to ensure the protection of their people and
the integrity of our territory — that is our responsibility.
We must also listen to and understand the concerns
about the alarming humanitarian situation and crimes
against civilians and foreign nationals and violations of
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
But we must also hear and understand that the Central
African people are weary and exasperated by the
perpetual use of force by armed groups, which has been
going on for decades. They are tired of being subjected
to violence and the practice of impunity justified on
the need for dialogue with those who harm them, while
elsewhere criminals are hunted down and brought to
justice and care is taken to avoid double standards.
We note and understand members’ great concern
about violations and attacks on Blue Helmets and
humanitarian personnel. But do not forget the millions
of Central African victims who lost their lives at the
hands of armed groups and during the various attempted
coups d’état — whether successful or not — in 2003,
2013 and 2020, without mentioning those martyred
during the coups and mutinies in the 1970s, 1980s and

S/PV. 8971

1990s. Human rights violations are unacceptable. But it
is also unacceptable to legitimize the violence of armed
groups by focusing on violations over a limited period
while ignoring more than 20 years of being subjected to
their barbaric acts.
Tangible progress on the political front and in
the quest for peace and stability is dependent upon
our capacity to provide justice and combat impunity.
That is why the Government is pleased to announce
the following.
The Special Criminal Court, which was developed
gradually, is set to begin taking cases in March.
A communication and consultation framework
between the Court’s Special Prosecutor’s and the
Ministry of Justice is being formalized to allow for the
timely identification of difficulties related to carrying
out the Court’s tasks and to promote appropriate
measure for facilitating the trying of persons operating
under legal, political or military mandates.
Management and accountability bodies within the
judiciary and the army are hard at work to identify
dysfunction and establish responsibility while executing
judicial warrants against political and military figures.
The judicial and penitentiary coverage rate
has improved significantly in recent times, as the
Secretary-General points out in his report, thanks to a
considerable effort to redeploy staff.
Faced with the recurrence of allegations of violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law in
connection with the crisis, the Special Investigation
Commission, whose initial mandate was limited, was
established mutatis mutandis as a permanent body in
order to interact with the Human Rights Division.
Allegations of human rights violations committed
during the reporting period, including military
incidents that took place in Boyo, Matika and close to
the residence of the Head of State, are being legally
dealt with in an appropriate fashion by the regular
mechanisms and will be addressed in a national report
that will be issued subsequently.
When it comes to this last point, the Government
continues to deplore the lack of specificity in reports on
human rights violations and sexual violence in conflict,
which does not facilitate legal investigations or criminal
prosecutions. It is imperative for reports of human rights
violations to be exhaustive and applied to all actors so

22-2639625/27

S/PV.8971

The situation in the Central African Republic

as to be impartial and not geared towards geopolitics
or creating a hierarchy of victims based on whether or
not the character of the person on trial is reputable or
not. In the main, it is about convicting those who merit
conviction. All actors who have committed crimes
and violations on Central African territory must be
convicted so as to show — not just to Central Africans
but to humankind as a whole — that guaranteeing
peace in the world and safeguarding human rights is not
simply an issue of talking about humanity but, above
all, practicing humanity, and that the 1789 Declaration
of the Rights of Man and the Citizen should not be mere
words on an illegible scrap of parchment.
It is essential to practice zero-impunity when
it comes to human rights. For while in the Central
African Republic we saw a contingent dismissed on
the basis of unproven allegations that were deemed
sufficiently serious to warrant its withdrawal, we also
saw how 40 accusations and 40 testimonies resulted in
zero trials.
Let me conclude on the issue of security by
discussing the reforms made in terms of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation and
security sector reform.
The former demobilized combatants who were
arrested in possession of military materials in
Haute-Kotte prefecture following a search operation
were ultimately released after an investigation.
With regard to security sector reform, and
specifically when it comes to weapons and munitions
management, a committee was established in February
2021 for implementation and follow-up. The committee
has come up with a list of trained, qualified personnel
to serve in arms and ammunition depots. In the
absence of lethal equipment, those personnel are not
all operational.
It seems important to me that we learn from the
past and look to the future and better coordinate our
work together in order to reach our shared objective,
which is to regain lasting peace in the Central African
Republic and create the conditions for the economic
and social development of the country. That is not a
lofty or pious dream. It is possible. Others have shown
that it is possible, and we should all be driven by the
same conviction, the same commitment, to work
resolutely so that our solidarity and partnership will not
be manipulated or subject to disinformation campaigns.
26/27

22/02/2022

Respect on both sides for the commitments we have
made and for the well-thought-out principles of the
Charter of the United Nations should help us overcome
our feelings, differences of opinion and criticisms,
knowing that constructive criticism is an asset that
must be deployed, according to the advice of Mahatma
Gandhi, with “humility and courtesy that leaves no
bitterness behind”.
The persistence of too many crises in the Central
African Republic continues to lead to serious
consequences and to create obstacles to building
a country that is respectful of human values. My
Government wishes to assure the international
community that issues linked to human rights, sexual
abuse in conflict and the free circulation of goods and
persons are major concerns for the Central African
Government. The Government continues to draw up
appropriate mechanisms to provide the best solutions to
the problems that continue to exacerbate the situation
in the country. In that regard, the Government again
calls on all its partners to continue supporting us to
achieve lasting stability.
The Government reiterates its call for the complete
lifting of the arms embargo. We call on the Council to
drop the inappropriate and arbitrary sanctions that are
to the detriment of Government forces. They are unfair
and ineffective because they do not align with the goals
and the situation on the ground. We urgently need joint
commitment to work to decrease the capacities of the
enemies of peace — the armed groups — in line with
MINUSCA’s mandate.
I take this opportunity to thank and commend our
bilateral and multilateral partners for their many forms
of support, which have made some progress possible. On
behalf of the Government and the people of the Central
African Republic, I also want to thank MINUSCA
for its support, especially on efforts to mediate
community dialogue, adapt early-warning mechanisms
and support the disarmament and demobilization of
former combatants.
I particularly want to commend the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Central African Republic, my dear brother Mankeur
Ndiaye, under difficult conditions. The Central African
context is a difficult one because it is a situation of
conflict that has gone on for too long. I address my
sincerest thanks to Mankeur for having worked with us
and for us in the struggle for peace. The peace process
22-26396

22/02/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

still faces many challenges, but I thank him for his
contribution and firm commitment to the process. We
urge him to continue to plead our cause even beyond
the borders of the Central African Republic.
I will conclude my statement by recalling that the
need for the support of the international community for
the Central African Republic has never been called into
question. My Government is pleased at the renewal of
MINUSCA’s mandate. It is now a matter of becoming
more effective in order to dampen the frustrations and
reach the legitimate aspirations of our people, to whom
we are accountable for our actions. The extension of
the MINUSCA good offices should lead to an increase
in effectiveness and results, particularly in the support
for training programmes for domestic security forces;
rehabilitating roadways used by tanks and other heavy
equipment; supporting the commission of inquiry into
the use of explosives, as provided for in the work plan
for the implementation of the ICGLR joint road map;
supporting the implementation of the joint road map

S/PV. 8971

itself; as well as continuing the implementation of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic, for which disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation
and
reintegration
are essential.
Beyond the significant progress made in all areas to
achieve lasting development, the Government reiterates
that it gives pride of place to ongoing consultation with
its partners, with a view to finding solutions to reach
our goals. Allow me to conclude with a quotation from
Robert Sabatier: “the friends of our enemies — whom
we believe are enemies — are our allies through the
power of their nature”.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I will now
adjourn the meeting so that the Council can continue its
discussion on the subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

22-2639627/27
