United Nations

A/RES/62/171

General Assembly

Distr.: General
20 March 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 70 (f)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2007
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/62/439/Add.6)]

62/171. International Year of Human Rights Learning
The General Assembly,
Recalling that the purposes and principles contained in the Charter of the
United Nations include promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all,
Reaffirming the central importance of human rights education in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights 1 and the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action
adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 2
0F

1F

Recalling its resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006, in which it decided that the
Human Rights Council should, inter alia, promote human rights education and
learning as well as advisory services, technical assistance and capacity-building,
Recalling also the 2005 World Summit Outcome, in which Heads of State and
Government expressed their support for the promotion of human rights education and
learning at all levels, including through the implementation of the World Programme
for Human Rights Education, as appropriate, and encouraged all States to develop
initiatives in that regard, 3
2F

Noting the complementarities between the World Programme for Human Rights
Education and the International Year of Human Rights Learning,
Acknowledging the important role played by the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization in promoting and coordinating the Education for
All programmes,
Welcoming the adoption by the Human Rights Council on 28 September 2007
of resolution 6/9 entitled “Development of public information activities in the field
of human rights, including the World Public Information Campaign on Human
Rights”, resolution 6/10 entitled “United Nations declaration on human rights

_______________
1

See resolution 217 A (III).
See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III, sect. II, paras. 78–82.
3
See resolution 60/1, para. 131.
2

07-47403

A/RES/62/171

education and training”, and resolution 6/24 entitled “World Programme for Human
Rights Education”, 4
3F

Acknowledging that non-governmental organizations play an important role at
the national, regional and international levels in the promotion and protection of
human rights through education and learning,
Considering that the sixtieth anniversary of the adoption of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights in 2008 is a suitable occasion for the United Nations to
increase its efforts to promote a human rights culture worldwide through education
and learning,
Convinced that every woman, man and child, in order to realize their full
human potential, must be made aware of all their human rights and fundamental
freedoms,
Convinced also that human rights learning should contribute to the fulfilment of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights as a way of life for people everywhere,
Decides that the year commencing on 10 December 2008 shall be
1.
proclaimed the International Year of Human Rights Learning, to be devoted to
activities undertaken to broaden and deepen human rights learning on the basis of the
principles of universality, indivisibility, interdependency, impartiality, objectivity and
non-selectivity, constructive dialogue and cooperation, with a view to enhancing the
promotion and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including
the right to development, bearing in mind the duty of the State, regardless of the
political, economic and cultural system, to promote and protect all human rights and
fundamental freedoms, and the significance of national and regional particularities
and various historical, cultural and religious backgrounds;
Calls upon Member States to intensify their efforts, throughout the Year
2.
and beyond, to promote human rights learning and education at the local, national
and international levels, and encourages cooperation at all levels and with all
relevant stakeholders to this end;
Invites the Human Rights Council and the United Nations High
3.
Commissioner for Human Rights to develop with Member States, in cooperation with
civil society organizations and appropriate specialized agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations system, activities suitable for promoting human
rights learning, as appropriate, at all levels of society;
Decides to commemorate the sixtieth anniversary of the Universal
4.
Declaration of Human Rights1 at a plenary meeting to be held on 10 December 2008,
and encourages the participation of Member States at the highest level possible;
Also decides to devote a special meeting at the end of the Year, during its
5.
sixty-fourth session, to reviewing activities undertaken by Member States, relevant
United Nations agencies and civil society during the Year, and further decides to
determine the format of the meeting at a later date;
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
6.
sixty-fourth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution.
77th plenary meeting
18 December 2007
_______________
4
See A/HRC/6/L.11. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session,
Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53).

2
