General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

72

radiation from all other sources and for analysing its
effects on man and his environment,
Noting the intention of the Scientific Committee to
submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session
a report reviewing, inter alia, the dose assessment
models, natural sources of radiation, technical modified exposures to natural radiation, radon and its decay
products, contamination from nuclear explosions, radioactive contamination due to nuclear power production,
medical irradiation, doses from occupational exposure,
dose-response relationships for radiation-induced cancer, late non-tumorous consequences of whole-body
irradiation, non-stochastic effects resulting from localized irradiation and genetic effects of radiation,
1. Commends the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation for the valuable contribution it has made since its inception to wider
knowledge and understanding of the levels, effects and
risks of atomic radiation;
2. Requests the Scientific Committee to contim~e
its work, including its important co-ordinating activities,
to increase knowledge of the doses, effects and risks of
ionizing radiation from all sources;
3. Notes with satisfaction the continued and growing
scientific co-operation between the Scientific Committee
and the United Nations Environment Programme;
4. Requests the United Nations Environment Programme to continue providing support for the effective
conduct of the Scientific Committee's work and for the
dissemination of its findings to the General AB.sembly,
the scientific community and the public;
5. Commends the Scientific Committee for its work
on selected radio-nuclides and on its objective of preparing a comprehensive document on that subject for
the United Nations Environment Programme;
6. Expresses its appreciation for the assistance rendered to the Scientific Committee by Member States, the
specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy
Agency and non-governmental organizations, and invites
them to increase their co-operation in this field;
7. Endorses the Scientific Committee's request that
Member States and the United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations concerned should continue to supply to the Committee all relevant information, in particular data on exposures from various
sources of radiation, which would greatly assist the
Committee in the preparation of its report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.

61 st plenary meeting
9 November 1979

34 / 29.

Situation in the occupied territories

The General Assembly,
Noting with concern the decision of the Israeli authorities to deport the Mayor of Nablus outside the occupied Palestinian territory,
Gravely concerned at the resignation of the mayors of
cities and towns in the occupied Palestinian territory as
a result of the deportation decision,
Expressing grave anxiety and concern about the present serious situation in the occupied Palestinian territory
as a result of the deportation decision,
l. Calls upon the Israeli authorities to rescind the
deportation order;

2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly as soon as possible on the: implementation of the present resolution.
71st plenary meeting
16 November 1979

34/52.

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East
A
ASSISTANCE TO PALESTINE REFUGEES

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/112 A of 18 December 1978 and all previous resolutions on the question,
including resolution 194 (Ill) of 11 December 1948,
Taking note of the report of the CommissionerGeneral of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, covering the
period from I July 1978 to 30 June 1979, 3
1. Notes with deep regret that repatriation or compensation of the refugees as provided for in paragraph
11 of General Assembly resolution 194 (Ill) has not
been effected, that no substantial progress has been made
in the programme endorsed by the Assembly in paragraph 2 of its resolution 513 (VI) of 26 January 1952
for the reintegration of refugees either by repatriation
, or rtsettlement and that, therefore, the situation of the
refugees continues to be a matter of serious concern;
2. Expresses its thanks to the Commissioner-General
and to all the staff of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
recognizing that the Agency is doing all it can within
the limits of available resources, and also expresses its
thanks to the specialized agencies and private organizations for their valuable work in assisting the refugees;
3. Expresses its deep appreciation to the former
Commissioner~General, Mr. Thomas W. McElhiney,
for his many years of effective service to the Agency and
his dedication to the welfare of the refugees;
4. Reiterates its request that the headquarters of the
Agency should be relocated within the area of its operations as soon as practicable;
5. Notes with regret that the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine has been unable to
find a means of achieving progress in the implementation
of paragraph I 1 of General Assembly resolution 194
(111) 4 and requests the Commission to exert continued
efforts towards the implementation of that paragraph
and to report to the Assembly as appropriate, but no
later than 1 October 1980;
6. Directs attention to the continuing seriousness of
the financial position of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
as outlined in the report of the Commissioner-General;
7. Notes with profound concern that, despite the
commendable and successful efforts of the Commissioner-General to collect additional contributions, this
increased level of income to the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
3
Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/34/13
and Corr.I).
4
For the reJ?Ort of the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestme covering the period from 1 October 1978 to
30 September 1979, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda item 50, document
A/34/549, annex.
