242

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Taking note of the reports of the Special Committee on
the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening
of the Role of the Organization 38 and of the Working Group
on the Peaceful Settlement of Disputes, 39
Taking note also of the progress made in the Special
Committee and in the Working Group in the elaboration of
the draft Manila declaration on the peaceful settlement of
international disputes,
Taking into account the opinions expressed during the
examination at its thirty-sixth session of the question of the
peaceful settlement of disputes between States,
l. Calls again upon all States to adhere strictly in their
international relations to the principle that States shall settle
their international disputes by peaceful means in such a
manner that international peace and security and justice are
not endangered;
2. Considers that the question of the peaceful settlement
of disputes should represent one of the central concerns for
States and that, to this end, the efforts for examining and
further developing the principle of peaceful settlement of
disputes between States and the means of consolidating its
full observance by all States in their international relations
should be continued;
3. Considers also that the elaboration, as soon as possible, of a declaration of the General Assembly on the peaceful settlement of international disputes is likely to enhance
the observance of the principle of peaceful settlement of
disputes and to contribute to the strengthening of the role
of the United Nations in preventing conflicts and settling
them peacefully;
4. Requests the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of
the Organization to finalize the draft Manila declaration on
the peaceful settlement of international disputes with a view
to its consideration and adoption by the General Assembly,
and to submit it to the Assembly at its thirty-seventh session;
5. Refers to the Special Committee the report of its
Working Group on the Peaceful Settlement of Disputes, as
well as the views expressed at the thirty-sixth session of the
General Assembly on the contents of the declaration;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Peaceful settlement
of disputes between States".
92nd plenary meeting
JO December 1981

36/111.

Consideration of the draft articles on mostfavoured-nation clauses

The Gereral Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/139 of 19 December 1978
relating to the report of the International Law Commission
on the work of its thirtieth session, 40 in particular section
II of the resolution,
Recalling also its resolution 35/161 of 15 December 1980,
entitled "Consideration of the draft articles on mostfavoured-nation clauses",
Reaffirming its appreciation of the high quality of the
work done by the International Law Commission in elaborating a series of draft articles on most-favoured-nation
clauses,

Bearing in mind the importance of facilitating international trade and development of economic co-operation
among all States on the basis of equality, mutual advantage
and non-discrimination in the establishment of the new
international economic order,
Having considered the item entitled ''Consideration of
the draft articles on most-favoured-nation clauses", including the report of the Secretary-General 41 and the analytical
compilation of comments and observations from Governments, organs of the United Nations which have competence
in the subject-matter and interested intergovernmental organizations, 42 submitted pursuant to paragraphs 3 and 4 of
General Assembly resolution 35/161,
Taking note of the comments and observations submitted,
in particular those relating to outstanding issues,
Aware of the fact that more replies from States and interested intergovernmental agencies are needed,
I. Requests the Secretary-General to reiterate his invitation to Member States, relevant organs of the United
Nations, such as the regional commissions and the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law, as well
as interested intergovernmental organizations, to submit or
bring up to date, not later than 30 June 1983, any written
comments and observations which they deem appropriate
on chapter II of the report of the International Law Commission on the work of its thirtieth session, in particular on:
(a) The draft articles on most-favoured-nation clauses
adopted by the International Law Commission;
(b) Those provisions relating to such clauses on which
the International Law Commission was unable to take a
decision;
and also requests States to comment on the recommendation
of the International Law Commission that those draft articles
should be recommended to Member States with a view to
the conclusion of a convention on the subject;
2. Decides to consider the substance of the draft articles
on most-favoured-nation clauses, together with any amendments thereto, at its thirty-eighth session with a view to
taking a decision thereon;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled •'Consideration of the
draft articles on most-favoured-nation clauses" and to consider it as a matter of priority.
92nd plenary meeting
JO December 1981

36/112.

Review of the multilateral treaty-making process

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that multilateral treaties are an important
primary source of international law,
Conscious, therefore, that the process of elaboration of
multilateral treaties, directed towards the progressive development of international law and its codification, forms
an important part of the work of the United Nations and of
the international community in general,
Recalling its resolution 35/ 162 of 15 December 1980, in
which it invited Governments and international organizations to submit their observations on the report of the Secretary-General submitted to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fifth session, 43 as well as their comments on any other
aspect of the subject.

38

lbid., Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 33 (A/36/33).
A/C.6/36/L.19.
40
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. JO (A/33/IO).
39

41
A/36/145.
" A/36/146.
" A/35/312 and Corr. I.
