A/RES/77/99

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
19 December 2022

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 75
Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fifty-fifth session

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 7 December 2022
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/77/413, para. 11)]

77/99.

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-fifth session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it
established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law with a
mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of
international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in
particular those of developing countries, in the extensive development of international
trade,
Reaffirming its belief that the progressive modernization and harmonization of
international trade law, in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of
international trade, especially those affecting developing countries, would contribute
significantly to universal economic cooperation among all States on a basis of
equality, equity, common interest and respect for the rule of law, to the elimination of
discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to peace, stability and the well being of all peoples,
Having considered the report of the Commission, 1
Reiterating its concern that activities undertaken by other bodies in the field of
international trade law without adequate coordination with the Commission might
lead to undesirable duplication of efforts and would not be in keeping with the aim of
promoting efficiency, consistency and coherence in the unification and harmonization
of international trade law,

__________________
1

22-28243 (E)

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 17
(A/77/17).

221222

*2228243*

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-fifth session

A/RES/77/99

Reaffirming the mandate of the Commission, as the core legal body within the
United Nations system in the field of international trade law, to coord inate legal
activities in this field, in particular to avoid duplication of efforts, including among
organizations formulating rules of international trade, and to promote efficiency,
consistency and coherence in the modernization and harmonization of inte rnational
trade law, and to continue, through its secretariat, to maintain close cooperation with
other international organs and organizations, including regional organizations, active
in the field of international trade law,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law;
2.
Commends the Commission for the finalization and approval of the United
Nations Convention on the International Effects of Judicial Sales of Ships, 2 and the
finalization and adoption of the Model Law on the Use and Cross-border Recognition
of Identity Management and Trust Services 3 and the recommendations to assist
mediation centres and other interested bodies with regard to mediation under the
Mediation Rules; 4
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to operate, through the
secretariat of the Commission, the repository of published information in accordance
with article 8 of the Rules on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State
Arbitration, 5 as a continuation of the project until the end of 2023, to be funded
entirely by voluntary contributions, notes with satisfaction the contributions by the
European Union, Germany and the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting
Countries Fund for International Development in this regard, 6 and also requests the
Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly informed of developments regarding
the funding and budgetary situation of the transparency repository;
4.
Notes with interest the progress made by the Commission in its work in
the areas of micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises, dispute settlement, investorState dispute settlement reform, electronic commerce and insolvency law, 7 and
encourages the Commission to continue to move forward efficiently to achieve
tangible work outcomes in those areas;
5.
Takes note with interest of the decisions of the Commission to task its
working groups with the development of a new instrument on negotiable multimodal
transport documents, 8 work on automated contracting and on data provision contracts
as part of its work on legal issues related to the digital economy, and the consideration
of the topics of technology-related dispute resolution and adjudication jointly; 9
6.
Welcomes the decision by the Commission to proceed with its exploratory
work on the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on international
trade law, 10 the stocktaking of developments in dispute resolution in th e digital
economy 11 and the progress of the preparatory work in the area of warehouse
receipts; 12
__________________

Ibid., chap. IV, sect. D, and annex I.
Ibid., chap. VI, sect. C, and annex II.
4
Ibid., chap. V, sect. C, and annex III.
5
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17), annex I.
6
Ibid., Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/77/17), chap. XV, sect. E.
7
Ibid., chaps. VII–XI.
8
Ibid., chap. XII, sect. B.2.
9
Ibid., chap. VII, sect. B.
10
Ibid., chap. XII, sect. B.3.
11
Ibid., sect. B.5 (a).
12
Ibid., sect. B.1.
2
3

2/6

22-28243

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-fifth session

A/RES/77/99

7.
Takes note of the interest of the Commission in holding a colloquium or
an expert group meeting on the various legal issues surrounding climate change
mitigation, adaptation and resilience in conjunction with relevant interested
international organizations; 13
8.
Notes the endorsement by the Commission of the International Standard
Demand Guarantee Practice for Uniform Rules for Demand Guarantees 758 of th e
International Chamber of Commerce; 14
9.
Endorses the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal
body within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, aimed
at increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities of international and
regional organizations active in the field of international trade law, including on legal
issues relating to the digital economy as reaffirmed by the Commission at its fifty third session, 15 and at promoting the rule of law at the national and international levels
in this field, and in this regard appeals to relevant international and regional
organizations to coordinate their activities with those of the Commission, to avoid
duplication of efforts and to promote efficiency, consistency and coherence in the
modernization and harmonization of international trade law;
10. Reaffirms the importance, in particular for developing countries, of the
work of the Commission concerned with technical cooperation and assistance in the
field of international trade law reform and development, and in this connection:
(a) Welcomes the initiatives of the Commission towards expanding, through
its secretariat, its technical cooperation and assistance programme, in that respect
encourages the Secretary-General to seek partnerships with State and non-State actors
to increase awareness about the work of the Commission and facilitate the effective
implementation of legal standards resulting from its work, and notes with appreciation
the organization by the secretariat of the UNCITRAL Day events in partnership with
Governments and regional universities in Asia and the Pacific and Latin America and
the Caribbean as well as the launch of a series of UNCITRAL Day events for Africa,
aimed at promoting awareness and encouraging the study and discussion of
Commission texts; 16
(b) Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for carrying out technical
cooperation and assistance activities and for providing assistance with legislative
drafting in the field of international trade law, and draws the attention of the
Secretary-General to the limited resources that are made available in this field;
(c) Expresses its appreciation to the Governments whose contributions
enabled the technical cooperation and assistance activities to take place, and appeals
to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations,
institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law trust fund for symposiums and, where
appropriate, for the financing of special projects and otherwise to assist the secretariat
of the Commission in carrying out technical cooperation and assistance activities, in
particular in developing countries;
(d) Reiterates its appeal to the United Nations Development Programme and
other bodies responsible for development assistance, such as the World Bank and
regional development banks, as well as to Governments in their bilateral aid
programmes, to support the technical cooperation and assistance programme of the
Commission and to cooperate with the Commission and coordinate their activities
__________________

Ibid., sect. B.4.
Ibid., chap. XIII.
15
Ibid., Seventy-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/75/17), part two, chap. X, sect. C.4, para. 72.
16
Ibid., Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/77/17), chap. XV, sect. B.1.
13
14

22-28243

3/6

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-fifth session

A/RES/77/99

with those of the Commission in the light of the relevance and importance of the work
and programmes of the Commission for the promotion of the rule of law at the
national and international levels and for the implementation of the international
development agenda, including the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development; 17
(e) Recalls its resolutions stressing the need to strengthen support to Member
States, upon their request, in the domestic implementation of their respective
international obligations through enhanced technical assistance and capacity building, and welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to ensure greater
coordination and coherence among United Nations entities and with donors and
recipients;
11. Recalls the importance of adherence to the rules of procedure and methods
of work of the Commission, including transparent and inclusive deliberations, ta king
into account the summary of conclusions as reproduced in annex III to the report on
the work of its forty-third session, 18 requests the Secretariat to issue, prior to meetings
of the Commission and of its working groups, a reminder of those rules of p rocedure
and methods of work with a view to ensuring the high quality of the work of the
Commission and encouraging the assessment of its instruments, and recalls in this
regard its previous resolutions related to this matter;
12. Welcomes the activities of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law Regional Centre for Asia and the Pacific, in the Republic of
Korea, towards providing capacity-building and technical assistance services to
States in the Asia-Pacific region, including to international and regional
organizations, expresses its appreciation to the Republic of Korea and China, whose
contributions enabled continuing operation of the Regional Centre, notes that the
continuation of the regional presence relies entirely on extrabudgetar y resources,
including but not limited to voluntary contributions from States, and requests the
Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly informed of developments regarding
the establishment of regional centres, in particular their funding and budgeta ry
situation;
13. Appeals to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system,
organizations, institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the trust
fund established to provide travel assistance to developing countries that are members
of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the Secretary -General,
in order to enable renewal of the provision of that assistance and to increase expert
representation from developing countries at sessions of the Commission an d its
working groups, necessary to build local expertise and capacities in those countries
to put in place a regulatory and enabling environment for business, trade and
investment;
14. Decides, in order to ensure full participation of all Member States in the
sessions of the Commission and its working groups, to continue, in the competent
Main Committee during the seventy-seventh session of the General Assembly, its
consideration of granting travel assistance to the least developed countries, at their
request and in consultation with the Secretary-General, and notes the contributions
from France, Germany, the European Union and the Swiss Agency for Development
and Cooperation to the trust fund, which would facilitate the participation of
representatives of developing States in the deliberations of Working Group III; 19

__________________

Resolution 70/1.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/65/17).
19
Ibid., Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/77/17), chap. X.
17
18

4/6

22-28243

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-fifth session

A/RES/77/99

15. Endorses the conviction of the Commission that the implementation and
effective use of modern private law standards in international trade are essential for
advancing good governance, sustained economic development and the eradication of
poverty and hunger and that the promotion of the rule of law in commercial relations
should be an integral part of the broader agenda of the United Nations to promote the
rule of law at the national and international levels, including through the Rule of Law
Coordination and Resource Group, supported by the Rule of Law Unit in the
Executive Office of the Secretary-General;
16. Notes the role of the Commission in promoting the rule of law, respective
discussions in the Commission at its fifty-fifth session, and the comments transmitted
by the Commission, pursuant to paragraph 20 of General Assembly resolution 76/117
of 9 December 2021, highlighting the relevance of its current work to the promotion
of the rule of law and the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals; 20
17. Notes with satisfaction that, in paragraph 8 of the declaration of the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law at the national and
international levels, adopted by consensus as resolution 67/1 of 24 September 2012,
Member States recognized the importance of fair, stable and predictable legal
frameworks for generating inclusive, sustainable and equitable development,
economic growth and employment, generating investment and facilitating
entrepreneurship and, in this regard, commended the work of the Commission in
modernizing and harmonizing international trade law and that, in paragraph 7 of the
declaration, Member States expressed their conviction that the rule of law and
development were strongly interrelated and mutually reinforcing;
18. Also notes with satisfaction that, in paragraph 89 of the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development,
adopted by the General Assembly by consensus as resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015,
States endorsed the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal body
within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, aimed at
increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities of international and
regional organizations active in the field of international trade law and at promoting
the rule of law at the national and international levels in this field;
19. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in conformity with
resolutions of the General Assembly on documentation-related matters, 21 which, in
particular, emphasize that any invitation to limit, where appropriate, the length of
documents should not adversely affect either the quality of the presentation or the
substance of the documents, to bear in mind the particular characteristics of the
mandate and functions of the Commission in the progressive development and
codification of international trade law when implementing page limits with respect to
the documentation of the Commission; 22
20. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the publication of Commission
standards and the provision of summary records of the meetings of the Commission,
including committees of the whole established by the Commission for the duration of
its annual session, relating to the formulation of normative texts;
21. Recalls paragraph 48 of its resolution 66/246 of 24 December 2011
regarding the rotation scheme of meetings between Vienna and New York;
22. Stresses the importance of promoting the use of texts emanating from the
work of the Commission for the global unification and harmonization of international
__________________

Ibid., chap. XVIII.
Resolutions 52/214, sect. B, 57/283 B, sect. III, and 58/250, sect. III.
22
See resolutions 59/39, para. 9, and 65/21, para. 18; see also Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/59/17), paras. 124–128.
20
21

22-28243

5/6

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-fifth session

A/RES/77/99

trade law, and to this end urges States that have not yet done so to consider signing,
ratifying or acceding to conventions, enacting model laws and encouraging the use of
other relevant texts;
23. Commends the secretariat of the Commission for holding an online panel
discussion on technical assistance activities in the field of insolvency law; 23
24. Notes with appreciation the work of the Secretariat on the system for the
collection and dissemination of case law on Commission texts (the CLOUT system)
in the six official languages of the United Nations, notes the resource-intensive nature
of the system, acknowledges the need for further resources to sustain and expand it,
notes with interest the progress towards a rejuvenation of the CLOUT system, and its
focus on developing a more active and productive network of CLOUT system
contributors and covering an expanded range of Commission texts, in this regard
welcomes the renewed efforts by the Commission and its secretariat towards building
partnerships with interested institutions, and appeals to Governments, the relevant
bodies of the United Nations system, organizations, institutions and individuals to
assist the secretariat of the Commission in raising awareness as to the availability and
usefulness of the CLOUT system in professional, academic and judiciary circles and
in securing the funding required for the coordination and expansion of the system and
the establishment, within the secretariat of the Commission, of a pillar focused on the
promotion of ways and means of interpreting Commission texts in a uniform manner;
25. Welcomes the continuing work of the Secretariat on digests of case law
related to Commission texts, including their wide dissemination, as well as the
continuing increase in the number of abstracts available through the CLOUT system,
in view of the role of the digests and the CLOUT system a s important tools for the
promotion of the uniform interpretation of international trade law, in particular by
building local capacity of judges, arbitrators and other legal practitioners to interpret
those standards in the light of their international character and the need to promote
uniformity in their application and the observance of good faith in international trade,
and notes the satisfaction of the Commission with the performance of the New York
Convention website 24 and the successful coordination between that website and the
CLOUT system;
26. Recalls its resolutions affirming the importance of high-quality, userfriendly and cost-effective United Nations websites and the need for their multilingual
development, maintenance and enrichment, 25 commends the fact that the website of
the Commission has been migrated to a mobile device-friendly platform and that it
continues to be published simultaneously in the six official languages of the United
Nations, and welcomes the continuous efforts of the Commission to maintain and
improve its website, and to enhance the visibility of its work by utilizing social media
features in accordance with the applicable guidelines. 26
47th plenary meeting
7 December 2022

__________________

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 17
(A/77/17), chap. XV, sect. B.2.
24
https://newyorkconvention1958.org/.
25
Resolutions 52/214, sect. C, para. 3; 55/222, sect. III, para. 12; 56/64 B, sect. X; 57/130 B,
sect. X; 58/101 B, sect. V, paras. 61–76; 59/126 B, sect. V, paras. 76–95; 60/109 B, sect. IV,
paras. 66–80; and 61/121 B, sect. IV, paras. 65–77.
26
See resolution 63/120, para. 20.
23

6/6

22-28243
