S/PV.7428

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7428th meeting

Wednesday, 15 April 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Kawar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Jordan)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. McLay
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2015/203)
Letter dated 9 April 2015 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2015/243)

15-10466 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1510466*

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2015/203)
Letter dated 9 April 2015 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2015/243)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, Belgium,
Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, El Salvador,
Germany, Guatemala, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Mexico, Morocco, Nepal,
the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Rwanda, Slovenia, the Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
Viet Nam and Zimbabwe to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict;
and Ms. Hamsatu Allamin, NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
individuals to participate in this meeting: Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, and Mr. Téte António,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

2/82

15/04/2015

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/203, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence.
I wish to also draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/243, which contains a letter dated
9 April 2015 from the Permanent Representative of
Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept note on the item under
consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bangura.
Ms. Bangura: I wish to thank the Government of
Jordan for hosting this open debate, which comes at a
crucial moment of consolidation for this agenda, as well
as the Council for the priority it has given this issue for
several years.
I am grateful that my sister Hamsatu Allamin is
able to join us today, giving voice to civil society, which
represents a moral compass for this mandate. I also
wish to acknowledge the presence of Vian Dakhil of the
Yazidi community and Member of Parliament in Iraq.
I am glad that she will speak on behalf of her country
at this debate.
It has been three years since I assumed my role as
the Secretary-General’s Special Representative, and
I could hardly have imagined how heartbreaking this
mission would be. The horrors suffered by the women,
children and men whom I have encountered reaffirm
my absolute conviction that sexual violence in conflict
represents a great moral issue of our time and merits the
concerted focus of the Security Council. This crime, in
its destruction of the individual and the pervasive way
it undermines the prospects for peace and development,
casts a long shadow over our collective humanity.
However, five years after the creation of the mandate,
I believe that we find ourselves at a new juncture, with
a possibility to turn back the tide of these atrocities. We
have an opportunity to change, irrevocably, not only the
way in which this crime is perceived and understood,
but also, crucially, the manner in which we respond to
it in our security and justice sectors, and in terms of
services for survivors.
We are beginning to see some tangible and positive
changes on the ground, which should convince us that
our fight to eradicate sexual violence in conflict is not
a “mission impossible”. We have a solid normative

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

foundation and increasingly precise tools to drive this
agenda on the ground. Our knowledge, analysis and
information are deeper and serve as a basis for strategic
interventions at all levels. Greater resources are
being dedicated to sexual and gender-based violence
programming on the ground than ever before, although
the resources still fall far short of the challenges we
face.
We are finally beginning to see some accountability
for a crime that has historically been largely cost-free
to commit. This is exemplified by important legislative
reforms, the criminalization of rape at national level, and
an increase in national and international prosecutions.
National authorities in some key situations of concern
are beginning to take ownership and exhibit the
leadership required to address conflict-related sexual
violence in a purposeful and sustainable manner. This
includes structured commitments undertaken at the
highest levels of Government, and the adoption of
specific plans of action by national security institutions.
Over the past three years, we have witnessed a
significant increase in the number of peace agreements
and ceasefire frameworks that explicitly reflect conflictrelated sexual violence concerns, which is crucial
to ensuring that survivors have services and redress
in the aftermath of conflict and that perpetrators are
excluded from power and held to account. The notion of
reparations for survivors is also beginning to take root,
and we are seeing some examples of transformative
reparations programmes coming on-line, and some
survivors receiving reparations. However, we still have
a long road ahead to ensure that women have consistent
and timely redress, including the necessary livelihood
support to enable them to pick up the pieces of their
lives.
This year’s report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/203), which I am honoured to present,
highlights shocking incidents of sexual violence in 19
situations of concern, as well as some of these positive
developments. The interagency network United Nations
Action Against Sexual Violence in Conflict, which I
Chair, continues to be the primary consultation forum
for the report, and the depth of information and analysis
this year represents an important marker of progress
in itself. I would like to note that women protection
advisers, where they are deployed, have contributed
significantly to deepening the information base for
the report. I am pleased that two of our senior women
protection advisers, currently serving in Mali and the

S/PV.7428

Democratic Republic of the Congo, are here today and
will have the chance to interact directly with Council
delegations and concerned Member States this week.
The text before the Council serves not only
as an annual report of record, but also as a global
advocacy instrument and vehicle for refining our
common understanding of critical themes to enhance
coordination and build global consensus. This year’s
report raises a number of themes and brings to light
new dimensions of this issue. There is a focus on sexual
violence as a threat used to induce displacement and
as a risk faced by civilians, particularly women and
girls, in displacement settings. It is linked to forced
dispossession of land and property, which denies
women vital sources of livelihood. It highlights the
vulnerability and targeting of ethnic and religious
minorities, including lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender
and intersex individuals by armed groups, to impose
morality and exert social control.
Forced marriage, which entails repeated sexual
abuse and increases in times of conflict, features
prominently throughout the report. It touches on
the role of community, faith-based leaders and local
journalists in addressing harmful social norms, and
helping to redirect the stigma of rape from the victims
to the perpetrators. The report emphasizes throughout
the narrative the necessity of addressing this issue in
ceasefire and mediation processes as an integral part of
our response to sexual violence, preventing relapse into
conflict and fostering a durable, inclusive peace.
Tomorrow, I will depart for my first visit to the
Middle East, on a mission that will take me to Syria and
Iraq, as well as to the neighboring countries of Jordan,
Lebanon and Turkey, which continue to bear the weight
of massive flows of refugees fleeing conflict. The visit
is undertaken against the backdrop of a catastrophic
new trend in the use of sexual violence as a tactic of
terror by extremist groups, not only in Iraq and Syria,
but also in Somalia, Nigeria and Mali.
The Secretary-General’s report, for the first time,
articulates how sexual violence is integrally linked to the
strategic objectives, ideology and funding of extremist
groups, and notes therefore that women’s empowerment
and sexual violence prevention should be central to
the international response. This represents a critical
new challenge for the conflict-related sexual violence
agenda. I would like to underscore the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that the Al-Qaida/Islamic

15-104663/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

State in Iraq and the Levant sanctions committee
includes sexual violence as part of its designation
criteria, and begins to focus on sexual violence as a
tactic of terrorism. But ultimately, an effective counterstrategy must include intensive community-level
engagement, including with women and civil society,
youth groups, and traditional and faith-based leaders.
It should be noted that, of the 45 parties listed in
the annex of this year’s report, the vast majority are
non-State actors. Therefore, we will have to consider
the political and operational challenges that lie ahead
in terms of engaging with some of these parties, for
concrete and time-bound commitments in line with
resolution 2106 (2013). My Office has begun to explore
engagement with a number of non-State actors, and I
look forward to the opportunity to brief the Council
in the future on progress and challenges in this crucial
area.
Since the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), we
have been able to successfully frame this issue as a
peace and security concern that requires an operational
security response. I believe that more focused
engagement of security sector actors will help to turn
the tide on this crime. It will require us to articulate
more precisely the role that security sector actors can
play and to transform military cultures to enhance
protection and prevention.
Over the past two years, we have signed
frameworks of cooperation with the African Union
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, and are now moving along similar lines with
the League of Arab States. At the same time, a number
of regional organizations, including the AU and NATO,
have appointed special representatives and envoys
on women, peace and security. This represents an
important expansion of the circle of stakeholders, and
challenges us to ensure coordination and coherence in
our collective action.
Since I assumed my role, one of my key objectives
for the mandate has been to foster national ownership,
leadership and responsibility. I am encouraged that,
since 2012, the Governments of Angola, Guinea, the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Somalia and South Sudan have signed
joint communiqués with the United Nations, outlining
priority areas of intervention to address sexual
violence. These commitments have been undertaken at
the highest levels of Government and are the basis for

4/82

15/04/2015

implementation plans that are now being developed by
national authorities, in concert with the United Nations
and other partners.
The United Nations Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict has
been instrumental in supporting national authorities
to catalyse implementation through technical and
institutional capacity-strenghthening. The role of
United Nations Action is also crucial, particularly in
supporting the development and implementation of
comprehensive national strategies to combat sexual
violence and deliver multisectoral services to survivors.
It is essential that both the Team of Experts and United
Nations Action receive the financial support necessary
to sustain those efforts.
Since my last briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.7160), I have undertaken follow-up missions to the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and visited South Sudan and Colombia
for the first time. I intend to continue the intensive
engagement of the mandate in situations of concern so
as to turn the resolutions of the Council into solutions
on the ground.
Progress at the national level is crucial and indicates
that addressing conflict-related sexual violence is
possible even under challenging circumstances. It is
essential that both the Team of Experts and UN Action
receive the necessary financial support to sustain these
efforts.
I believe that the modest progress that we are
beginning to witness should be an encouragement to
all of us to stay the course and reinforce our efforts.
At the same time, the catastrophic circumstances and
the acute vulnerability of so many women, children and
men to sexual violence in conflict situations around the
world must now crystallize our resolve into clear action
to prevent those crimes and to care for survivors.
It is essential that we translate promises into
practice. As the report states, the era of silence has been
replaced by international recognition that the shame of
rape resides not in the victims but in the perpetrators,
and in any party that seeks to condone or conceal their
conduct.
The history of war-zone rape has been a history
of denial. It is time to bring these crimes, and those
who commit them, into the spotlight of international
scrutiny and to send a clear message that the world will

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

not tolerate the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war
and terror.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Ms. Bangura
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Allamin.
Ms. Allamin: Today I wish to draw global attention
to the plight of women and girls in Nigeria’s north-east, a
region that has been the centre of a two-year insurgency.
Yesterday we marked the one-year anniversary of the
abduction of 276 girls from Chibok. Two hundred and
nineteen of them remain missing, even as the whole
world has been asking our authorities to bring back our
girls. The most recent estimate is that approximately
2,000 women and girls have been kidnapped by armed
men since the start of 2014, a much higher number
than is currently receiving attention. They are stripped
naked so that they cannot escape, forced into marriage
and repeatedly raped.
On behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, and as the regional manager of the
Nigeria Stability and Reconciliation Program and as a
national executive member of the Federation of Muslim
Women’s Associations in Nigeria, I am here to implore
the Security Council and the international community
to develop integrated solutions in partnership with
women’s groups and service providers. Such solutions
should prevent conflict-related sexual violence, protect
those at risk, provide comprehensive support to
survivors, promote gender perspectives and women’s
voices, prosecute those responsible and take action to
strengthen the rights of women and girls. In addition,
women’s meaningful participation in peace and security
processes must be a core component of any effort to
effectively reduce and address incidents of conflictrelated sexual violence.
Fighting extremism and ending violent conflicts
must prioritize the promotion of State and global
responsibilities to uphold international standards.
That means ensuring accountability for human rights
violations, including all forms of sexual and genderbased violence, and enshrining gender equality at all
levels.
State and non-State armed groups in my
country — as in Somalia, the Sudan, South Sudan, Iraq,
Syria, Yemen, Burma and many other places — are
perpetrating acts of sexual and gender-based violence
on women, girls, men and boys. That has a devastating

S/PV.7428

impact on sustainable peace and development. In Iraq,
sexual and gender-based violence committed by the
extremist group Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
may amount to crimes against humanity. Likewise in
my country, Nigeria, witnesses last month reported that
dozens of women who had previously been forced to
marry insurgents were killed by their “husbands” to
prevent them from either escaping or being rescued
and eventually marrying soldiers or other so-called
non-believers.
Efforts to prevent all forms of conflict-related
violence will not succeed without women’s leadership
and participation. Women human rights defenders and
local civil society representatives in north-eastern
Nigeria are negotiating and mediating with armed
groups, rescuing women and girls in the occupied
territories and providing rescued survivors with
assistance and support. I cannot stress enough the
importance of coupling international efforts with those
that are already happening at the grass-roots level.
Community organizations must be involved in
the provision of immediate and long-term support
services, and be supported to create safe spaces where
women and girls can openly discuss their experiences
and share their coping strategies. Often, survivors and
their families do not want to be identified. They fear
retribution and stigmatization, and they feel alone.
Coordination is also required to ensure that specialized
and confidential survivor-centred medical, psychosocial
and economic support is available. Member States must
also commit to removing barriers that prevent many
survivors, particularly those who are displaced, from
accessing the medical care required by their condition
on a non-discrimminatory basis.
In addition, I urge the Security Council and Member
States to ensure the establishment of comprehensive
justice strategies that ensure investigations, reporting
and reparation provisions. Those must be in line with
international humanitarian and human rights law and
comply with ethical and safety guidelines. Immunity
must not be granted for sexual and gender-based
violence or any other serious human rights violations,
whether in legislation or peace agreements. In Nigeria,
therefore, we need a formal process to determine
the total number of women and girls who have been
abducted to date. Those still missing must be found and
supported, and the perpetrators and sponsors of those
crimes must be brought to justice.

15-104665/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

Out of the horrible ordeals that we have suffered
and witnessed has come the transformation of Nigerian
women as peacebuilders. Women who were the most
marginalized, poor and illiterate are now mobilizing.
They are active citizens who speak on community radio
and are establishing safe spaces and peace clubs that
train other women and survivors, equipping them with
life skills and linking them to microfinancing bodies.
The international community should support those
growing efforts.
Organizations such as my own are advocating and
building awareness in Nigeria for the full integration of
resolution 1325 (2000) and the women and peace and
security agenda into domestic policies and legislation.
In addition, we need international attention and support
for the implementation and resourcing of Nigeria’s
national action plan. Member States should ensure
that development assistance to Nigeria helps increase
educational opportunities for girls, combats genderbased and other forms of discrimination, keeps schools
safe, builds the capacity of women leaders in girls’
education, improves health care for women and girls
and supports and empowers local women civil society.
Women’s meaningful and active participation must
be prioritized in all efforts aimed at addressing the
underlying causes of conflict-related sexual violence
and broader conflict management, prevention and
resolution, as well as post-conflict strategies. Such
strategies must also address the proliferation of drugs
and corruption and the absence of the rule of law, and
curb the flow of small arms and light weapons, which
have been linked to conflict-related sexual violence.
States should ratify and implement the Arms Trade
Treaty, which requires exporting parties to take into
account the risk of conventional arms being used
to commit or facilitate serious acts of gender-based
violence.
It is important to acknowledge the recent peaceful
elections in Nigeria, which have brought hope for
stability. The incoming President must address the
general system and the institutional failures in the
country. Permit me to use this opportunity to also
call on the Security Council and all Member States to
encourage the Nigerian and neighbouring Governments
to explore alternative options for dialogue with the
non-violent members of the insurgency, including
those who were forcibly conscripted and those who are
yearning for peace and an end to violence. I am sure
there are many who are willing to lay down their arms,
but lack an alternative.
6/82

15/04/2015

We have all seen the violence in my country spill
over into neighbouring States. Women in our part of
the country are not included, and our voices have been
marginalized from discussions relating to peace and
security in the region. My country, and particularly
the region I live in — the north-eastern part of
Nigeria — will experience peace, security and stability
only when we, the women, are empowered to be active
citizens in society.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Ms. Allamin for her briefing, especially on the issue of
the girls in Nigeria, one that has attracted the attention
of the entire world.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): Thank you,
Madam President, for organizing today’s debate. We
appreciate greatly the remarks and leadership of Special
Representative Zainab Bangura and Ms. Hamsatu
Allamin on the critical issue of combatting sexual
violence in conflict.
Fifteen years ago this October, the Security Council
acknowledged the critical importance of women in the
maintenance of international peace and security. This
October the Council will convene at the ministerial
level to take stock of our progress over the past 15 years
and determine a way forward.
As we look ahead to the high-level review in
October, today’s debate can be seen as an opportunity
to assess the progress made and the challenges ahead
of us related to protection against conflict-related
sexual violence. As we know from experience, women
and children are disproportionately affected by such
violence, and the use of sexual violence as a tool of
war too often serves to marginalize women and
obstruct their participation in peace processes. Over
the past several years, the international community has
galvanized around this issue, denouncing the culture of
impunity surrounding sexual violence and supporting
judicial and legal reforms among other interventions.
We have seen progress in that regard, but there
is much more that remains to be done. Special
Representative Bangura has demonstrated admirable
leadership in tackling this difficult issue head on. Her
personal efforts, along with those of many individuals
here today, have already resulted in significant changes
in the way we approach conflict-related sexual violence.
Women leaders have been dynamic agents for change in
15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

combating sexual violence, and we are inspired by their
work around the world. They not only support survivors
in their work, but also promote prevention, recovery
and resilience through efforts that champion women’s
active participation in decision-making in society. They
are women such as Landy, a 28-year-old law student
in Haiti, who volunteered with a Unites States-funded
programme and has since committed herself to using the
law as an important tool for preventing violence, and Sri
Lankan peace activist Shreen Saroor, who, through her
non-governmental organization, has fostered critical
grass-roots peacebuilding and reconciliation activities
and provided essential support for survivors of sexual
violence. And in the Central African Republic, our
efforts to support survivors’ recovery through economic
empowerment are intricately tied to ensuring the future
safety and protection of those courageous women.
Across the world we are working with women
through leadership programmes, small grants and
professional training to demand better, safer lives
through legislation that protects the rights of women
and men from gender-based violence. Unfortunately,
there are severe gaps in many local justice systems and
international accountability that must be remedied in
order to hold all perpetrators accountable.
At the June 2014 Global Summit to End Sexual
Violence in Conflict, representatives from over
120 different countries committed to strengthening
accountability. They agreed that the way forward
must include capacity-building and a focus on the
rule of law in order to create a sustainable and secure
system of justice. The United States unveiled its new
accountability initiative at the June Summit, which
supports specialized justice sector mechanisms and
reflects our commitment to move sexual violence out
of the shadows and into the sphere of justice.
However, we must not forget that we have come a
long way. In the period since the Council took up the
issue of conflict-related sexual violence in resolution
1820 (2008), many Member States have made significant
strides, as demonstrated by the Secretary-General’s
recent report on conflict-related sexual violence
(S/2015/203). Of the five States cited as having security
forces suspected of committing or being responsible
for patterns of rape or other forms of sexual violence
in situations of armed conflict that are on the Security
Council’s agenda, four have committed to adopting
specific measures to address conflict-related sexual
violence.

S/PV.7428

Unsurprisingly, the Syrian armed forces, intelligence
services and pro-Government forces stand apart
from international norms in that regard. Among the
violations faced by Syrians daily are reports of sexual
violence against women, men, girls and boys in flight,
house searches, checkpoints and, especially, detention.
A significant challenge also lies in curtailing the
violence and crimes of non-State actors, such as Boko
Haram and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
also known as Daesh. These groups utilize conflictrelated sexual violence not only to terrorize women and
children, but as a war tactic to suppress opposition and
punish those whose beliefs differ. Sexual and genderbased violence has become an ingrained aspect of their
overall strategy for controlling territory, destroying the
social fabric and recruiting new supporters.
Yesterday marked the one-year anniversary of the
kidnapping of 276 girls from Chibok in Nigeria and,
heartbreakingly, as Ms. Allamin has just reported, their
fates remain, for the most part, unknown. Boko Haram’s
gross violence against women and girls — abduction
and rape, often exercised under the cover of false
terms, such as “marriage”, or the use of girls as suicide
bombers — is a symbol of its toxic ideology. In Iraq,
the devastating plight of minority communities rocked
by ISIL, especially the sexual slavery faced by women
and girls, is a call to action.
As so compellingly detailed by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bangura, the
tools at the disposal of the international community
require further refinement in the approach to non-State
actors. The threat of prosecution, while necessary, does
not, by itself, deter groups like Boko Haram or ISIL, nor
are such groups necessarily responsive to international
censure. Consequently, we must consider stronger,
more innovative and more aggressive approaches to
address the use of sexual violence by those groups.
I invite the United Nations Secretariat and the
international community to think thoroughly about that
challenge and to join us in New York in October with a
renewed commitment to stopping the sexual predations
committed by non-State actors.
We also applaud the Secretary-General for including
in his report the disproportionate and unique impact
of sexual violence on the lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender (LGBT) community. Pre-existing political
disenfranchisement, social exclusion and violence
against LGBT individuals intensifies in situations

15-104667/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

of conflict, often with complete impunity. Where
individuals are targeted for conflict-related sexual
violence based on their real or perceived identity, it is not
only appropriate but necessary for the United Nations
and the international community to identify ways to
halt such predation. We must protect all people from
the crimes of sexual violence and improve measures to
protect those most at risk. Preventing sexual violence
is not about politics. It is about our common humanity
and about respect. We must all stand united in taking
urgent action to combat sexual violence in conflict and
in reaching out to support survivors around the world.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Jordanian presidency for convening today’s important
debate on sexual violence in conflict, which represents
a long-standing and urgent priority for France. I also
thank Ms. Bangura and Ms. Allamin for their briefings
and for their exemplary activities.
Exactly one year and one day ago, on 14 April 2014,
276 highschool girls were kidnapped by Boko Haram
in Chibok, Nigeria. We still have had no word on those
young girls, who, like other women and girls abducted
by that terrorist group, have been subjected to sexual
violence and forced marriage and reduced to slavery,
assuming that they have not been sold outright. The
plight of those young Nigerians is unfortunately shared
by thousands of other young girls, women and children.
The widespread sexual violence being perpetrated
by extremist non-State groups is a daily assault on our
most basic values. In the Middle East and in Africa,
it has become the signature of extremist and terrorist
armed groups that seek to dehumanize targeted,
terrified communities. Daesh, for instance, has aimed
its sexual violence against women and girls on the
basis of their ethnicity, their sexual orientation or their
influence within their communities. In August 2014,
during the attacks in Sinjar in northern Iraq, hundreds
of Yazidi women were abducted and sold in Syria as
sexual slaves. I welcome the opportunity to applaud
Iraqi parliamentarian Vian Dakhil for her unforgettable
and moving testimony (see S.PV 7419) before this body
at last month’s open debate on persecuted minorities
in the Middle East, which was convened by the French
presidency. Some 2,500 women and children from the
Yazidi, Christian, Kurd and Shabak minorities are
currently being held by Daesh in northern Iraq, and that
figure does not include all the women and girls who
have not been identified owing to the lack of statistics
that accurately reflect the reality on the ground. Still,

8/82

15/04/2015

in order to condemn such savagery and act to stop it, we
must have reliable and exact data on the fate of those
women and children.
Given their scale and character, the acts of sexual
violence committed by extremist groups demand a
specific response. First of all, the Security Council
should support the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative calling for
sexual violence to be categorized as a terror tactic and
not merely a tactic of war, pursuant to resolution 1820
(2008).
Secondly, we must ensure effective follow-up to
the addition to the Secretary-General’s blacklist of
13 conflict parties accused of sexual violence, including
Daesh and Boko Haram. States must do their utmost to
end such acts of violence and bring the perpetrators, who
until now have enjoyed virtually complete impunity, to
justice. France therefore calls on all concerned States
to ensure that justice at both the international and the
national levels is able to proceed and to cooperate with
United Nations investigation mechanisms seeking to
force the perpetrators to answer for their acts.
Furthermore, once sexual violence has been
categorized as a terror tactic, that new reality should
be reflected in the sanctions regime against Al Qaeda.
Finally, in general terms, we should pay particular
attention, within the framework of the Coalition against
terrorism and the fight against terrorism, to the risks
of imminent sexual violence wherever communities,
minorities and children are concerned.
Acts of sexual violence committed by violent
extremist groups, however barbaric, should not let us
forget those committed by other actors. I would like
first to address the responsibility of State actors. True,
there has been notable progress in certain countries. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example, has
improved access to reparations for the victims of sexual
violence and has allowed the prosecution of members of
the national security forces. With French technical and
financial assistance, the Central African authorities are
in the process of setting up a rapid response unit and
a special criminal tribunal to investigate human-rights
violations, including sexual violence.
But such efforts are not enough. Sexual violence
continues to be committed by State security forces in
the Sudan, South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Syria. Syrian women are the targets of
such violence in detention centres or at the hands of

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

the Syrian intelligence services. The responsibility of
States is also essential for countries involved in peace
processes. The integration of the issue of sexual violence
into the Mali and the Central African Republic peace
accords was a first step. In order not to undermine the
credibility of those processes, we must now ensure that
such provisions are effectively implemented and that
individuals implicated in acts of sexual violence are not
inadvertently freed.
I would now like to mention those actors implicated
in such crimes in refugee centres or camps for displaced
persons, where women are particularly exposed. The
fear of rape is currently one of the main reasons for
the flight of Syrian refugee women to neighbouring
countries. It is therefore all the more critical to
ensure that women have access to security and basic
medical assistance in those centres. France has
delivered psychological and medical support through
non-governmental organizations to the victims of
sexual violence in the Za’atari refugee camp in Jordan
and to internally displaced women in Syria, as well as
to Syrian refugee women in Lebanon. We call on other
States to join us in providing access to medical services
to the victims of sexual violence.
Finally, I would like to recall the matter of sexual
violence perpetrated by United Nations staff or by
Blue Helmets. At the end of March, the SecretaryGeneral published a report entitled “Special measures
for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual
abuse” (A/69/779), which confirms that a number of
peacekeeping operations employ individuals suspected
of having committed acts of sexual violence or sexual
abuse, even against minors. I have already said, and I
repeat, that we must be especially vigilant and apply
zero tolerance on this matter if we wish the United
Nations to retain its credibility and serve as a model.
In that context, I welcome the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to make predeployment gendersensitivity training for peacekeepers a requirement
across the board.
In light of the variety of actors responsible for sexual
violence, both within and outside the United Nations,
the solutions are well known. To mention only a few,
we need to strengthen security in and around camps
for refugees and internally displaced persons; increase
the participation of women in peacekeeping operations,
peace negotiations and the fight against terrorism and
violent extremism; and guarantee financing via the

S/PV.7428

United Nations general budget for women protection
advisors.
The high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000) this
coming October will be an opportunity for the United
Nations and States to deliver on their commitments
on those different points. The review should be an
opportunity for everyone to ensure the greatest possible
mobilization of our will, our action and our resources.
The fight against sexual violence in conflict must be
waged every day by the United Nations and by each and
every one of us. The Council may rest assured of the
firm commitment of France to the fight.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): The delegation of Angola
aligns itself with the statements to be delivered by the
Permanent Observer of the African Union and by the
Permanent Representative of Zimbabwe on behalf of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC).
We commend the presidency of Jordan for
convening this open debate on the critical issue of
sexual violence in conflict situations under the agenda
item “Women and peace and security”. We praise the
Secretary-General and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, for their leadership and
long-standing commitment to the defence and protection
of victims. We also thank Ms. Hamsatu Allamin for her
valuable contribution to this debate.
Sexual violence in conflict situations is one of the
most egregious forms of human rights violations. As
the Secretary-General points out in his latest report on
this issue (S/2015/203), 2014 was marked by continuing
human rights violations and crimes against the integrity
of women and girls in conflict situations, including
abductions, labour exploitation, forced marriages,
human trafficking and sexual slavery. As referred to in
the report, sexual violence perpetrated by State actors,
or armed groups associated with States, is a matter of
concern in many countries and territories where the
rape of women and girls is used as a weapon of war
and a tactic of terror. Women and girls are targeted by
terrorists and armed groups linked to violent extremism
as trophies of war, with the aim of humiliating and
destroying entire communities, especially through
ethnic cleansing, by changing the demographic
composition of those communities. Additionally,
through sexual violence, extremist groups terrorize
communities into compliance, displace populations

15-104669/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

from strategic areas and generate revenues through
trafficking, the slave trade and ransoms.
The United Nations has been pointing out that
States bear the primary responsibility for the protection
of the civilian population, particularly women and
children, in times of peace or conflict. The SecretaryGeneral stresses the vulnerability and increased risks
endured by refugees and displaced women and girls,
who face additional difficulties due to their limited
access to resources and services, such as education
and health care, including comprehensive sexual
and reproductive health services, and to training and
sources of revenue. Therefore, it is necessary to ensure
a better international response in addressing women’s
and girls’ specific vulnerabilities.
Eliminating conflict-related sexual violence is
key to addressing the root causes of gender inequality
and changing the mindset of perpetrators, victims and
society at large. Some progress has been achieved in
the struggle since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000). The Security Council has assumed a leadership
role in this regard by stressing the need for a more
systematic monitoring of sexual violence in armed
conflict situations. It is now imperative that the United
Nations continues developing appropriate response
mechanisms to counter such a scourge.
The General Assembly’s important Declaration
of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict
made recommendations, among which we highlight
the following. We must ensure that all peace, security
and conflict mediation processes explicitly recognize
the need to prevent, respond to and reduce crimes of
sexual violence; promote women’s full participation
in all political, governance and security structures, as
well as in all decision-making processes; ensure that
national military and police doctrine is in accordance
with international law so as to enable a more
effective-prevention and response to sexual violence in
conflict; and support the deployment of national and
international expertise to build national capacity to hold
perpetrators to account and to improve the response to
and support for victims and their access to justice.
Furthermore, the other United Nations decisions
that we fully support stress the importance of, inter
alia, increasing the number of women in peacekeeping
missions and police units with a view to countering
stigma and threats of reprisal against survivors;
including specific actions to prevent conflict-related

10/82

15/04/2015

sexual violence in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes; and ensuring the mainstreaming
of a gender perspective in conflict resolution and peace
processes.
At the regional and subregional levels, the African
Union and SADC have made the protection of women’s
rights a priority, and have adopted measures to tackle the
issue of conflict-related sexual violence and to ensure
women’s participation in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts in Africa. The Permanent Observer of the
African Union and the Permanent Representative of
Zimbabwe, speaking on behalf of SADC, will elaborate
on what both organizations are doing in that regard.
Finally, it is crucial to prevent new such crimes
and to hold perpetrators to account. Victims should be
encouraged to speak out and to report violence, and their
voices should be heard and respected. As we celebrate
the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), we look forward to the 2015 high-level
review, which will enable us to make an assessment of
the progress made and the ongoing challenges in the
implementation of the Council’s women and peace and
security agenda.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
the Jordanian presidency for convening this important
debate on sexual violence in conflict. I also thank
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
for her briefing, and Ms. Hamsatu Allamin, for her
statement.
My delegation endorses the statement that will be
made by the observer of the African Union.
Yesterday, 14 April, we sadly commemorated one
year of captivity of the 276 young girls kidnapped by
Boko Haram in Nigeria. Since then, hundreds of others
have been wrested from their families and communities
for purposes of sexual violence. Sexual violence, which
is characterized by rape, sexual slavery, prostitution,
and forced pregnancies and sterilization, has always
existed in all cultures of the world. In peace time, these
acts of violence often have serious consequences while
the resources to address them remain insufficient.
In contrast, in time of war or conflict, the subject
remains taboo and poorlu documented. The report
of the Secretary-General (S/2015/203), based on
information collected in 19 countries where United
Nations peacekeeping operations and country teams are
deployed, sheds light on sexual violence in two specific

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7428

cases and introduces a series of new elements that are
useful to our reflection and for response.

strategies in line with international standards for
fighting sexual violence.

First of all, we note that in situations of conflict
there is a real mobilization with respect to this issue,
whose effects and impacts are of very serious concern
in the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Mali, where thousands of
people, particularly women and girls, fall victim to rape
and abuse and have no access to health-care services or
justice. Sexual violence is also used by terrorist armed
groups as a tactic of war and terror, as we have seen in
Yemen, Mali, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
South Sudan and Iraq. Lastly, it results in the forced
displacement of populations in certain countries.

In times of conflict, ensuring the systematic
participation of women in peace processes and that
sexual violence is explicitly addressed in ceasefire and
peace agreements is one way of guaranteeing justice
for victims. In the aftermath of conflict, the integration
and participation of women in all decision-making
processes, in the public and private spheres alike,
will help eliminate negative social norms, reduce
discrimination and promote gender equality.

Furthermore, significant progress has been made
in developing standards in post-conflict situations,
including for the provision of victims’ services as well
as in establishing accountability. However, as in the
specific case of Liberia, the difficulty remains that
many violations were committed by minors.
Despite the tragic and troubling nature of sexual
violence in conflict, Chad welcomes the ever-stronger
political momentum that has been built around this
issue over recent years and the determined efforts by
the international community and States aiming to create
the conditions for victims’ voices to be heard. Against
the tragic scale of the situation, States are recognizing
and meeting their obligations to prosecute those
who perpetrate such violence and to ensure victims
protection and access to justice. These obligations also
extend to non-State actors, who, according to the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2015/203), are responsible
for more than 60 per cent of conflict-related sexual
violence. In that regard, the report lists 45 groups, by
country, credibly suspected of committing or being
responsible for patterns of rape and other forms of
sexual violence.
Moreover, it must be underscored that sexual
violence is the result of social behaviours and constitutes
a violation of human rights and humanitarian law.
Despite the fear of stigmatization and reprisals, it is
almost universal. It is therefore crucial that victims
of sexual violence be afforded justice as a means of
contributing to international peace and security. In that
regard, Chad encourages the international community
to assist Governments to fight against impunity
by developing and implementing national plans or

Since the end of the civil war in Chad, the joint
efforts of the national authorities and United Nations
agencies have sought to integrate women into the
national security forces, including the Gendarmerie
Nationale and the National and Nomadic Guard. A
quota of 30 per cent has been applied in the competitive
recruitment of police officers so as to respond to the
need to promote gender equality.
On the legal front, the President of the Republic
recently signed an order based on the law on
empowerment of the National Assembly prohibiting
early marriage so as to protect the comprehensive
development of young girls. Moreover, discussions
focused on women’s empowerment were held during
national women’s week in Chad and the International
Women’s Day, on 8 March. On that occasion, the
Government inaugurated the first Maison de la femme
in N’djamena.
In conclusion, let me underscore that Chad is today
host to 500,000 refugees from the Central African
Republic, the Sudan and Nigeria, and that the scourge
of sexual violence also affects the camps where they
are housed. During the debate held under the Argentine
presidency last October (see S/PV.7289), we had an
opportunity to set out the efforts undertaken and
the progress achieved, including the establishment
of early-warning systems through women’s groups
aimed at prevention and the protection of vulnerable
populations.
Finally, I would like to highlight the fate of the
219 Nigerian girls still being held by Boko Haram,
who are a daily reminder that we have not yet done
enough. Despite the strong emotions that this has
elicited through the worldwide media campaign, their
liberation becomes ever less likely. In general terms,
we need to change the mindset and our practices so as

15-1046611/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

to work together to eradicate sexual violence for the
sake of international peace and security.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Madam President, for having organized
this debate. I also express my gratitude to Ms. Bangura
and Ms. Allamin for their moving briefings.
It is absolutely unacceptable in this day and age
to hear that many women — too many women — are
subjected to rape on a daily basis in order to obtain
drinking water. Worse still is that this takes place in
places where we have large peacekeeping operations. It
is also absolutely unacceptable to read in newspapers the
tragic news of Yazidi women or of the girls abducted by
Boko Haram. I take these two clearly distinct examples
because we need to treat them differently. I would like
to propose a set of 10 measures to seek to somehow
constrain this tragedy afflicting humankind. But before
doing so I would like to share with the Council two
preliminary reflections.
First, I think we need to modify our conventional
conception of what constitutes a threat to peace and
security. It is unfortunate that we have managed to coin
acronyms such as “DDR”, reflecting the great attention
paid to demobilization and disarmament, but failed to
pay sufficient attention to sexual violence in conflict. I
think we need to change that.
Secondly, as the representatives of the United
States and of France mentioned, sexual violence has
become not just a weapon of war but of terrorism, and
we must therefore make the necessary changes in the
United Nations to reflect that.
As I said, I will propose a set of 10 measures aiming
to eradicate this scourge. The first five are for States or
situations where there is no peacekeeping operation.
First, we must spare no effort in referring to
the International Criminal Court all the relevant
information that exists on sexual violence in conflict,
since there can be no doubt that this constitutes a crime
against humanity.
Secondly, we must achieve universality — the
universal understanding of sexual violence as a crime.
Unfortunately, in many jurisdictions, sexual violence is
merely seen as a moral failing.
Thirdly, we must pay greater attention to the
treatment of victims of sexual violence so as to ensure
their appropriate reintegration into society and access

12/82

15/04/2015

to basic services. In that connection, I would like to
highlight the leading example of Colombia, which
has done a great job in this regard, and to encourage
Colombia to share its experiences with other States that
have had similar experiences.
Fourthly, I would like to congratulate Ms. Bangura
on the important efforts she has made, as well as to
encourage her to continue in her work seeking contact
with non-State actors to impart an understanding of
the seriousness of these crimes. Ms. Bangura will now
travel to the Middle East, as she as already to many
African States, as part of her efforts to convince
non-State actors and guerrillas of the seriousness of
this phenomenon.
Fifthly, if we start from the idea that sexual violence
is a weapon of terrorism, then, as the Ambassador of
France said, we must modify the mandates of some
sanctions committees, especially that dealing with
Al-Qaida and the Taliban, to include these crimes.
Let me turn now to measures Spain proposes to
be more effective in the fight against sexual violence
in situations where there are already peacekeeping
operations.
First, we need more robust mandates
specifically address sexual violence in conflict.

that

Secondly, we need to provide better training to
our peacekeepers. Contingents must have undergone
a number of specific and sufficient training courses
devoted to issues of sexual violence in conflict before
deploying to peacekeeping operations.
Thirdly, our peacekeeping operations should,
at the command level, be in constant contact with
local forces — meaning police, security forces and
armies — in order to address the issue of sexual
violence in conflict and provide advice in this area.
Fourthly, the Department for Peacekeeping
Operations has a truly formidable task, but its relevant
unit has neither the size nor the importance that, in
Spain’s view, it should have. I would propose, therefore,
that the unit be strengthened.
Fifthly, we should ask that our special representatives
systematically report on sexual violence in conflict
in both formal and informal meetings of the Security
Council in a strategic, as opposed to merely descriptive,
manner. Many delegations have mentioned the fact
that the review of resolution 1325 (2000) will come

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

to a close in October. We need to be ambitious in that
respect. The October review of resolution 1325 (2000)
will fall under the Spanish presidency of the Security
Council. I understand that the delegation of the United
States has suggested that it be held at the ministerial
level, and I can assure the Council that it will be. I trust
that our rejection of sexual violence in conflict will
translate into the presence of a great number of foreign
ministers here in New York. I also trust that we shall
be effective enough so that the girls and daughters of
those women who have experienced such tragedy will
one day be able to say that the United Nations has made
a difference.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I thank to Ms. Bangura
and Ms. Allamin for their briefings and, above all, for
the dedication and the energy that they bring to a cause
to which we should all be committed.
May I also say to my colleague, the Ambassador
of Spain, that if Spain intends to take an ambitious
approach with regard to the review of resolution 1325
(2000), he will find ready support from this part of the
table.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/203)
paints a very grim picture. Civil conflict, the collapse
of State authority, unprecedented numbers of displaced
people, and the use of sexual violence as a weapon
of war have all exposed more women and girls to the
risk of sexual violence than at any other time in living
memory. And, as if to emphasize that point and the
grimness of the situation, just yesterday we marked the
first anniversary of the abduction of 276 Nigerian girls
by Boko Haram, of whom 219 are still missing. These
are grim statistics on a very sad day.
There are many ways in which we could approach
this issue, but today I am going to focus on the
practical steps that might translate our collective
commitments — the words of Council members around
this table and the words of many others — into action,
and which can result in safer environments for women
and girls everywhere. United Nations peacekeeping has
a crucial role to play in meeting those commitments,
particularly where the capacity of national authorities
has been significantly degraded, as is sadly the case
in so many of the situations we must review. That role
can range from active enforcement to providing support
or capacity-building to national partners. All of these,
wherever they are pitched, are practical steps.

S/PV.7428

New Zealand has witnessed the impact that the
United Nations can have on a post-conflict setting. In
Timor-Leste, the Government sought the assistance of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) in developing community-based policing
strategies in order to tackle domestic abuse and sexual
violence. Initial support, through UNMIT, translated
and transitioned into longer-term bilateral policing
programmes; community policing and gender protection
principles were integrated into Timor Leste’s national
legislation, well as the country’s policing doctrine and
training. All of that demonstrates the progress that can
be made when strong, focused and determined national
leadership receives targeted support from the Council
and the United Nations.
We commend the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and others for developing guidance and
training on preventing and responding to sexual
violence, because it is important that our peacekeepers
have access to that sort of guidance. In many conflict
situations, barriers to women’s participation in
decision-making are exacerbated. Women are often
excluded from conflict resolution and peacebuilding,
thus undermining the effectiveness and sustainability
of peace initiatives. We therefore echo the SecretaryGeneral’s call for sexual violence to be integrated into
the approaches taken by the United Nations in conflict
and post-conflict settings, including protection of
civilians and conflict-resolution strategies, which
are, again, practical steps. We also call for particular
attention to be paid to combating sexual violence
against displaced persons. We have more of them these
days than at any time since the Second World War.
In our region, Pacific Islands Forum leaders
have recognized sexual violence and violence against
women as a pair of the most significant human security
issues that face their communities. The Secretariat
of the Pacific Islands Chiefs of Police, representing
21 Member States, aims to develop practical and
ethical policing standards in its member countries,
including a Women’s Advisory Network to support
the professional development and leadership of Pacific
Islands policewomen. Preventing and combatting
sexual violence is ultimately a national responsibility,
and one that is assumed on behalf of organizations such
as the Pacific Islands Chiefs of Police.
The framework of resolution 1325 (2000) provides
useful mechanisms for supporting national and local
solutions, including the development of national action

15-1046613/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

plans on women, peace and security. New Zealand is
currently finalizing its own national action plan, which
is under public consultation at this time. That plan
sets out a range of initiatives tailored to our specific
needs and circumstances, including tackling domestic
violence, which is ever a problem in all societies.
The plan also focuses on increasing the number of
military and policewomen who are available for senior
deployment in peacekeeping operations. Each of the
steps I have outlined are small, but every small step
can make a difference and, collectively, all of those
differences will be important. Only if we all take such
steps we can make progress against sexual violence.
That is the challenge and, step by practical step, that
should be our collective response.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to thank you,
Madam, for convening this important debate on a
subject that arouses the interest of so many countries.
We would also like to express our gratitude for the
work and briefings of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Bangura, and of Ms. Allamin.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela condemns
sexual violence in armed conflict because it is a crime
against human dignity. We reject the abduction of
women and girls, who are abused, sexually enslaved
and subjected to massive abuses that may cause their
death. In that regard, my country urges all parties
to conflict to respect the norms and provisions of
international law, international humanitarian law and
human rights, as well as the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council on this topic.
The abominable crimes that are committed in
situations of armed conflict are not new and do not
always follow a single pattern; rather, they change
according to circumstance, as do their perpetrators,
whether State or non-State actors. That is why it is
important that the strategies implemented to prevent
and eradicate sexual violence in armed conflict take
into account the specific context and confront the root
causes of conflict situations, including any political,
religious, ethnic, cultural or other underlying causes
of the sexual violence suffered by women and girls.
Women can no longer be seen as spoils of war or made
subject to violence or oppression in any society or in
any circumstances. Ensuring that efforts to prevent
and eradicate such crimes are as effective as possible
requires coordination and synergy between the States

14/82

15/04/2015

concerned, all the relevant United Nations bodies and
the various regional and subregional mechanisms.
The Secretary-General’s 2014 report on conflictrelated sexual violence (S/2015/203) refers to 45 parties
suspected of committing acts of sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict, 13 of which appear for
the first time. My country urges that those parties be
investigated and the perpetrators brought before the
appropriate tribunals. There should be no impunity for
this type of crime, which we agree in many instances
should be termed a crime of terror. We are particularly
concerned about the increasing rates of atrocities and
sexual violence in armed conflicts as examples of
systematic action on the part of extremist groups, and
about the fact that this phenomenon is directly related
to the training, equipping and encouraging of non-State
groups, designed to promote the break-up of States for
political reasons and thereby contribute to the collapse
of their institutions and turn them into fertile ground
for impunity and the perpetration of atrocities that
violate human dignity, including sexual violence.
All of this prevents sufficient care and protection
from being provided to survivors and their families,
and raises obstacles to achieving accountability. If
the ban on providing such groups with arms and
financial support were respected in accordance with
international law, the ability of non-State agents to
operate would decrease along with rates of sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict. Once again, we
call on the international community to take measures
to bring to justice those responsible for giving military
and financial aid to extremist and terrorist groups.
The report also notes that sexual violence is
frequently not denounced because of the risks faced by
the surviving victims and their families and witnesses.
Most victims of sexual violence are stigmatized
and ostracized and have little access to justice. That
is why we should join forces to environment sure
that, while fully respecting the sovereignty of the
States concerned, national institutional capacities,
particularly health-care, judicial and social welfare
systems, can be developed and strengthened in order
to provide appropriate, timely care and rehabilitation
to the women and child who are the victims or fruit of
such violence.
We believe it is important that the issue of sexual
violence be considered in peace processes and ceasefire
agreements, as well as in all demobilization and

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

reintegration processes involving the United Nations.
The mediators and special envoys dealing with such
processes should possess the information and training
necessary to gauge the most relevant ways to address
the issues based on the specific circumstances. We
must also continue to work to improve preparation
for all staff deployed on the ground and to increase
the presence of gender experts and women protection
advisers on mission staff. We appreciate the work being
done by the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and we also believe that
information and awareness-raising campaigns can have
a positive effect on communities by enabling them to
understand their rights and the ways in which they can
demand justice.
My country supports the zero-tolerance policy of
the United Nations on incidents of sexual violence that
have occurred or may occur in any of its operations.
The Organization should be firm and consistent
regarding the importance of accountability for staff
who commit such offences. In that regard, compliance
with the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000), as well
as ensuring women’s participation in preventing and
settling conflicts, is particularly essential. We believe
that women’s participation at every level, stage and
area related to political missions and peacekeeping
operations will produce a more appropriate, assertive
and comprehensive approach to the issue.
In conclusion, 2015 is significant because it is a year
in which some important mechanisms are coming due
that will enable us to renew our commitments and act
decisively to combat such barbarities. The sustainable
development agenda, the twentieth anniversary review
of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,
the strategic review of peacekeeping operations and
the global review of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) are all opportunities that we should sieze
in order to arrive at a more accurate picture of the issue
and help to adopt appropriate measures for addressing
it.
Ms. Murmokaité (Lithuania): Ms. Bangura’s task
is indeed a tough one, but her leadership provides a
lifeline for many affected by monstrous crimes such
as these. Our appreciation also goes to Ms. Hamsatu
Allamin for her contribution to today’s debate.
Brutal and barbaric sexual violence as a weapon
of war is scarily cheap and effective. It is used to
intimidate, change local demographics, attack ethnic

S/PV.7428

and religious minorities, seize land and clear access
to scarce resources and force entire communities into
submission. With the emergence of Da’esh and Boko
Haram, public gang rape, sexual slavery, the sale of
women and girls as young as pre-teens and forced
impregnations and abortions have become trademarks
of the wanton and depraved reign of terror. A report
released by Amnesty International in December details
the abominable suffering of Yazidi women and girls
under Da’esh. A girl is quoted in that report describing
her attempt, with a fellow captive, to take her own life.
“We tied scarves around our necks and pulled
away from each other as hard as we could until I
fainted. I could not speak for several days after
that.”
Like her, many captives of terrorist groups prefer
suicide to suffering the savage abuse and consequences
of rape. Even in modern societies, rape victims can
be slow to speak out, and rape is often underreported.
With all the care and services available, it takes
years for victims to heal. Imagine rape victims in
countries where services are non-existent and social
norms ostracize and punish the victims of rape, not
the perpetrators. Of course, rape victims will choose
to keep silent when those who rape them are from
the ranks of local authorities, police or armed forces;
where reporting a crime may expose the victim and
her family to additional attacks; where rape victims
are forced to marry their rapists and punished for
moral crimes or where sexual abuse is committed by
peacekeepers — those who by their very definition
are expected to protect, not to abuse. The SecretaryGeneral’s reports and those of various human rights
bodies repeatedly point to such problems, and while in
many cases significant progress has been made at the
normative level, both nationally and internationally, the
gap between the law and reality on the ground remains
wide.
We all agree that the responsibility to protect
civilian populations, including from rape and sexual
violence as a tactic of war, lies first and foremost with the
State. Having judicial and penal frameworks adequate
to that end is essential, as is making sure that national
civilian and military justice systems comply fully with
international legal and human-rights standards. But
where that responsibility is not lived up to, whether
for lack of resources, capacity or political will, it
is imperative that the perpetrators of mass-atrocity
crimes, including those involving sexual violence, be

15-1046615/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

held to account through existing international justice
mechanisms, including the International Criminal
Court (ICC). Human rights monitoring, reporting
of peacekeeping mission human rights and gender
components, independent commissions of inquiry, and
rapid deployment of the United Nations Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict to
situations of particular concern can all be instrumental
in bringing perpetrators to account. As a founding party
to the ICC, Lithuania calls for the universal application
of the Rome Statute, as it recognizes sexual violence
offences as crimes against humanity.
Ensuring accountability for conflict-related sexual
crimes and for sexual and gender-based crimes in
general is key to prevention. The perpetrators must
know their heinous acts will carry consequences.
The Council should be more vocal and systematic in
its condemnation of conflict-related sexual violence
and demand credible investigations of all allegations
of sexual violence committed in conflict zones, be
they allegations against Government-affiliated forces,
armed groups or United Nations peacekeepers, and use
sanctions to this effect. When signals of rape reach us,
we cannot afford to ignore them or brush them under the
carpet. Our silence and equivocations inflict additional
wounds on the victims and only serve to embolden the
perpetrators.
On the protection side, the deployment of
women protection advisers, the provision of human
rights and gender-awareness training for staff to be
deployed in peacekeeping missions and the inclusion
of sexual violence issues in the drafting or renewal of
peacekeeping mandates have proven useful and should
be further expanded. To change the calculus, more
women peacekeepers need to be deployed. While the
Secretariat’s efforts to address this gap merits our full
support, respective troop- and police-contributing
countries can contribute a great deal.
A policy of due diligence must be applied and
fully implemented. The much-too-easy availability
of small arms and light weapons in conflict and postconflict situations adds to the already high risks faced
by civilians, including an increased threat of sexual
violence. Lithuania intends next month to hold an open
debate on the human costs of small arms and light
weapons that will aim to identify means by which the
Council could more systematically take into account
small arms and light weapons-related threats, including

16/82

15/04/2015

their exacerbating effect on sexual and gender-based
violence.
Ensuring that gender considerations are given due
attention, the creation of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and security sector reform
programmes; the systematic integration of gender-based
violence into designation criteria of sanctions regimes;
and improving the collection of disaggregated data
are just a few examples of where further advances are
needed. In a wider context, the provisions of the Arms
Trade Treaty that oblige States to take into account the
risks of arms being used to commit or facilitate genderbased violence before issuing export licenses must be
robustly implemented.
One should also bear in mind that while women
and girls are usually the first victims of conflictrelated sexual violence, rape as a weapon of war is also
used against men and boys to humiliate, break down
the morale, intimidate and subjugate. Taking into
consideration the distinct roles of women protection
advisers and gender advisers, systematic deployment
of both in conflict zones remains essential. Male rape
victims should also be accorded all necessary support
and treatment. In particular, the stigmatization and
integration of children born out of conflict-related
sexual violence and rape need to be addressed delicately
but seriously to prevent lingering marginalization and
animosities that may ultimate explode in unrest and
renewed conflict.
As Special Representative Bangura noted, national,
regional and subregional cooperation mechanisms
are very important. They should continue to actively
engage in promoting effective responses to conflictrelated sexual crimes, including through awareness
campaigns, action plans, cooperation frameworks,
capacity-building and shared good practices. Next
week, Lithuania will host a regional conference together
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and UN-Women on the review of the women
and peace and security agenda, providing a good
opportunity to address these issues as well.
Finally, prevention requires inclusion — inclusion
of women, minorities and vulnerable groups — in a full
and meaningful way in all conflict resolution, postconflict reconciliation and peacebuilding processes as
active contributors and not merely as a token presence
at the negotiating table. Their equal participation will
contribution significantly to building the enduring

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7428

peace that will break the cycles of violence, including
gender-based violence.

international law and national legislation, be brought
to justice.

Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we would like to thank you,
Madam, for convening today’s meeting and express our
gratitude to the guest briefers for their participation in
it and their assessment of the current situation in the
fight against sexual violence in armed conflict.

The section of the Secretary-General’s report on
the problem of sexual violence in the context of violent
extremism is crucial. The danger of this scourge has
become increasingly serious. A year ago, we were
witness to the tragedy in the Nigerian city of Chibok,
where terrorists from the Boko Haram group kidnapped
276 school girls. Many of these girls have yet to be
found. Regrettably, this example is not unique. Such
crimes must be stopped.

Separately, we recognize the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, whose
actions have brought about considerable progress in
work in this area.
We have carefully studied the report prepared for
today’s meeting (S/2015/203), which attests to the great
amount of work done by the Special Representative
in the past year. Unfortunately, the problem of sexual
violence remains relevant, particularly in individual
conflict situations where such crimes are widespread.
Such situations require attention from the Security
Council. At the same time, we support the activities of
a range of other bodies of the United Nations system
that, within their remit, are engaged in the subject of
sexual violence in broader terms. The Security Council
should not duplicate these efforts.
We note the report’s definition of conflict-related
sexual violence. As such, the report departs from the
terminology of the Security Council resolution on
this issue, beginning with resolution 1820 (2008), and
diverges from the very language of today’s debate on
sexual violence in conflict. Such attempts to revise
previously agreed language and in general to broaden
our approach to the subject are of concern to us.
Issues related to the struggle against sexual
violence in armed conflict should be seen as one
component of the entire range of measures to achieve
conflict resolution and post-conflict recovery. Women
and children frequently fall victim of war crimes and
crimes against humanity, including the indiscriminate
or excessive use of force. They suffer from terrorist acts
and become refugees and internally displaced persons.
As a result, any discussion of the women and peace
and security agenda in the Security Council must be
comprehensive and include such issues as countering
sexual violence as a way of fighting other forms of
crime against women, as provided for in resolution 1325
(2000). The perpetrators of such crimes must, after due
investigation in accordance with the requirements of

Sexual violence in armed conflict cannot be
fought without the active involvement of national
authorities in the process. There is a reason why the
Secretary-General’s report focuses in particular on the
need for national involvement and the assumption of
leadership roles and responsibilities by States. Contacts
with non-State armed groups must be carried out in
accordance with Security Council resolutions and
other regulatory instruments of the United Nations.
We appreciate the approach of the authors of the
report, who have specifically addressed a considerable
portion of the recommendations in the fight against
sexual violence to national Governments. Gains in the
Secretariat in this area, such as the guidance note on
reparations for conflict-related sexual violence, serve
as frameworks for States to use, taking into account
their national specifics and legislation.
With respect to the matrix of early warning
indicators of sexual violence, we are cautious with
respect to such indicators, particularly since sexual
violence in and of itself is far from always being a
source of emerging armed conflict. On balance, we
believe that the recommendations of the report should
focus on approaches that have been worked out and
approved within the United Nations and not on those
that advance other initiatives or instruments elaborated
by a limited number of participants without the support
of decisions taken by United Nations bodies.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madam, for convening today’s important debate and for
giving it a lot of publicity through Twitter.
I welcome the Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/203),
which is a vital framework for all of us. I particularly
want to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Bangura for her briefing and her brave and
tireless work alongside the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. She is

15-1046617/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

an example to all of us, and every time she speaks she
gives us new energy in this fight.
I also want to pay particular tribute to Ms. Hamsatu
Allamin. What she said just now is important testimony
for all of us. I was particularly struck by how she talked
about how she was using the resolutions of the Security
Council, including resolution 1325 (2000), to make a
real difference on the ground. That is a reminder to all
of us of what this is all about. We are working together,
creating norms and a sense of energy that allow people
to take real action on the ground to change people’s
lives in this important and very controversial area.
As you said, Madam President, the timing of this
debate is tragically apt. One year ago yesterday, when
276 schoolgirls were kidnapped by Boko Haram in
Chibok, the abduction shocked the world. Abductions,
enslavement, sexual abuse and forced marriage of
women and girls are central to Boko Haram’s method of
operation. As the fight against Boko Haram continues,
we reiterate our support to colleagues from Nigeria and
Chad and to all affected Member States in the region.
This anniversary is a stark reminder of the task that we
face to end conflict-related sexual violence.
The Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict, held in summer 2014 in London, led to a
number of ambitious commitments, and I would like to
highlight just three of them: first, the African Union’s
launch of a pilot project in the Central African Republic;
secondly, the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s
commitment to implement its action plan; and thirdly,
a number of countries signing up to the call for action
on protecting women and girls in emergencies. Those
are just some of the issues that we have worked hard on
with others to implement and deliver real change in the
countries that are worst affected.
The rise of extremist non-State actors such as Boko
Haram and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is
now one of the greatest threats to our goal, as others
have said. Sexual violence has become a tactic of their
terror. There are three keys ways that we can fight this.
First, we need to do more to support affected
countries. The needs of survivors are great. The
report (S/2015/203) highlights that more medical,
psychosocial, legal and economic support is urgently
required. Whatever support we provide, we must ensure
that women and girls are at the heart of it. My country is
committed to this approach. In Syria, we are providing
counselling for survivors of sexual and gender-based

18/82

15/04/2015

violence, as well as clinical care, reproductive health
care and cash assistance to particularly vulnerable
households. In Iraq, our Embassy has established
working groups to promote women’s rights and combat
the effects of sexual violence, and we support activities
such as legal assistance and support groups for women.
We have given over $1.5 billion in humanitarian
support to the Syrian crisis. The United Nations has
a particularly important role to play. We strongly
support the Secretary-General’s recommendation for
greater links between the issues of women and peace
and security, and fighting extremism. We hope that
this will be addressed in the review of resolution 1325
(2000) this year, and I welcome what the Permanent
Representative of Spain has just said about the energy
and commitment that the Spanish presidency will bring
to this issue in October.
Secondly, national military and security actors
must be responsive to survivors’ needs. More focused
training, incorporating gender and survivor awareness,
and better information-sharing between military
and civilians are part of the solution. However, so is
making our police and military more representative of
our societies, with greater recruitment and promotion
of women. Until that happens, we are not going to
make real, substantive and lasting progress on this
issue. United Nations peacekeepers and police can also
do more to address the needs of women and girls. We
need to empower peacekeeping personnel to prevent
and respond to sexual violence. That must be central
to predeployment preparations at all ranks, and fully
integrated into mission-wide objectives and mandates,
as the representative of France emphasized earlier. We
hope that the peace operations review later this year
will reflect these important recommendations.
Thirdly, we must ensure greater accountability for
all perpetrators and for Governments that do not uphold
their responsibility to protect the vulnerable in society.
Our support, whether through improved training or
more female personnel, can help encourage victims
of sexual violence to come forward and help end the
stigma associated with this crime. We must match
this with more investigations and more prosecutions,
including through the International Criminal Court,
to show that there is no impunity. We also encourage
States to implement the International Protocol on the
Documentation and Investigation of Sexual Violence
in Conflict, launched at the Global Summit held in
London in 2014. This important tool can help national

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

and international justice and human rights practitioners
document sexual violence and pursue accountability for
these crimes effectively. The United Kingdom has thus
far supported and trained practitioners of the Protocol
in areas as diverse as Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Nepal and Colombia.
We have also raised awareness with international faith
leaders, bearing in mind their often unique position of
influence with survivors.
Allow me to conclude with this point: if we are
to end sexual violence in conflict, we must tackle
its root causes as well as its symptoms. We all
have a responsibility to end gender inequality and
discrimination in our societies, and in the Council we
have a unique responsibility to prevent conflicts that
allow sexual violence to thrive. Last year, resolution
2171 (2014) affirmed that human rights violations and
abuses, including sexual violence, could act as indicators
for impending conflict. If we are to uphold international
peace and security, the Council must heed and act on
these warnings to prevent conflict taking hold. This is
difficult work. It is not work that the Council is brilliant
at, but it is an area where we can make progress using
the tools that we have, and we need to use whatever
evidence we have to make progress here. By doing so,
we will give women and girls around the world a future
that those at Chibok were denied.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile thanks the presidency of Jordan for convening
this debate. We welcome the briefings, in particular
by Hamsatu Allamin, which drive us to act more
decisively to prevent, eradicate and punish conflictrelated sexual violence and the stigma attached thereto
and ensure reparation and reintegration for survivors.
We appreciate the work of the Special Representative,
Zainab Hawa Bangura, and her team, and we welcome
her seventh annual briefing, which identifies new parties
involved in such violence, including non-State and
terrorist armed groups. We welcome the commitments
made by some parties in support of the system.
Chile strongly condemns conflict-related sexual
violence in its various forms, which, depending on the
circumstances, might constitute war crimes, crimes
against humanity, genocide, torture or other serious
violations of human rights. We note with amazement
how sexual violence is used not only as a tactic of war
but also by non-State and terrorist armed groups to
sow terror, thus threatening international peace and
security. No religion or ideology could justify such

S/PV.7428

actions, and we call for cooperation on developing
strategies to prevent and eradicate violent extremism
that promotes sexual violence.
Despite the progress achieved by resolution 1820
(2008) and related resolutions, we regret to note that
we have not yet achieved their full implementation.
We therefore support the urgent implementation of
the recommendations of the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on the subject (S/2015/203).
We urge States and the international community to
enhance its work to prevent, punish and eradicate such
violence, while fighting against impunity and using to
that end national tribunals, international tribunals such
as the International Criminal Court, mixed tribunals,
truth and reconciliation commissions and community
justice mechanisms.
The responses to this scourge must guarantee
reintegration and fair and adequate compensation for all
victims. The Guidance Note of the Secretary-General
on Reparations for Conflict-Related Sexual Violence
of June 2014 provides guidelines and best practices to
consider in this respect. The trust funds established to
that end, such as the Multi-Partner Trust Fund and the
International Criminal Court’s Trust Fund for Victims,
can contribute to efforts undertaken in that direction
and require sustainable financial support.
In 2014, we focused on prevention; today, we
would like to emphasize participation and protection.
Protection cannot exist without women’s participation,
which in turn requires a secure, enabling environment.
We must guarantee, even in the most fragile contexts,
the participation of women in the prevention and
elimination of all forms of physical, sexual and
psychological violence. The participation of women
should be guaranteed in peacekeeping operations;
peace
processes;
disarmament,
demobilization
and reintegration processes; and in mediation,
reconstruction and electoral reform efforts and security,
justice and administration sector reforms. It is important
to provide women with the necessary training to ensure
their equal access in all of those areas.
Our experience as a non-permanent member
indicates that the Council should make more and
better use of available mechanisms in addressing this
violence, which affects not only women and girls, but
men and boys as well, worldwide. Such violence must
be an integral item on the Council’s agenda. It should be
addressed in its consultations, relevant resolutions and

15-1046619/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

mission mandates, as well as in the terms of reference of
the field visits and missions of the Council’s subsidiary
bodies. We support greater interaction between those
bodies, especially the sanctions committees and their
respective teams of experts, and the Office of the
Special Representative.
The Council should bring greater pressure to bear
on the perpetrators of such violence, including the
parties named in the reports of the Secretary-General,
and consider the adoption of selective, phased measures
by the relevant sanctions committees, while ensuring
respect for due process. The various missions, including
electoral missions, commissions of inquiry and related
mechanisms, should consider appointing women
protection and gender advisers, and guarantee the
protection of civilians in order to focus on combating
the scourge with a view to affecting a greater proportion
of the internally displaced persons and refugees. The
training of peacekeeping contingents should include
a gender perspective, including measures to prevent
sexual violence and to ensure respect by security
forces of the due diligence policy on human rights
and accountability in the conduct of cases involving
personnel.
We reiterate the importance of promoting,
protecting and ensuring access for survivors of sexual
violence to timely and non-discriminatory multifaceted
assistance, including access to adequate health
services to enable their rehabilitation. In that respect,
we value the role of civil society, including women’s
organizations, community and religious leaders,
the media and human rights defenders. We support
the efforts of the United Nations system to build the
capacities of such groups. As one example, we note the
Colombian authorities’ successful efforts in fighting
this scourge. We especially highlight the policies of the
peace process in victim support.
Last March, Chile launched its second national
action plan on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and related resolutions, which includes, among
its strategic objectives, the prevention of violence,
especially sexual and gender-based violence, against
women and girls.
To conclude, Chile reiterates its decisive commitment
to the implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820
(2008) and others. We will continue collaborating
to ensure that the Council pays due attention to this
agenda item, the development of which will contribute

20/82

15/04/2015

to the global review of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). In that regard, we firmly support the
ministerial meeting to be convened by Spain during its
Council presidency in October.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Jordan for its initiative to convene today’s open
debate. I thank Ms. Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
for her briefing and the representative of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security for her
statement.
Women are an important force in achieving stability,
maintaining peace and promoting development. The
protection of women’s rights and interests and the
promotion of gender equality represent advances in
human civilization. However in many armed conflicts,
sexual violence against women has been used by the
parties as a tactic of war. In particular, in recent years
terrorist and extremist forces have committed acts of
sexual violence in a number of locations, which has
gravely threatened the lives and safety of vulnerable
groups, including women and girls, and given rise to
serious international concern.
China strongly condemns and firmly objects to
the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war, including
any acts of sexual violence committed against women
and girls. We support the efforts of the international
community in its work against sexual violence in
conflict in the following four aspects.
First, in addressing the root causes of sexual
violence in conflict, only the achievement of peace and
the promotion of development can ensure the elimination
of sexual violence in conflict. The international
community must pay close attention to the promotion of
the socioeconomic development of relevant countries,
the genuine improvement of women’s status, and their
achievement of full empowerment. As the primary body
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security, the Council should fully implement the
provisions of Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations and pursue the peaceful settlement of disputes
through negotiation, mediation and good offices in
order to eliminate the root causes and breeding grounds
of sexual violence in conflict.
Secondly, the sovereignty of the countries
concerned must be firmly respected, while their
leadership role is ensured. The countries concerned
bear the primary responsibility for combating sexual

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

violence in conflict and protecting the rights and
interests of vulnerable groups, such as women and
girls. The international community should support
relevant countries in adopting a zero-tolerance policy
in the fight against sexual violence in conflict. The
international community should firmly abide by the
principle of State ownership, State leadership and
State responsibility; fully honour the sovereignty and
will of the countries concerned; respect Governments’
measures taken in accordance with national conditions;
provide constructive assistance in the areas of capital,
human resources and technology; and avoid the
imposition of outside solutions.
Thirdly, it is necessary to integrate policies
and create synergies. In view of its responsibilities
and advantages, the Council should play a positive
role in countering sexual violence in conflict. The
Peacebuilding Commission, UN-Women and the
World Health Organization should play their respective
roles, work with each other in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction, and
provide medical, legal and psychological services to the
victims of sexual violence, as well as a sound political,
security and social environment for the protection of
women’s rights and interests.
Fourthly, counter-terrorism activities must be
intensified. Terrorist and extremist forces have
committed acts of brutal sexual violence, while
expanding the ranks of their victims. The international
community should pay close attention to those
developments and link the elimination of sexual
violence in conflict closely with counter-terrorism
initiatives. Acts of terror, whenever, wherever and by
whomsoever committed, must be resolutely combated
according to a uniform standard. Terrorism should
not be linked with a particular nationality or religion.
Counter-terrorism activities should be undertaken
on the basis of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations; respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the countries
concerned; give full play to the leading role of the
United Nations and the Security Council; and provide
a peaceful and secure living environment for victims
of sexual violence subjected to the threat of terrorism.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, as well as
the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security. China
wishes to take this opportunity to work with the

S/PV.7428

international community to jointly cultivate a peaceful,
secure and stable international environment, effectively
ensure the rights and interests of women and girls, and
eliminate sexual violence in conflict situations as soon
as possible.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for having convened this open
debate on women and peace and security, focusing on
the pressing issue of sexual violence in conflict. My
delegation expresses its appreciation to Ms. Zainab
Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, for her
briefing and to Ms. Hamsatu Allamin for her poignant
presentation.
Malaysia associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by Viet Nam on behalf of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations.
It is a sad truth that situations of conflict have
throughout history formed the backdrop for heinous
violations of sexual violence against civilians,
disproportionately affecting women and girls, as well
as men and boys. In this regard, over the past two
decades the international normative framework to
end and prevent sexual violence in conflict has been
fortified, inter alia through seven resolutions adopted
by the Council, including resolution 1325 (2000).
And yet the seventh annual report of the SecretaryGeneral on sexual violence in conflict (S/2015/203)
provides a shocking reminder that sexual violence
continues to be widely committed as a tactic of war,
causing devastating consequences for women and
girls and shattering local communities caught in the
crossfire. The report documents cases of women
and girls being sexually assaulted while farming or
collecting firewood; abducted from homes and schools
en masse to be sold into sexual slavery or forced
marriages; or compelled to flee neighbourhoods to
escape persecution, only to find themselves at risk of
sexual violence in displacement camps.
The physical and personal insecurity faced by
women and children in situations of armed conflict
permeates daily lives and routines, resulting in
intolerable environments and prolonged instability.
Clearly we need to redouble our efforts to ensure
the effective implementation of all Security Council
resolutions in preventing sexual violence and returning
peace, security and stability to conflict-stricken areas.

15-1046621/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

The report also highlights recurring challenges and
new trends in conflict-related sexual violence, namely,
the rise of violent extremist groups. Malaysia is deeply
alarmed at the fact that violent extremist groups are using
sexual violence as a means to terrorize, persecute and
conquer. We condemn in strongest terms the barbaric
acts of sexual violence committed by Al-Qaida, Boko
Haram, Daesh and their ilk, particularly against women
and girls, which have caused unspeakable anguish to
families and local communities.
In parallel with disturbing reports of sexual
violence being committed against women, we are also
witnessing cases of women and youth, including young
girls, being lured into joining such groups. Given the
complexity of the spheres of influence surrounding
violent extremist groups and their link to terrorism, the
international community must ensure that its response
is multidimensional and takes into account the fact
that women are victims as well as agents of violent
extremism. In this regard, we agree that measures
to prevent and address sexual violence should be
strategically aligned with efforts to prevent violent
extremism.
In underlining the primary responsibility of
Governments to ensure the protection of civilians and
uphold human rights, we firmly support the efforts
of national Governments to strengthen measures
to eliminate sexual violence in conflict, including
through the adoption of action plans in concert with
the United Nations. We also commend the initiatives
of Governments to protect the rights of victims of
sexual violence and improve access to justice through
the passage of relevant legislation. The importance
of accountability and justice mechanisms cannot be
overstated, and we believe that national capacities must
be enhanced and supported in this regard.
We note that the majority of parties listed in the
annex to the Secretary-General’s annual report consist
of non-State armed groups and hold the view that
peace processes provide a critical forum of engagement
with such groups. We call for provisions on sexual
violence in conflict to be integrated into all peace
processes, negotiations and agreements. In this regard,
we recognize the great value of the United Nations
Guidance for Mediators: Addressing Conflict-Related
Sexual Violence in Ceasefire and Peace Agreements
as a tool in training envoys, mediators and mediation
experts.

22/82

15/04/2015

At the same time, the involvement of women
in peace processes is crucial, and we commend the
efforts of those Member States that have specifically
reserved space at the negotiating table for meaningful
participation by women, including survivors of sexual
violence.
Malaysia believes that peacekeeping missions and
peace operations must be adequately supported so as
to respond and prevent incidents of sexual violence
in conflict. We believe that this can be done through
standardized pre-deployment and in-mission training.
Mindful of this need, Malaysia’s Peacekeeping Training
Centre has collaborated, and continues to collaborate,
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and United Nations partners to provide training in
various aspects of peacekeeping for countries in Asia
and beyond. One current project running from March
2014 to December 2015 involves developing training
manuals and modules on, inter alia, gender, cultural
diversity in peacekeeping operations and the protection
of civilians.
We note with appreciation the complementary roles
of women protection advisers and gender advisers in
United Nations missions in ensuring the effective
implementation of Council resolutions on sexual
violence in conflict and on women, peace and security,
and we call for these posts to be sufficiently budgeted
for.
The stigmatization faced by victims of sexual
violence contributes to the persistent underreporting
of sexual violence cases and remains a challenge that
needs to be overcome. This stigma also affects the
children born to victims of sexual violence, who are
sometimes abandoned or grow up shunned by society.
We call for national Governments and civil-society
actors, including religious leaders, to step up efforts to
reduce the paralysing stigma experienced by survivors
of sexual violence at the community level.
We stress that survivors of sexual violence
must receive timely and comprehensive assistance
and health-care services to aid their recovery and
reintegration into communities. We urge that consistent
funding be channelled into reintegration programmes
that empower women and girls, especially livelihood
programmes and education opportunities. We also
support the design and implementation of reparation
programmes as a tool for empowerment in line with
the recommendations of the Guidance Note of the

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

Secretary-General on Reparations for Conflict-Related
Sexual Violence.
The wounds inflicted by conflict-related sexual
violence can scar survivors and communities for
generations. The collective and coordinated response of
all stakeholders, including Member States, the United
Nations and civil society, is crucial to ensuring longterm strategies that will allow scarred communities
to heal and rebuild. I wish to conclude by taking this
opportunity to particularly commend the tenacious
work of Ms. Bangura, as well as the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict and
United Nations Action, in catalysing responses in this
field. Malaysia pledges its support for all these efforts.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this debate. I would also
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Bangura and Ms. Allamin for their very lucid
briefings.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/203)
presents an operational context for conflict-related
sexual violence. Indeed, we want to thank him for
placing the United Nations in the vanguard of the global
fight against sexual violence.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the Permanent Observer of the African
Union on behalf of the African Union.
We want to welcome in particular the efforts
of United Nations Action against Sexual Violence
in Conflict to improve inter-agency coordination,
knowledge-building, advocacy and technical countrylevel support. Of particular significance is the
publication by United Nations Action in 2014 of a
guidance note designed to improve and perfect data
collection on sexual violence and reporting to the
Security Council. We believe, however, that it is
essential to include in our quest for answers broader
questions about the prevalence of sexual violence in
human society. The image of men fighting and dying
in wars while women remain protected at home has
become a myth in our times. Contemporary violent
extremism in all parts of the world has rendered women
and girls exceedingly vulnerable. In today’s armed
conflict, women living in areas of conflict, who are
essentially non-combatants, suffer as much if not more
than soldiers in active service.
In order for us to obtain enduring answers on this
subject, we must cast our enquiry beyond situations

S/PV.7428

of active conflict into all human situations. As
conflicts do not exist in isolation, it is unlikely that
we can understand sexual violence outside the larger
context of human society. We must seek a full moral
and helpful understanding of the correlation between
sexual violence in societies on either side of the conflict
divide. Preventing sexual violence is a critical element
in fighting this scourge, whatever the context. We
therefore commend United Nations Action for adapting
its framework of early warning indicators of conflictrelated sexual violence for use in several countries.
We expect this effort to enhance the ability of United
Nations mission to prevent sexual violence.
Promoting accountability and fighting impunity
are crucial to ending sexual violence. In that regard,
Nigeria notes the important work being conducted by
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, including criminal investigations
and prosecutions, the collection and preservation of
evidence, criminal law reform, the protection of victims
and reparations. We look forward to the compilation of
good practices that the Team is currently preparing.
Nigeria’s national policy on gender identifies
gender-based violence as a threat to the fundamental
human rights of women. The policy recognizes the link
between gender inequality and gender-based violence,
and aims to address the systematic inequalities by
prioritizing the empowerment of women as a crucial
first step towards equality. This is being promoted
through the introduction of a gender-based perspective
in all aspects of policy planning and legislation.
The fight against sexual violence should not be
left to Governments alone. Indeed, ending this kind
of violence is not a task that Governments alone can
accomplish. There is an important role for civil society
to play in this enterprise. We recognize the efforts of
various national and international non-governmental
organizations, and express our full support for them as
major stakeholders in combating sexual violence.
Nigeria commends the Government of the United
Kingdom for its global leadership in mobilizing
countries to act against sexual violence. As a
signatory to the Declaration of Commitment to End
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Nigeria was pleased
to participate in the Global Summit to End Sexual
Violence in Conflict, which was held in London in
June 2014. One significant outcome of the Summit
was the launch of the International Protocol on the
Documentation and Investigation of Sexual Violence in

15-1046623/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

Conflict. The Protocol outlines global standards for the
collection of evidence on sexual violence. The aim is to
increase conviction rates for offences and deter future
occurrences of sexual violence.
We are pleased to note that the Summit generated
substantial political support all across the world.
The key task now, and the key challenge for us, is to
translate that political support into effective action
on the ground. That will require a multi-stakeholder
approach involving various actors playing different
but complementary roles. The Nigerian Government
remains firmly committed to working in a collaborative
manner with relevant international and domestic
partners to end this scourge.
Yesterday, 14 April, marked the anniversary of the
infamous abduction of 276 Nigerian schoolgirls by the
terrorist group Boko Haram. The Nigerian Government
and people are united in a strong determination to find
and free them all, as well as all the other victims of
sexual violence perpetrated by that terrorist group.
Together with our neighbours Chad and Cameroon,
we are placing Boko Haram on the defensive. We are
confident that the group will be crushed and its leaders
and members held accountable for the war crimes and
crimes against humanity that they are committing.
Nigeria takes note of the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General’s report, and
expresses its full support for them. We share the view of
the Secretary-General that sexual violence has become
a tactic employed by terrorist groups, and that makes
it even more dangerous. This is evident in the actions
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, Boko Haram
and other extremist groups. We therefore see merit in
aligning efforts to address sexual violence with efforts
to prevent extremism.
As part of the efforts of the Nigerian Government to
counter violent extremism, steps are being taken under
a soft approach, which was launched on the premises
of the United Nations, encompassing peace, security
and development. The main focus of the approach is
deradicalization, countering the extremist narrative
and advancing economic regeneration. We support the
recommendation that Security Council missions should
focus attention on issues pertaining to sexual violence
and engage with stakeholders on the ground. We stand
ready to work with other Council members to give
practical effect to these and other recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General’s report.

24/82

15/04/2015

The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Jordan.
At the outset, I wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
and her team for their outstanding efforts in drafting
the report before us today (S/2015/203), and for her
comprehensive briefing. I also thank Mr. Hamsatu
Allamin of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security for her enlightening briefing.
Tangible progress has been made in terms of
developing standards and legal frameworks to protect
against sexual violence in conflict. The approach
adopted by the international community to prevent this
barbaric phenomenon has been instrumental. In spite
of that progress, however, we continue to see the most
abject of crimes being perpetrated during and after
conflict, including rape, forced prostitution, sexual
slavery and forced sterilization.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/203)
paints a very gloomy picture with respect to the
unprecedented increase in the types of violence and
the number of victims, in particular in the Middle East
and Africa. In fact, some States and State-affiliated
groups, as well as non-State armed groups, have
adopted innovative measures to systematically
use sexual violence as a weapon of war against
civilians — to terrorize them and force them into exile
or displacement, to humiliate them and undermine the
moral authority and standing of the adversary, and to
get victims to join their ranks. In that regard, the acts
perpetrated by Daesh — including mass kidnappings of
women and minors in areas under its control, rape, the
sale and presentation of women as gifts, and systematic
sexual servitude — require that we give this problem
the priority attention it deserves.
Daesh is also using such violence and collective
punishment as a way of attracting and winning over
young delinquents to their ranks. The same goes for
Boko Haram, which carries out mass kidnappings of
girls in Nigeria, exploiting them in the worst way by
using girls under the age of 10 for suicide attacks. In
that regard, we note that there is no specific registry
of the number of victims of those crimes perpetrated
in conflicts. As members are aware, that is because
victims do not submit complaints in order to avoid
being stigmatized or held responsible. They also fear

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

reprisals against their local communities. Hence the
importance of awareness-raising in communities to
change those mistaken perceptions, which are prevalent
in some conflict areas. We need to empower victims
and ensure the necessary protection. We need to create
an environment conducive to their return to normal
lives.
Among the major challenges currently facing the
international community, there is the need to ensure
accountability with respect to the perpetrators of these
crimes. We need to ensure that there is no impunity. In
that regard, we reiterate the need for States to cooperate
by observing the obligation to extradite or prosecute
perpetrators. Legal mechanisms to combat these crimes
exist under international treaties and conventions.
However, legal gaps remain that we must work to fill,
as they impede the prosecution of perpetrators. In that
regard, we also need to help countries and empower
their legal institutions in order to address these
issues. We also call on the Security Council to work
with the International Criminal Court in prosecuting
perpetrators by pressuring States that are unable or
unwilling to act to prosecute or extradite perpetrators
to third parties for prosecution. We reiterate the
importance for the Security Council to also encourage
documentation and follow-up on these crimes.
We need to encourage States engulfed in violence
or armed conflict to develop plans of action to combat
sexual violence, as well as to grant the relevant United
Nations agencies access to conflict zones in order to
provide the necessary support to victims. We pay
tribute to the efforts of the Organization in launching an
initiative to improve the performance of United Nations
missions with regard to issues of sexual violence.
Within our modest means, we in Jordan are working
actively to ensure the greatest possible protection and
care for victims of these types of crimes with respect
to Syrian refugees. It goes without saying that we
condemn all attempts by individuals to exploit refugees,
especially women and girls, by exposing them to the
dangers of such crimes owing to the circumstances
they are living in. Jordan is raising awareness among
individual refugees upon their entry into Jordan,
providing them with pamphlets on their human rights
and ensuring that they are not exploited. We have also
set aside spaces for refugees in public and private
schools, based on our belief in education as the front
line of defence against this type of crime.

S/PV.7428

Some of the steps taken by Jordan to reduce the
incidence of this phenomenon in armed conflict include
the holding of training sessions on investigating sexual
violence in conflict, as well as sessions on legal aspects
and for police officers and military commanders. We are
also keen to promote the role of women in the military
in order to heighten the effectiveness of humanitarian
missions and peacekeeping operations. We are also
increasing the role of women in the Kingdom’s medical
services by ensuring that they are present in clinics and
field hospitals. Jordanian women have had a key role to
play in caring for and protecting Syrian refugees. This
will contribute to their involvement in peacekeeping
operations.
We call for speeding up the appointment of a special
adviser on the protection of women. We also call for a
gender-specific approach in United Nations missions.
In conclusion, we have a long road ahead in the
efforts pursued by Member States and United Nations
bodies in order to ensure the necessary protection
against sexual violence in conflict and ultimately
eradicate it. In that regard, I want to recall that victims
are possibly among the people we know. As such, we
should continue to support any and every effort in order
to prevent and eradicate this heinous phenomenon and
bring about a better future for coming generations.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Alexander
De Croo, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Development Cooperation, Digital Agenda, Telecom
and Postal Services of Belgium.
Mr. De Croo (Belgium): I wish to thank the briefers
in today’s debate, namely, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Bangoura and Ms. Allamin of
Nigeria, who spoke on behalf of civil society.
I am honoured to speak here today about a subject
of the utmost importance for my country, Belgium. I
align myself with the statement to be delivered later on
behalf of the European Union.
A few weeks ago, I was shocked by the testimony
of a young Yazidi girl who had been held captive by
Daesh in the north of Syria. The girl explained how she
had been abused several times a day, and how several
other girls killed themselves in despair of their hopeless
situation. That is one more cruel illustration of how
sexual violence is not only used as a weapon of war, but

15-1046625/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

also constitutes a tactic of terror. Therefore, as rightly
suggested by the recommendations of the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/203), efforts to
prevent and address sexual violence must also closely
be aligned with efforts to prevent violent extremism.
Just last month, I visited the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In Goma I was approached by survivors
of sexual violence. Women testified about how they
had been raped by soldiers, by rebels and even by camp
guards when they dared to leave the camp to look for
the charcoal they needed to cook and to survive. These
women were desperate. They asked us for safety and
shelter. We have to respond. That is why I am here
today.
According to Dr. Mukwege, who for many years
has been caring for survivors of sexual violence at
the Panzi Hospital in Bukavu, South Kivu, a recent
development is the rise of sexual violence perpetrated
by civilians. One explanation for this development
is that, through disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes, former child soldiers have
indeed been reintegrated, but owing to insufficient
vetting and psychological follow-up, they perpetuate a
culture of violence, including sexual violence, within
their communities. That leads to the continuation of
structural gender-based violence, with a multiplicity of
consequences, not only for the individual but also for
the community and the society as a whole.
In that regard, Belgium welcomes the decision
by the Congolese authorities to prosecute highranking Congolese army officers suspected of crimes
of sexual violence and to offer reparations to a
number of survivors. The appointment of a personal
representative of the President on sexual violence and
child recruitment, Ms. Mabunda, is an important sign of
hope. I look forward to her statement later this morning.
The action plan against sexual violence for the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC) and the creation of a monitoring committee
for the FARDC are indeed very important steps.
Belgium will support United Nations action to
fight impunity in Mali, where a comprehensive national
strategy to combat sexual and gender-based violence
will be drafted. There too, the improvement of the rule
of law and of justice mechanisms will be key.
We will also need more efforts for prevention and
the participation of women. Women must be part of the
solution. We welcome the Algiers peace process for

26/82

15/04/2015

Mali, but we believe that an opportunity may have been
missed in terms of including women in the negotiations
and giving them a role in the implementation of a future
final agreement. Fifteen years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), the Council must be vigilant that
women and women’s organizations are fully integrated
into such peace negotiations.
On behalf of my country, I would like to take
this opportunity to thank Ms. Bangura for her work,
dedication and the comprehensive report of the
Secretary-General she presented. I hope the Council
will take into account the recommendations set out in
the report. The issue of conflict-related sexual violence
must be fully integrated into the work of the relevant
Security Council sanctions committees as part of the
designation criteria for the imposition of targeted
measures.
Belgium welcomes the ongoing work of the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, which focuses its efforts on strengthening
the capacity of national rule of law and justice actors.
We encourage countries to draw upon their expertise
to strengthen their capacity to address impunity for
conflict-related sexual violence.
In conclusion, I wish to encourage the Security
Council to keep the fight against conflict-related
sexual violence high on its agenda and to take action
accordingly. Sexual violence as a weapon of war, often
used against the most vulnerable, remains a stain on the
conscience of the international community. If we want
to uphold our common humanity, it is our duty to end
all forms of conflict-related sexual violence.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Lynne Yelich, Minister of State of
Canada.
Ms. Yelich (Canada): Canada, along with all States
represented here today, is deeply concerned by the still
growing trend of sexual violence and abuse targeting
women and girls in conflict situations. We are alarmed
by the recent report (A/HRC/28/18) by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
which points to possible war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide committed by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, including rape and sexual slavery
directed against civilian populations in Syria and Iraq.
The reports of thousands of young Yazidi girls bought
and sold in slave markets is nothing short of disturbing.

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

Unfortunately, these heinous crimes extend far
beyond the tragic conflict in Iraq and Syria. Just
yesterday, we marked the one-year anniversary of the
terrible kidnapping of hundreds of young girls from
their school in northern Nigeria. One year later, the
fate of most of those innocent girls is still unknown. In
addition, the sustained and widespread acts of sexual
violence perpetrated against women and girls in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains an ongoing
crisis.
The sobering fact is that violence against women
and girls is one of the most prevalent human rights
violations in the world today, and we know that the
consequences are only amplified in situations of
conflict.
Canada is proud to contribute to global efforts to
stop the so-called Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant.
Canada’s contribution includes vital support for
survivors of sexual violence, including through local
partners, and the documentation of crimes and abuses
so that we can hold perpetrators to account.
Canadians have reaffirmed their concern over
the continuing atrocities in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Our Parliament debated the ongoing
crisis, and Canada’s efforts to address sexual violence
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo have been
producing results. Since 2006, over 60,000 survivors
have accessed health and psychological support, over
15,000 survivors have acquired new job skills and over
800 perpetrators have been convicted. While this shows
progress, much remains to be done. We must do more,
not only in ISIL-affected areas and in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, but also in areas affected by
Boko Haram, as well as in the many other countries
listed by the Secretary-General in his excellent report
(S/2015/203) on sexual violence.
Canada is very grateful for the work of Ms. Bangura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. Her efforts give voice to
the too many voiceless women and girls that become
survivors of these cowardly and despicable acts.
We must do more to support more survivors and
ensure that they can live in dignity and security within
their families and participate fully in the economic and
social lives of their communities and countries. We
must ensure that the world investigates and documents
these crimes and human rights abuses, and hold those
responsible to account. We must ensure that those in

S/PV.7428

leadership who order, permit or condone widespread
and systematic sexual violence are tried and prosecuted.
Canada supports the important work of Justice Rapid
Response and UN-Women in deploying trained experts
to do this work. We must do more to ensure areas that
are meant to be a safe haven or a refuge are spaces free
from further sexual violence against women and girls
and abusive practices, such as child, early and forced
marriage. We must do more to ensure that security
forces are equipped to protect and investigate these
crimes and are not the perpetrators.
Much remains to be done to change the structural
causes of sexual violence in conflict, such as
discrimination and the denial of human rights. Much
remains to be done to change legal and social barriers
that prevent women from fully contributing to the
political and economic lives of their communities.
Women’s leadership and participation are essential
tools to address sexual violence in conflict. That is why
I am pleased to be here today to announce an additional
Canadian commitment of $5.4 million as a step towards
achieving these goals.
The year 2015 is a year of opportunity to advance
efforts to end sexual violence in conflict. That includes
the United Nations reviews on women and peace and
security, and on peace operations. It also includes work
at the Human Rights Council in June to consider draft
resolutions on violence against women and on child,
early and forced marriage. Those are all opportunities
to underline the importance of respect for human rights
and the empowerment of women and girls.
The consequences of this violence are not only
felt by those victimized. The violence affects entire
communities and undermines a country’s ability to
prosper. These women and girls must be empowered
to move their communities beyond these tragedies and
ensure that they are fully engaged in all aspects of their
security, economic, social and political development.
The International Conference of the Red Cross
and Red Crescent in December will consider a draft
resolution on sexual violence in conflict, with some 170
countries participating. That will be an opportunity for
countries and national societies to pledge actions to end
sexual violence.
Canada remains committed to working at the United
Nations, in other international forums and in countries
of concern to See this work completed. Women and
girls deserve to live in safety and dignity — especially

15-1046627/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

in conflict situations, when their contributions to
community peace and resilience are so badly needed.
We must redouble our efforts.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mrs. Dakhil (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the delegation of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
We wish them every success in their task. I would
also like to thank the Government of my country for
providing me with the opportunity to participate in
this debate. I express my appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his annual report on sexual violence during
armed conflicts for the period of January to December
2014 (S/2015/203). Moroever, I wish to commend the
important part played by the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the outstanding role that office
plays in that context.
I would like to make several remarks in the context
of the Secretary-General’s report.
First, we fully concur with paragraph 28 of the
report, as the year 2014 was one of the bloodiest years
in Iraq since 2003, particularly the second half of that
year, when the entire Iraqi population began to suffer
from the brutal attacks launched by the enemies of
humankind and civilization — namely, the terrorists of
the criminal group Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). That included every manner of attack on the
lives, security and dignity of Iraqi citizens from every
social sphere, as well as threats to the very existence of
Iraqi society and its safety, security, stability and the
peaceful coexistence of its components. Along with the
numerous other criminal and savage acts committed by
ISIL against innocent Iraqis, which in terms of their
criminality and violence deserve to be considered
crimes against humanity, war crimes and genocide based
on prevailing legal norms, sexual violence was one of
the central components used by ISIL. The facts indicate
that violence and sexual attacks form a significant part
of ISIL’s criminal doctrine, which includes all forms
of sexual violence, including kidnapping, rape, sexual
slavery, genital mutilation and trafficking in persons
for sexual purposes, as well as forced marriage, forced
pregnancy and forced abortion.
Today, ISIL’s barbarity defies understanding. Its
practices and criminality have exposed the group’s

28/82

15/04/2015

intent to take humankind back to ancient times, when
human dignity was regularly trampled upon and humans
were bought and sold like merchandise in the market.
The criminals of ISIL have established markets for the
sale of women and children and have set prices for the
women who are ISIL’s victims, and especially members
of the Yazidi sect, in blatant contravention of all norms
and dictates of both divine and worldly laws.
The Iraqi Government has taken a number of steps
and adopted a number of resolutions. To the best of
its abilities, the Iraqi Parliament has issued a number
of laws to promote and improve the situation of Iraqi
women and guarantee their enjoyment of all their civil,
political, social, economic and cultural rights. The
Iraqi Government was among the first to respond to the
requirements of resolution 1325 (2000), concerning the
promotion and protection of women. We have adopted
a national action plan to implement that resolution and
have launched two national strategies in that regard,
the first for the promotion of women and the second
for combating violence against women and for taking
the necessary steps in that regard. That makes Iraq the
first State in the Middle East to begin implementing
the resolution. Despite all the suffering that Iraq
has endured at the hands of terrorists, Iraq today is
continuing to implement the national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). That is
in addition to a number of special measures to respond
to the new, urgent needs resulting from ISIL’s attacks,
particularly against women. The Iraqi Government has
sought, to the best of its abilities, to provide a rapid
response in order to offer relief and assistance to the
survivors. The regional Government of Kurdistan has
also formed a special committee focused on genocide
that seeks to receive and assist female survivors. Both
Governments are also assisting internally displaced
persons and providing them with humanitarian
assistance.
Based on the foregoing, I would like to seize
the two opportunities presented to me — that of my
presence here and the fact that today is the Yazidi New
Year, an occasion we cannot truly celebrate when such
a large number of Yazidi women have taken hostage and
kidnapped. Still, I seize this opportunity to call on the
international community once gain, as Member States
and as international organizations, to continue to assist
the Iraqi Government win its fight against terrorism in
order to achieve the liberation of the areas controlled
now by that criminal group and to hold accountable its

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

members as well as those who have provided it with
support. I call on the international community to assist
with the rehabilitation of the victims of terrorism,
particularly the victims of sexual violence, especially
women, and to rehabilitate them psychologically,
providing them with the necessary skills to guarantee
their return to their central role in Iraqi society and to
help the country prosper.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give
the floor to the representative of of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Ms. Mabunda Lioko (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (spoke in French): It is an honour for me to take
part in this debate on behalf of my country. I would like
to congratulate you, Madam President, for convening
this meeting under your presidency. While encouraging
Ms. Allamin, who spoke at the outset of the meeting,
I would also like to thank Special Representative
Bangura for her commitment to the cause of women
and her particular efforts on behalf of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
For 10 years before the return to peace in 2013,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo faced deadly
armed conflicts in the east, where rape was used as a
weapon of war against women. Despite that troubled
decade, my country has worked to make progress in the
fight against sexual violence, as can be seen from the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/203) today. Indeed,
there were 10,882 cases of sexual violence reported in
2014 as compared to 15,323 in 2013, or a reduction of
33 per cent within a year. The cases of rape attributable
to the armed forces were reduced from 71 per cent in
2013 to 42 per cent in 2014, or a reduction of almost
50 per cent. That was no accident; it is a reflection of
our nation’s commitment.
Since my appointment in July 2014, the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has remained
on the alert, notably through an acceleration in the
work of the justice system and the fight against
impunity, with 135 rape indictments against members
of the military, in particular and for the first time, an
indictment against a general of the Congolese Army;
the appointment of three female generals, one of whom
is the head of the army training school; the adoption of
a plan reviewed by the United Nations to fight sexual
violence; and a declaration by more than 20 brigade
commanders of our army who have pledged to follow
that plan; the establishment of an emergency call centre

S/PV.7428

aimed at helping victims to get immediate assistance;
prevention through a massive poster campaign entitled
“Break the Silence”; and the publication soon, with
the assistance of the International Criminal Court, of
a collection of the sentences in the cases mentioned
above. Finally, we instituted an aggressive policy of
promoting access to education for young girls by the
construction of 1,000 schools per year, the allocation of
a $100 million budget, and an increase in the share of the
national budget devoted to education from 6 per cent to
16 per cent over the past 4 years, with the resulting free
enrolment of 17 million Congolese children in primary
school, as opposed to 7 million in 2001, which has also
led to a modest improvement in the parity index.
Those improvements were due, to start with,
to the determination, will and substantial support
demonstrated by the Congolese Government, coupled
with the support of the international community. I have
mentioned the United Nations, the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Bangura;
Japan; the United Nations Population Fund; and
UNICEF. We are proud of being able to sustain that
effort but are certainly far from feeling satisfied.
Indeed, there remain enormous challenges before us,
but today, we, Congolese women and girls, having
paid a heavy price, have taken the decision to leave
victimhood behind, choosing the path of resilience in
order to take our destiny into our own hands as women,
no longer on our knees despite having been raped, but
rather standing to deal with those challenges, hoping
for a return to sustainable peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
There are no miracles. Those results were not
isolated and were not attained without the real passion
of the President of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, accompanied by the Government of Prime
Minister Matata Ponyo Mapon, through consistent
and courageous policies put in place for the long term,
geared towards development, not just emergency
measures. In 2014, our growth rate was 9.5 per cent and
the inflation rate was 1.03 per cent, which indicates that
perhaps we can now place our hope in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): My delegation would like
to thank you, Madam President, for having organized
this debate. We have read the concept note (S/2015/243,

15-1046629/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

annex) circulated by your delegation and reviewed the
progress made in the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions on the subject before us.
We would also like to thank our briefers this morning.
Going by what we have just heard from the
delegations of Iraq and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, we are in strong agreement with the view
that sexual violence in armed conflict is not incidental,
but is integrally linked with the strategic objectives,
ideology and funding of extremist groups. That is
equally worrisome when the list of perpetrators of
armed conflict mentioned in the Secretary General’s
report (S/2015/203) has increased to include 45 parties
that commit egregious and heinous crimes, including
sexual violence against women, girls, men and boys,
and use sexual violence as a tactic of terror.
We also take note of the fact that the list of
perpetrators of sexual violence in armed conflict
includes mainly non-State actors who act beyond
the pale of law. That strengthens our view that we
should extend more support to national Governments
in their efforts to deal with such challenges. Those
efforts include ownership and capacity-building
aimed at adopting progressive legal frameworks and
legislation to implement zero tolerance for sexual
violence. National Governments should be encouraged
to realize their primary responsibility for leadership
and response in dealing with sexual violence through
social-sector reforms and the establishment of rule-oflaw-based systems. The reintegration of the survivors
of sexual violence needs to be facilitated by providing
a safe, secure and enabling environment, free from
fear of stigmatization and reprisals. Recourse by the
Council to international punitive mechanisms should
be considered only as a matter of last resort.
The impact of armed conflict on women and girls
and the role of women in peace operations remain
central issues in conflict situations, as outlined in the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000). The mainstreaming
of a gender perspective in peace operations is a
prerequisite for achieving the ultimate goal of
gender equality, women’s empowerment, sustainable
development and sustainable peace and security. We
concur with the Secretary-General’s report, which calls
on us to take cognizance of, and reinforce the need for,
the deployment of more women peacekeepers, women
protection advisers and gender advisers in peace
operations. We support the development of a genderresource package and training materials. More women

30/82

15/04/2015

in high decision-making positions in multidimensional
peace operations is undoubtedly essential.
For our part, India is proud to be committed to
assisting the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security with nearly 180,000
troops having served under the blue flag so far,
the largest contribution by any Member State. That
includes the fully formed Indian female police unit in
the United Nations Mission in Liberia, which has been
commended both by the Government of Liberia and by
world leaders. Our women peacekeepers have helped
to reduce conflict and confrontation by imparting
a greater sense of security to local populations and
inspiring women and girls to push for their own rights
and participation in the peace process. We continue
to lay emphasis on gender-sensitive predeployment
training, and we are willing to increase our contribution
to peace operations.
We would like to reiterate our principled position
that Security Council reports should focus on issues
related to the mandate specifically given by the Council.
We would urge caution in going beyond those mandates
in reports submitted to the Council and to not stray
into sweeping generalizations about “other settings of
concern”, including counter-terrorism, with regard to
sexual violence being perpetrated in the context of an
increase in violent extremism. It is useful to remind
ourselves here that the women-and-peace-and-security
agenda evolved from the imperative to address the
disproportionate impact of armed conflict on women,
including the abhorrent practice of sexual violence
against women as an instrument of war.
The international community should address
that emergent and worrisome challenge in a spirit of
compassion, solidarity and burden-sharing. I would like
to reaffirm my country’s commitment to our collective
efforts to find durable solutions to the issues of women
and peace and security, within the overall framework
of international peace, security and stability. We look
forward to the global review on sexual violence to
take place in October on the occasion of the fifteenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
and the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand): At the outset, my delegation
would like to congratulate the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan for assuming the presidency of the Council

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

for the month of April. I welcome this opportunity
to discuss the important issue of sexual violence in
conflict, an issue that deserves close attention on the
part of the Security Council and the entire international
community. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report on conflict-related sexual
violence (S/2015/203), and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the representative of the Non-governmental
Organizations Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security for their informative briefings.
Thailand aligns itself with the statement of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations to be delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam later in
this meeting.
The significant increase of systematic sexual
violence in conflict settings, particularly that
perpetrated by non-State actors and extremist groups
in many areas, as stated in the Secretary-General in his
report, is alarming. It requires an immediate response
from the international community. To address the issue,
a holistic approach must be adopted that encompasses
political, social, economic and legal aspects. On the
political front in particular, we must work together to
strengthen the role of national Governments in ensuring
security and the rule of law so as to prevent and protect
their people from all forms of sexual violence. National
policy in that regard must combine effective preventive
measures with robust enforcement action in order to
end the impunity of the perpetrators of sexual violence.
On the international level, the same must be ensured
in action plans to combat terrorism and extremism
and in any ceasefire or peace agreements. Monitoring
mechanisms must also be put in place.
At the same time, the role of women peacekeepers
and female humanitarian staff of the ground must be
enhanced. Through our own experience in international
peacekeeping, we have learned that the presence of
female personnel can significantly help create a safer
environment for women and children. Against that
backdrop, we have been making consistent efforts to
increase our number of female peacekeepers and to
provide specific training on gender sensitivity to our
peacekeeping personnel before deployment. We also
support the efforts of the United Nations to appoint more
gender advisers and to integrate a gender perspective
into the implementation of peacekeeping mandates at
the policy and operational levels alike.

S/PV.7428

(spoke in French)
Another aspect of the issue deserving our particular
attention is the provision of assistance to survivors of
sexual violence — be they men, women, boys or girls.
These people need multidimensional support, including
immediate medical assistance and psychological care,
as well as access to justice and reparations. Above all,
they need social and economic assistance to rebuild
their strength, resilience and dignity.
It must also be underscored that survivors of sexual
violence in conflict are not mere victims; they can
become effective agents of change. It is therefore our
shared responsibility to protect them, to help them and
to build their capacity to take control of their lives. In
that regard, I welcome in particular the important role
played by non-governmental organizations, civil society
and women’s organizations, which work tirelessly to
assist those in distress following sexual assault and to
prevent sexual violence in conflict.
In conclusion, allow me to underscore that
international law, in particular international humanitarian
law and human rights legal norms, must be respected.
The use of sexual violence as a weapon of war and
terrorism constitutes a war crime and a crime against
humanity. Those who perpetrate such crimes must face
justice.
I take this opportunity to assure the international
community of the determined commitment of the
Kingdom of Thailand to contribute actively to efforts
seeking to bring all forms of sexual violence to an end.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Thomas Mays-Harting,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova
align themselves with this statement.
At the outset, I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, for her
briefing today and for the very important work she is
doing. I would also like to express my appreciation for
the briefing by Ms. Hamsatu Allamin on behalf of civil
society.

15-1046631/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

We welcome the report submitted by the SecretaryGeneral (S/2015/203) and note the updates to the annex
of the report. In that regard, we commend the work of
Ms. Bangura and of the Team of Experts on the Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence, as well as of the UN Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict. We emphasize the
importance of the focused recommendations made by
the Secretary-General for the thematic and countryspecific considerations of the Council.
Twenty years ago, the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action drew attention to the widespread
and unpunished use of sexual violence in conflict,
including the use of systematic rape as a tactic of war
and terrorism. It stated that the violations of the human
rights of women in situations of armed conflict were
violations of the fundamental principles of international
human rights law and humanitarian law. This principle
was reaffirmed in the Group of Eight Declaration
on Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict and the
Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict.
The seventh report submitted to the Security
Council regrettably reflects the continuing concerning
scope of sexual violence, including recent alarming
trends, and its close linkages to ensuring broader
peace and security. We therefore underline the need to
make full use of the mechanisms and tools created by
the Security Council to combat and prevent conflictrelated sexual violence.
Conflict-related sexual violence is intrinsically
linked to broader, multiple and systematic genderbased discrimination. It is facilitated by the absence of
women from formal or informal decision-making and
of the recognition of their full and equal human rights.
It leads to further forms of gender discrimination and
abuse, often as a result of steps taken to cope with
sexual violence or the threat thereof. Discrimination
against women and girls also restricts the access of
survivors to assistance and services and can lead to
revictimization. The implementation of the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women and the Beijing Platform are essential
elements in addressing conflict-related sexual violence.
Women need to meaningfully participate in decisions
and policymaking with regard to peace and security, in
line with the main objectives of resolution 1325 (2000),
including to address the underlying causes for sexual

32/82

15/04/2015

violence in conflict and ensure adequate protection
measures.
The continued collection of timely information
and of training remain crucial to efforts to combat
sexual violence, including the detection of earlywarning signs. We welcome the contribution of women
protection advisers to the implementation of the
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements, and
continue to support their further deployment, alongside
gender advisers, in United Nations missions. Equally,
we need measures to ensure the safety of those who
face reprisals and intimidation because of their work to
help the survivors of sexual violence or report on such
crimes.
We need to end impunity for sexual violence-related
crimes. We emphasize the significant advancement
in international law made by the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court as well as non-permanent
international criminal tribunals in combating sexual
violence in conflict. We underline the need for rapid
and effective investigation and documentation of these
crimes, and welcome the increased use of the Justice
Rapid Response-UN Women special Justice Experts
Roster.
The Secretary-General describes the alarming
trend of the use of sexual violence by violent extremist
groups, including for religious or ethnic persecution,
and its integral linkage to their strategic objectives
and ideology, including its use to advance recruitment,
funding, intelligence gathering, conversion, and
the destruction or change of community ties. The
empowerment of women and girls and respect for their
human rights need to be a part of efforts to counter
violent extremism.
Let me just say a few words on European Union
actions in that regard. The European Union continues
to implement its dedicated policy on women and peace
and security, including through close cooperation with
other international and regional organizations. Let me
also point out that 17 of our 28 member States have
adopted national action plans on resolution 1325 (2000).
The European Union continues to follow up the
2014 Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the Call to Action on Protecting Girls and Women
in Emergencies. At the end of last year, the European
Union adopted a guide to practical actions at the EU
level for ending sexual violence in conflict, which

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

includes 36 concrete initiatives, ranging from human
rights to conflict prevention and humanitarian aid.
We continue to support initiatives to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) around the world. Those
efforts include support to the programme for women’s
empowerment included in the Trust Fund for the Central
African Republic and aimed at empowering women
victims of violence, including through the provision of
health services and support to access justice. We are
also launching a project in the Democratic Republic of
Congo on improving the provision of care to victims of
sexual violence and continue to support the work of the
Panzi hospital there, headed by Dr. Denis Mukwege,
who was awarded the Sakharov Prize by the European
Parliament in 2014.
The EU continues to support the capacity of civil
society and women’s organizations as key partners
in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The
EU has so far committed over €34 million to protect
victims of the Syrian crisis, including for gender-based
violence and child-protection activities. We welcomed
the entry into force of the Arms Trade Treaty, which has
been signed by all and ratified by almost all member
States of the EU.
In conclusion, we are looking forward and
contributing to this year’s high-level review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), including the
global study. As the preparations for the review will be
conducted in parallel with the peacebuilding review and
the review of peace operations, we have an opportunity
to incorporate a strengthened gender dimension into
the United Nations peace and security architecture.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): At the outset, allow
me to warmly thank the briefers for their very important
contributions this morning.
The scourge of conflict-related sexual violence
continues unabated. Non-State armed actors and
extremist groups have been primarily responsible for
these egregious crimes, which are often used as a tactic
to terrorize civilian populations and as a method of
warfare. While women and girls are the primary targets
of this type of violence, men and boys are also affected.
The women, peace and security agenda should guide
our actions in response. As we deal with multifaceted
challenges such as those posed by groups like Daesh,

S/PV.7428

the international community should attach high priority
to fighting sexual violence. One meaningful step the
Council could take would be to consistently use conflictrelated sexual violence as a criterion for the imposition
of targeted sanctions. Member States can also play an
important role by holding terrorist fighters to account
for the crimes they committed abroad, especially when
those crimes involve sexual violence.
The surge in conflict-related sexual violence is
also a direct challenge to the authority of international
humanitarian law. Liechtenstein strongly supports efforts
to enhance compliance with international humanitarian
law, in particular through improved monitoring. In that
regard, we have high hopes for the joint initiative of
Switzerland and the International Committee of the
Red Cross, which is aimed at strengthening compliance
mechanisms. That should also include greater efforts
to ensure effective accountability at the national level,
as required under the Geneva Conventions. We were
pleased to hear this morning that there has been some
progress in that regard, as reported by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
National ownership and leadership are key to
successfully tackling the challenge posed by conflictrelated sexual violence. I would like to commend
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bangura, United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict for their
efforts. During the past few years, they have had a
significant impact in improving the knowledge and
capacity of key players in the fields of security, justice
and conflict resolution, both domestically and within
United Nations field missions. It is crucial to address
this issue through a comprehensive effort and to hear
the voices of all concerned, including women and
survivors.
Fighting impunity is an essential component of our
response to conflict-related sexual violence. While the
primary responsibility in this regard lies with States,
the Security Council and the International Criminal
Court (ICC) can play important complementary roles.
Nearly every case currently before the Court addresses
sexual violence. The ICC Prosecutor pursues sexual and
gender-based crimes as a matter of priority. In addition
to providing justice to the victims of sexual violence,
ICC investigations and prosecutions can also deter the
commission of future crimes, as has been confirmed by
recent research.

15-1046633/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

But, of course, the ICC’s impact is limited to
situations within its jurisdiction. It is the Security
Council’s responsibility to ensure that appropriate
situations involving sexual violence are referred to
the Court. The Council’s role does not end with the
referral, however. As States parties to the Rome Statute
have stressed time and again, consistent follow-up
to ICC referrals is essential to their success, and the
Council’s track record in this respect is mixed at best.
We therefore call on the Council to match its stated
commitment to the survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence with appropriate action. Such action needs to
take place at all levels, but it needs to include action
to ensure State cooperation with ICC investigations
requested by the Council.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I wish to thank the Kingdom of
Jordan for organizing this open debate, and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Bangura, for introducing
the Secretary-General’s thorough report (S/2015/203),
which documents the situation on the ground and the
current state of one of the most heinous aspects of war:
conflict-related sexual violence.
Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by
observer of the European Union; however, I would like
to make the following remarks in my national capacity.
Today, no country denies the fact that conflictrelated sexual violence is a crime against humanity, as
opposed to an inevitable spoil of war, as was maybe the
perception until quite recently. Remarkable progress
has been made in that respect. We have many Security
Council resolutions, beginning with resolution 1325
(2000), which is at the core of the women, peace and
security agenda. This debate is a further step towards
its implementation. We need to keep the international
community focused on this issue and urge greater
engagement and action.
As the report of the Secretary-General shows,
all forms of sexual violence, especially in conflict
and post-conflict situations or in fragile contexts,
exacerbate instability and jeopardize the restoration of
peace and security, the rule of law and respect for human
rights. Conflict-related sexual violence causes physical
and psychological damage and has a tremendous
socioeconomic impact on affected societies. This is why
we believe it is critical to address its root causes, and to

34/82

15/04/2015

explore alarming new trends such as the rise of violent
extremism and the increasing use of sexual violence
as a tactic not only of war, but also of terror. At the
same time, we must continue to strive to strengthen the
participation, representation and leadership of women.
We advocate, in particular, a stronger Security Council
focus on four main areas.
The first area is prevention. As past experience has
shown, a focus on healing and reparation will never
be a winning strategy. We have to invest in prevention
because prevention is the solution. Italy is deeply
committed to early warning initiatives, including the
framework of analysis, that sound the alarm when there
is the risk that a situation will degenerate. We strongly
encourage all willing Member States to make a more
decisive shift to the prevention mode.
The second area is participation. We believe that all
actions to increase the role of women in peacebuilding
and peacekeeping depend on empowerment.
Participation means increasing the number of women in
political bodies, entities and processes. But it also means
empowering women and girls to seize opportunities
themselves, in order to have a greater impact on conflict
prevention and post-conflict governance. We need to
give them the means to build their self-confidence
and potentialities so as to become the drivers of their
sustainable advancement.
The third area concerns the rehabilitation of
survivors. To address the specific needs and priorities
of women and girls in relief, transitional justice and
economic recovery, we need to better complement our
efforts with development cooperation and emergency
aid activities. Multisectoral, integrated, coordinated
and synergistic approaches are to be enhanced.
The fourth area is accountability. We must not
underestimate the preventive power of justice. The
necessary social changes also require a more effective
fight against impunity at all levels, including increased
referrals, when appropriate, to the International
Criminal Court.
In conclusion, that is how we interpret the four
recommendations of the Secretary-General’s report,
which we fully agree with. They highlight the need to
address the root causes of sexual violence in conflict by
promoting women’s empowerment and gender equality,
transforming harmful social norms and countering
the rise of extremism, safeguarding the rights and
protection needs of survivors through the delivery of

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

multi-sectoral assistance and reintegration measures,
and systematically addressing all the elements of
resolution 1325 (2000) in the work of the Security
Council.
The international community should provide
critical support by scaling up integrated actions,
increasing its backing for United Nations action and
cooperating with all stakeholders, including those from
the private sector. It is time to enhance synergies in
an integrated approach in order to better the lives of
millions of women and men, girls and boys, around the
world.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): I would like to thank Jordan
for organizing today’s open debate. I would also like
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for her insightful briefing on the SecretaryGeneral’s comprehensive report (S/2015/203), and to
express my appreciation to Ms. Hamsatu Allamin, who
spoke so knowledgeably about the situation in Nigeria.
It is important to hear the voice of civil society in the
Council.
Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union.
In recent months, we have heard about women
and girls being abducted, sold as slaves, forced into
marriage and sexually abused. What is frequently
ignored, however, is that sexual violence is committed
against men and boys as well as women and girls. I
would like make three points of particular concern to
Germany.
First, we welcome the report’s detailed analysis
of the emerging phenomenon of violent extremism. It
reveals that sexual violence is not only a widespread
crime committed by individuals but that it functions
as an inherent strategic component of extremist
groups’ ideology. Sexual violence and abuse are
used to terrorize local populations into submission,
forcibly displace unwanted populations and, even more
shockingly, to recruit new fighters, who are promised
the sexual availability of women and girls. With that
analysis before us, it is high time to tackle the issue.
Robust military and police responses and sanctions
can be a part of the solution, but such measures should
go hand in hand with work at the grass-roots level,
where we must strengthen tolerance, the rule of law,

S/PV.7428

the protection of human rights and compliance with
international humanitarian law.
Secondly, we welcome the fact that seven of the State
parties listed in the annex to the Secretary-General’s
report have committed to taking joint action with the
United Nations to tackle the issue of sexual violence
committed by their troops. However, this year’s report
also shows that more and more non-State armed groups
are responsible for systematic and widespread sexual
crimes in conflict. The international community must
find new and innovative ways to interact with those
actors in order to stop them committing such horrific
crimes. The International Criminal Court in particular
has a leading role to play in that regard, and we welcome
its June 2014 policy paper on sexual and gender-based
crimes.
We need to focus on the women and girls who fall
victim to such violence. Survivors have to be able to
access counselling and medical assistance, including a
full range of sexual and reproductive health services.
They must be encouraged to report such crimes to the
responsible authorities, and any re-victimization and
stigmatization must be prevented. Finally, they have to
be accepted and reintegrated into their communities.
Traditional and religious leaders can play a key role in
creating a welcoming environment and countering any
kind of stigmatization of survivors. We have always
emphasized the crucial role of women as active agents
in the prevention, management and settlement of
conflicts, as well as in reconciliation. Experience has
shown that when women have a seat at the table and
their voices are heard, the prospects for a lasting peace
are better.
Only when we know what is happening on the
ground — and this is my third point — can we effectively
respond to and help those affected by violence. Women
protection advisers have proved to be an essential
asset, a fact that is clear from this year’s report. Such
advisers should be included in the mandates of all the
relevant peacekeeping and special political missions,
and their funding and deployment should be a priority.
Moreover, the situation and role of women in armed
conflict should be included in all briefings and reports
on country situations.
In October we will celebrate the fifteenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). Together we
will utilize the opportunity to take stock of what has
been achieved over the past 15 years. We look forward

15-1046635/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

to the results of the global study commissioned by
the Council, which will undoubtedly give us concrete
guidance on further implementation of the resolution
and its follow-up resolutions.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you and your country, Madam
President, for bringing us together in this open debate.
As many have said before me, it could not have been
held on a more significant date than the anniversary of
Boko Haram’s abduction of girls, and I would like to
express our solidarity with the people of Nigeria at this
difficult time. I would also like to thank Ms. Zainab
Bangura for the enormous effort she has put into her
work on this issue, and to Ms. Hamsatu Allamin for her
words this morning. Colombia is also grateful to Spain,
Chile and the United Kingdom for their recognition of
my Government’s commitment to acting to address this
serious problem.
Although it has been under very different
circumstances, my country, too, has been affected by
this phenomenon, the result of an internal conflict that
has afflicted us for more than half a century, despite
the fact that we are on the way to reaching a negotiated
solution. As Ms. Bangura saw at first hand on her visit to
Colombia, we are still facing enormous challenges, but
in that raw and painful confrontation we have learned
lessons and taken preventive measures that have been
described as pioneering at the international level. The
challenge lies in effective implementation, and with
that commitment, we have developed initiatives on zero
tolerance and prevention, and on the care and protection
of women who are victims of sexual violence, based on
collectively formulated policies that elicit best practices
and lessons learned that we can now share with other
States dealing with similar challenges.
I would like to point out that Colombia’s strategy is
founded on two key areas — first, legislatively, through
two laws, the first of which, enacted in 2008, provides
standards for raising awareness of, preventing and
punishing every form of violence and discrimination
against women, while the second, enacted last year,
incorporates international standards into the area of
conflict-related sexual violence. The second area is
our endorsement of the State’s commitment to victims,
supporting them so that from the judicial point of
view they cannot be subject to re-victimization or

36/82

15/04/2015

fear impunity for the perpetrators. As Ms. Bangura
said eloquently in her press conference yesterday, the
survivors of these violent acts want to be heard. They
are ready to stand up and get on with their lives, and the
Colombian Government will be there to support them.
In the past few years, my country has developed
and implemented actions that have had an immediate
impact on the protection and promotion of the
rights of women, of which I will mention just a
few — a monitoring mechanism through a national
violence observatory for monitoring various types of
sexual violence; an information system that enables
us to identify potentially vulnerable populations; an
early-warning monitoring system for detecting possible
cases and a single registry of victims that enables us to
identify men, boys and members of minority groups, as
well as women and girls, who have also been victims of
such crimes.
We support Spain’s proposal to play an active
role, perhaps at the highest level, in commemorating
the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), in
October. Concerning the peace process that is under
way in Havana, I would like to assure the Council that
the parties have understood that this is a cross-cutting
issue that will be reflected in the peace agreement and
in future post-conflict policies.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for your initiative in organizing
today’s debate.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Nordic
countries of Denmark, Finland, Iceland and Norway
and my own country, Sweden.
First, I would like to thank the Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, for her statement and for her activities and
hard work. I would also like to thank Ms. Hamsatu
Allamin for her participation in today’s meeting.
The role and influence of civil society in preventing
conflict, building peace and promoting human rights is
essential and it should be supported.
We warmly welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2015/203) and its concrete and specific
recommendations on actions, and we commend Special
Representative Bangura and her Office for their work in
this regard. I would also like to commend the Team of

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

Experts on Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict
in strengthening the capacities of States to address such
violence, but despite rising recognition and attention to
this issue, the picture is appalling. Nothing less than
zero tolerance is acceptable in this area.
The fight to prevent and eradicate conflict-related
sexual violence must be pursued on several levels.
These crimes do not emerge in a vacuum; they take
place against a backdrop of structural, gender-based
discrimination. Sexual violence is a reflection of
gender inequalities. Therefore, a systematic and broad
gender approach, which includes increasing women’s
empowerment through political participation and
influence, strengthening women’s economic rights and
empowerment, promoting and protecting sexual and
reproductive health and rights, improving women’s
and girls’ security and furthering the education of
women and girls, needs to be applied. These issues are
fundamental.
I would like to raise three more points. First,
measures dealing with the consequences of sexual
violence need to be stepped up. Assistance to survivors
and witnesses, including sexual and reproductive health
services and psychosocial, legal and livelihood support,
is crucial, as was stressed by my Colombian colleague.
It is urgent that we take further concrete steps to ensure
accountability and end impunity, as many around this
table have said today. We welcome and support the
efforts of the Chief Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court and the ongoing work of Justice Rapid
Response and UN-Women for enhancing the capacity
to investigate sexual and gender-based violent crimes
which deny women and girls their human rights.
Secondly, there is a growing recognition that men
should be involved to a larger extent in the work in
favour of gender equality, as it cannot be left to women
alone. There is a need to look at the impact of masculine
identities on gender inequality, conflict and violence.
Evidence suggests that violent notions of masculinity
not only perpetuate gender-based violence but can also
fuel armed conflict, while more positive notions of
masculinity could be instrumental in promoting peace.
Thirdly, we note the rise of violent extremism and
terrorism, which are often built on perceptions that
deny women their enjoyment of human rights. More
attention on the human rights of women is therefore
needed, particularly in the context of terrorism and
counter-terrorism, especially with regard to the specific
consequences of violent extremism on women’s and

S/PV.7428

girls’ rights. Sexual violence and the denial of rights
and freedoms, including the right to control their
sexuality and reproduction, are integral to the ideology
of extremist groups and used as part of a strategy to
spread terror, persecute ethnic, religious and sexual
minorities, and suppress whole communities that
oppose these groups’ ideology. It is clearly a tactic of
terror and needs to be addressed in the international
community’s response. We therefore welcome the
recommendation that efforts to prevent and address
sexual violence and promote human rights of women
should be closely and strategically aligned with efforts
to prevent violent extremism. Conflict-related sexual
violence should be a topic fully integrated into the work
of relevant Security Council sanctions committees.
Women protection advisers and gender advisers
have a central role to play in ensuring competence
and knowledge in order for United Nations missions
to meet actual needs in the field. All missions should
have a gender adviser with a sufficiently high level
of authority and who should work directly with the
mission leadership. Gender advisers, gender focal
points and women protection advisers should be funded
from the regular budget. Nevertheless, the ultimate
responsibility to secure the gender dimension naturally
lies with the leadership of the mission.
The Nordic countries are firm supporters, including
financially, of United Nations Action Against Sexual
Violence in Conflict. We believe that United Nations
Action makes the United Nations system work in a
more holistic and coordinated way.
Lastly, the important role of media and civil society,
including women’s rights organizations, should not be
underestimated. We need to draw on their knowledge
and experience and recognize the pivotal role they play
in changing social norms, attitudes and behaviours and
help ensure that women’s rights are upheld and that
their voices are fully heard.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank
the President for convening today’s debate. I would like
to thank Special Representative Zainab Hawa Bangura
for her leadership. I also thank the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security for its commitment.
Brazil strongly condemns the repugnant use of
sexual violence as a weapon of war. Serious violations
such as rape, sexual slavery and forced pregnancies, all

15-1046637/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

of which constitute crimes against humanity, continue
to occur on a massive scale during armed conflicts
around the world. This dire situation is worsened by
the fact that victims are often afraid to expose the
abuses they have endured due to the absence of a
protective environment and a fear of stigmatization and
punishment. We expect this challenge to be at the core
of the Council’s upcoming high-level review of women
and peace and security.
As the annual report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/203) correctly points out, sexual violence can
also be a method of terror. Brazil deplores the fact
that non-State actors with extremist ideologies have
deliberately employed this appalling tactic to subjugate,
humiliate and disseminate fear and distress.
National Governments bear the primary responsibility
for the protection of civilians under their jurisdiction,
including of those who are most vulnerable to sexual
abuse. In this regard, the international community
should encourage and help States to fully exercise
their responsibility. Ensuring justice for all victims
and accountability for all perpetrators is of great
importance in tackling the menace of sexual violence
in conflict and upholding the tenets of international
humanitarian law. Peace negotiations, mediation
processes and power-sharing agreements should all
embrace the specific legal, medical and psychosocial
needs of victims of sexual abuse. The complementary
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court may
play a decisive role in this regard.
Above all, the wisest and most effective way to
counter the martial use of sexual violence would be
to redouble our efforts to prevent conflict. Apart from
traditional diplomatic instruments for the peaceful
resolution of disputes, this could be achieved through
more ambitious policies to promote awareness for genderbased questions at the highest levels of peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding endeavours. Recent
experience suggests that women can play a pivotal role
in overcoming ethnic and sectarian divides in order to
seek peace, justice and tolerance.
The Peacebuilding Commission, which was chaired
by Brazil last year, has acknowledged the link between
the advancement of women and the establishment of
sustainable peace. In the same vein, the Peacebuilding
Fund has financed projects to support victims of sexual
and gender-based violence in Nepal and Liberia, inter
alia. Through South-South cooperation, Brazil is

38/82

15/04/2015

also involved in initiatives aimed at assisting victims
of sexual and gender-based violence and combating
impunity in countries affected by conflict or instability,
in particular Haiti, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Guinea-Bissau.
Multidimensional peacekeeping missions are also
instrumental in preventing conflict-related sexual
violence and can profoundly impact women’s lives on
the ground, not only by providing a secure environment
for women and girls but also by helping law enforcement
bodies to address gender-based crimes and by
facilitating women’s participation in decision-making
processes. In this regard, Brazil expects the women and
peace and security agenda to be duly considered in the
discussions and deliberations of the high-level panels
on United Nations peacekeeping operations and on the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture.
Within the sphere of responsibility of the General
Assembly, Brazil will chair the sixtieth session of the
Commission on the Status of Women with the firm
conviction that gender issues are of critical concern.
We believe that every public policy should reflect the
imperatives of respecting, protecting and empowering
women and girls. This cannot be achieved without
fully engaging men and counting on their unwavering
support, which is why the Brazilian Government has
endorsed the HeForShe solidarity campaign launched
by UN-Women.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the fact that
Brazil attaches the utmost priority to the women and
peace and security agenda of the Security Council. We
hope this cross-cutting agenda will inform all major
decisions to be taken by the Organization and that
the international community can recommit to joining
forces to eradicate the scourge of sexual violence in
conflict.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Montaño (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico thanks Jordan for holding this open debate and
welcomes the statements made at the start of the debate,
in particular the briefing by Ms. Zainab Bangura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict.
As highlighted in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2015/203), sexual violence in conflict
situations affects millions of people, especially

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

women and girls, and at times is a crucial part of the
strategy through which armed groups humiliate their
opponents and intimidate the populations among which
they operate. My delegation believes that this scourge
constitutes a threat to international peace and security,
given, among other factors, its impact on the societies
of countries in conflict — before, during and after
hostilities — and the fact that it hinders peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
It is unacceptable that in the twenty-first century
sexual violence is still being used as a weapon of war.
Just in the last year, we witnessed new forms of such
violence. The relevant report of the Secretary-General
leaves no room for doubt. Cases of rape, sexual slavery
and forced marriage perpetrated by extremist groups,
including using them as terrorist tactics, continue to
increase.
The common thread running through all conflictrelated sexual violence can also be found in structural
gender discrimination and in the exclusion of women
from political life. In the fight against sexual violence,
it is critical that efforts for conflict prevention promote
equality and the rule of law through the creation of
institutions that take into account gender issues.
Mexico acknowledges the Organization’s efforts
to advance the women-and-peace-and-security agenda
within and outside the United Nations system. In 2013,
my Government accepted an invitation from the United
Kingdom to lead the initiative to prevent sexual violence
in conflict at the regional level. We acknowledge the
support that several States have given us.
In addition, the adoption, in June 2014, of the
International Protocol on the Documentation and
Investigation of Sexual Violence in Conflict was a
step in the right direction. The core function of the
Protocol — namely, to prosecute those responsible and
provide comprehensive care to victims — also serves as
a vital tool for authorities, motivating them to undertake
more clear and expeditious investigations in cases of
sexual violence at the national level and provide care
for survivors.
The lack of rules and institutions to protect the
rights of women in most armed conflicts is a catalyst
for the commission of such crimes. Taking into account
the fact that acts of sexual violence are premeditated
and pursue specific goals, it is imperative that they
be punished through national judicial systems in all
States. Those who commit such crimes should not have

S/PV.7428

impunity as an ally. The implementation of a system of
national and international cooperation for accountability
is essential.
Mexico supports the Secretary-General’s recommendation
that the Security Council continue to use all the means
at its disposal regarding conflicts so as to ensure that
international law is respected. We believe that it is
particularly relevant to refer cases to the International
Criminal Court and further to include and highlight the
issue of sexual violence in the work of the sanctions
committees.
Fifteen years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), my delegation welcomes the global efforts
to increase the number of women participating in
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
We trust that the strategic reviews on sanctions and
peacekeeping operations currently being carried out
will take into account the commitments and priorities
of the women-and-peace-and-security agenda. We also
consider it essential that revisions of peacekeeping
mandates contemplate measures to prevent sexual
violence. Strengthening the mandates of those missions
with women protection advisers is a good start in that
direction.
Mexico is aware that one of the main challenges
to ensuring effective action by the United Nations is
obtaining valid, representative, relevant and timely
information that has been collected on the ground.
Therefore, we appreciate the efforts and initiative of
the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict and the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Providing comprehensive responses that promote
women’s education and empowerment is key to
combating violent extremism. Women are crucial
actors in peace and ceasefire processes, and we must
encourage their decisive participation in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration measures and
in security-sector reform. The role of women is a
significant part of the message being spread by radical
extremist groups, and it is therefore vital that efforts
to counteract that message take into account all
stakeholders.
Finally, my delegation welcomes the efforts of
countries such as Spain and Colombia to support and
give a voice to victims of violent extremism, particularly
women, using their national experience to generate best
practices on access to justice for victims.

15-1046639/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

Through the National Women’s Institute, Mexico
promotes public policies based on gender and
intercultural perspectives that are aimed at promoting
the empowerment of women and making them active
participants in efforts to ensure respect for their rights.
These policies serve as a counterweight to extremism,
as they represent significant progress in gender equality
and thus lead to stability and development for peoples.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): I thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2015/203) and Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict Zainab Bangura for her
briefing.
Sexual violence in conflict has become a weapon
of choice because it is cheap, silent and effective.
Instead of bullets or bombs, the perpetrators employ
barbarism and brutality. Sexual violence in conflict
ruins lives, fuels conflict and causes lasting damage.
The suffering caused by sexual violence does not end
even if the women are released or escape. Survivors are
often stigmatized by their communities, rejected by
their families and infected with sexually transmitted
diseases, and they are at increased risk for committing
suicide.
For all of those reasons, sexual violence is almost
universally underreported. For each rape reported,
it is estimated that 10 to 20 go unreported. The great
injustice is that, in the aftermath of sexual violence, the
women affected live in shame while the perpetrators
live free.
I look around the world today and see an epidemic
of sexual violence. The number of victims is so large
and so overwhelming that we often lose sight of the fact
that we are speaking about individuals. We are speaking
about Arwa, a 15-year-old Yazidi girl who was captured
and raped by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIS) fighters and whose sisters are still in the hands
of the Islamic State. We are speaking about Noora, an
11-year-old from Yemen, who was forced to marry a
much older man, who abused her. Arwa and Noora have
been robbed of their childhoods, families and dreams.
Many other girls and women have also been robbed of
their lives. They may have been silenced, but we cannot
be silent.
We cannot be silent when we are told that female
genital mutilation and forced marriage are acceptable

40/82

15/04/2015

cultural norms. They are not. We cannot be silent when
extremists misconstrue religion to permit sexual assault
and slavery. There can be zero tolerance for barbaric
acts that should have been relegated to the dark ages.
Our family of nations is failing millions of families
throughout the world, particularly in the Middle
East and North Africa. With every passing day, ISIS
militants brutalize and enslave scores of women. Last
summer, ISIS advanced to the remote communities of
northern Iraq, lining up men by the side of the road
and shooting them into mass graves. They kidnapped
thousands of Yazidi and Christian women and girls
and herded them into Mosul’s Badush prison. The
reports from the prison are shocking. Women are raped
numerous times a day. Young girls are forced to call
their parents to detail being gang-raped by dozens of
men. The captured women and girls are sold as wives to
Islamic fighters for as little as $25, or given as “sabaya”,
a reward for fighters.
ISIS is just one of the radical extremist groups
seeking to subjugate women. There is also Boko Haram
in Nigeria and in Chad, Al-Qaida in Yemen, as well
as like-minded militias in Libya and Al-Shabaab in
East Africa. Those groups seek to control every area
of a woman’s life, including how she dresses, how she
spends her days, whom she marries and how many
children she will have.
Sexual violence as a tool in war is not a women’s
issue, it is a crime of humanity committed against
humanity. Victims of sexual violence should not stand
alone. All of us — Governments, civil society and
United Nations agencies — must work together to pass
stronger laws, strengthen enforcement mechanisms and
introduce tougher penalties for offenders. If a nation
refuses to prosecute domestic sexual abuse, marital
rape and honour killings in times of peace, then there is
little hope for justice in times of war and conflict.
Our sages teach us that “It is not what one says,
but what one does, that makes all the difference in the
world.”
We have heard the debates and adopted the resolutions,
but we have yet to make the difference that we need
to make. The time has come for meaningful action.
The victims and survivors of sexual violence deserve
nothing less.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): Hungary takes a stand
against the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war. We
fully support and have joined the “Get Cross!” global
campaign of the United Nations.
I wish to thank you, Madam President, and Jordan
for choosing an old monster afflicting humankind as
the topic of today’s open debate. I also wish to thank
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and Ms. Allamin of Nigeria for sharing so openly those
shocking and personal accounts.
Hungary fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I said “old monster” because women and girls have
always been particularly vulnerable victims during
armed conflicts; however, in modern history sexual
violence is often used as a weapon of war to demoralize
women or the communities to which they belong.
Also, sexual and gender-based violence rarely cease at
the end of hostilities, but continue well into the postconflict phase.
We know only too well from history that sexual
violence is often used by people with guns and power as
part of a multifaceted strategy to terrorize populations,
displace communities, humiliate women, children
and men and destroy their human dignity for the rest
of their lives. Those crimes are serious violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law and
represent one of the cruelest forms of discrimination
against women, which the international community
must not tolerate. In that context, Hungary firmly
supports the international efforts aimed at eliminating
all forms of sexual violence in conflict.
In that spirit, a high-level Hungarian delegation
participated in the Global Summit to End Sexual
Violence in Conflict, held in London last June. The
Hungarian Government joined the Call to Action on
Protecting Women and Girls in Emergencies and the
Girl Summit 2014 charter on ending female genital
mutilation and child, early and forced marriage.
We are deeply troubled by the harrowing accounts
of sexual violence used as a tactic of war described
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/203).
Sexual violence remains chronically underreported
as a result of fear and stigmatization. We support the
urgent recognition that sexual violence can not only be
employed as a tactic of war but, indeed, as a tactic of
terror.

S/PV.7428

We would like to see more women as official
peacekeepers and peacemakers to strengthen
communication in the field. Today’s armed conflicts
are increasingly characterized by extremist ideologies
and ethnic or religious divisions, thus presenting new
challenges for the international community.
We consider the criminal activities of Al-Qaida,
Daesh, Boko Haram and the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) as shocking news. In our view,
ISIL’s targeting of women and girls, especially those
belonging to ethnic and religious minorities — including
Christians, Yazidis and women of other faiths — is also
shocking news.
Also, using sexual violence as a form of persecution
to forcibly displace populations is particularly
worrisome. Displaced and refugee girls face particular
risks and are more vulnerable to sexual abuse, as
witnessed in refugee camps. A recent United Nations
inter-agency report revealed that rates of early marriage
in refugee camps are on the rise, thus putting those girls
at a higher risk of sexual abuse.
As others have today, we agree with the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that effective counterterrorism strategies need to address the use of sexual
violence as a tactic of terror and be adapted accordingly.
We firmly believe that those crimes must
be prosecuted and punished under national and
international law. Regrettably, however, impunity for
perpetrators remains a major challenge, as we know.
We support the efforts of the United Nations Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict aimed at assisting national authorities in
criminal investigation and prosecution, the collection
and preservation of evidence and criminal law reform.
The Declaration of Commitment to End to Sexual
Violence in Conflict, endorsed by 144 Member States,
including Hungary, in September 2013, is an important
achievement in raising awareness and ending the
silence surrounding this atrocious crime — as is
today’s meeting in the Council. It is now imperative
that the international community live up to its political
commitment by way of concrete and measurable action.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to express
my gratitude to you, Madam President, for convening
today’s meeting. I very much appreciate that you

15-1046641/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

yourself are presiding during lunch-time. I would also
like to thank Ms. Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and Ms. Allamin for their briefings.
Last summer, when Special Representative
Bangura visited Japan, she further opened our eyes
to the importance of sexual violence in conflict. We
look forward to her presence once again at the World
Assembly for Women to be held in Tokyo in August.
Japan welcomes the Secretary-General’s report
on this agenda item (S/2015/203). It is a particularly
helpful tool for the Security Council to continuously
monitor the situation in the countries listed, so that it
can reinforce national-level policy recommendations
on each country.
Today I would like to speak briefly about two
points: first, the importance of support for the security
and judicial sectors, and, secondly, counter-measures to
violent extremist groups.
On the first point, the Japanese Government fully
supports the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral’s priority objective of strengthening national
ownership, leadership and responsibility to cope with
sexual violence in conflict. In that regard, I wish to
emphasize the importance of fully involving national
military forces and the police and judicial sectors in this
agenda. Member States should support Governments in
building capacity for those sectors.
Regarding this particular point, Japan is actively
supporting the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral’s Team of Experts. For example, we are
assisting in the reinforcement of the judicial system and
the special police unit on women and children in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I was encouraged
by the statement made earlier by Mrs. Mabunda Lioko
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the effect
that that assistance is well appreciated and utilized.
Secondly, the measures enacted with respect
to State actors are not enough to cope with violent
extremist groups. I am shocked that the abduction of
nearly 300 girls by Boko Haram in Nigeria a year ago
today has not yet been solved. It is unacceptable that
the rise of extremist groups is continuing, such as that
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Iraq
and Syria.
As the Secretary-General’s report points out, the
recent acts of barbarity by extremist groups shows the

42/82

15/04/2015

use of sexual violence as a tactic of terror in order to
achieve strategic objectives. Such extremist groups aim
to create their ideal State by controlling the community
through fear. They also use abducted women and girls
as a reward for soldier recruitment and a source of
income.
Yesterday, my Mission co-hosted a BBC film
screening and panel discussion with the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
International Peace Institute and the Iraqi Mission. The
aim was to examine the current situation with respect
to sexual violence by looking at the abductions of
Yazidi women and girls by ISIL in Iraq. Yesterday’s
discussion gave us the impression that the extent of the
terror that these groups instil is not fully felt. It is very
timely that Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Bangura is starting her trip to the Middle East
tomorrow; we expect positive results.
We have to analyse the objectives of these groups,
which are still on the rise, while the Security Council
needs to build a counter-strategy that recognizes the
methods that they employ and develop new countermeasures.
Japan fully supports the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. Last year,
we became the top donor to her Office, and last month
we contributed $2.5 million in additional financial
support. We are concerned that only a handful of
donors are contributing to the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We encourage
other Members to join us in providing financial support
to this important Office.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Mr. António.
Mr. António (spoke in French): Allow me at the
outset to warmly congratulate you, Madam President,
on the assumption by your country, the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month.
I thank Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for her very comprehensive
report. I also thank Ms. Hamsatu Allamin, civil society
representative in this debate. We welcome the presence
and participation this morning of eminent persons who
kindly agreed to come to New York to take part in this
debate.

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

This debate, whose topic is sexual violence against
women in conflict situations, is taking place in the
context of the commemoration of several legal and
political landmarks on women and peace and security.
Indeed, this year marks the fifteenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000); the thirtieth
anniversary of the third World Conference on Women,
held in Nairobi; and the twentieth anniversary of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action.
For African women, the year 2015 is particularly
significant because it forms part of the celebration
of the African Year of Women’s Empowerment and
Development towards Africa’s Agenda 2063, as well
as of the commemoration of the fifth anniversary of
the African Women’s Decade 2010-2020. In the context
of these celebrations, our debate today should not be
limited to launching commemorative celebrations but,
rather, should be an objective assessment of the state
of implementation of the commitments undertaken so
as to renew our commitment with respect to this issue.
An examination of current theatres of armed
conflict and their recent evolution makes it clear that
women are among the primary victims, who continue
to be subjected to heinous criminal acts such as rape,
sexual slavery and forced pregnancy or sterilization.
Unfortunately, Africa is affected by this scourge, as
was underscored by the three African Security Council
members and by Ms. Bangura and Ms. Allamin in their
respective presentations.
The statement made by Mrs. Jeannine Mabunda
Lioko of the Democratic Republic of the Congo spoke
volumes and was extremely instructive about the
challenges facing the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its response with respect to
this scourge, which, based on the information she gave
us, is beginning to bear fruit. Given these challenges,
the international community should pool, coordinate
and scale up its efforts so as to strengthen prevention
and suppression measures as well as tackle the root
causes of sexual violence through the promotion of
gender equality and the empowerment of women.
The African Union is making determined efforts
to combat violence against women, be it in time of war,
peace or post-conflict reconstruction. In addition to its
accession to existing international legal frameworks,
the AU in recent years has developed several legal and
political instruments relating to women and peace and
security. These include the Protocol to the African

S/PV.7428

Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of
Women in Africa; the Solemn Declaration on Gender
Equality in Africa; the gender policy adopted by the
African Union in 2009; and the proclamation of the
African Women’s Decade 2010-2020.
The vision enshrined in these instruments focuses
on three areas of action: prevention, protection and
the participation of women in conflict resolution and
peacebuilding processes. In order to achieve that vision,
courageous steps have been taken.
First, this issue was dealt with at the highest
level of the pan-African organization by including it
on the agenda of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union.
Secondly, an annual open meeting has been
organized since 2010 in the African Union Peace and
Security Council on the issue of the vulnerability of
women and children in conflict situations in Africa.
Thirdly, in January 2014, Ms. Bineta Diop was
appointed Special Envoy for Women, Peace and Security.
Since her appointment, she has undertaken missions in
several conflict zones. Moreover, the Special Envoy
was mandated by the African Union Peace and Security
Council, at its meeting on 16 December 2014, to develop
a framework for the follow-up to, and acceleration of,
the implementation of the various instruments adopted
on the continent with regard to women and peace and
security.
Fourthly, efforts were intensified to ensure strict
compliance with the principle of parity among elected
and appointed officials, in particular in the areas of
peace and security. Therefore, half of the Commission’s
leaders are women, including the Chairperson of the
Commission herself, Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma.
The number of women representatives and special
envoys on the ground has increased from 1 to 11 since
2014. In addition, three of the five members of the
African Union Panel of the Wise are women.
Fifthly, the African Union Commission committed
to accelerating progress in the implementation of the
African Union’s programme Silencing the Guns in
Africa by 2020.
Sixthly, in June 2014, the African Union
Commission launched a five-year programme entitled
“Gender, Peace and Security”. The programme is
designed to provide a framework for the development
of strategies and effective mechanisms to increase

15-1046643/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

women’s participation in the promotion of peace and
security. It also seeks to improve the protection of
women in conflict and post-conflict situations in
Africa.
Mr. Omaish took the Chair.
In the same vein, I would like to recall the importance
of the agreement signed on the margins of the twentysecond African Union Summit between the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Department of Peace and
Security of the African Union. The agreement provides a
framework for establishing closer cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union in key areas
with regard to prevention and the response to sexual
violence in conflict situations in Africa. We would also
like to note that there is an existing agreement between
the African Union and UN-Women on various aspects
of the women and peace and security agenda.
In conclusion, let me stress that, despite the
persistence of several challenges, the African Union
remains determined to continue its efforts to restore the
African woman’s true place as the generator of social
and economic development of our societies.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Haydar (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We have carefully read the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/203) prepared by the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict. While we appreciate
Ms. Bangura’s efforts, her understanding of the events
in Syria regrettably remains fundamentally partial and
one-sided, like her two previous reports (S/2013/149
and S/2014/181).
In order to assess the events in Syria objectively
and without politicization, the Special Representative
should respond to the repeated invitations that the
Syrian Government has extended to her to visit Syria
and the region, which we recently agreed to. The
Syrian Government looks forward to her visit, which
will enable the Special Representative to accurately
report on sexual violence in Syria and to document the
responsibility of the armed terrorist groups, regardless
of their names, for acts of murder, abduction and rape
along sectarian lines, gang rapes, enslavement, torture
and sexual violence against women and girls in Syria.

44/82

15/04/2015

Those crimes are part of the Salafi and Takfiri
ideology, which the armed terrorist groups seek to
propagate in the area and the world. Those terrorist
groups have persisted in their criminality, to the point
that the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria has opened
camps for the recruitment of women and girls in the
northern countryside of Aleppo in order to train them
on suicide operations, on the one hand, and to recruit
them for sexual violence, on the other. They have also
issued a manual for dealing with women as spoils of
war and how to capture and sexually assault them by
way of one of the most heinous forms of sexual violence
against women and violations of their dignity.
In the context of the present report, my delegation
would like to make the following comments on the
section regarding the situation in Syria.
First, those who prepared the report based
themselves and their allegations against the Syrian
Government on the reports issued by the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic. My country would like to reaffirm its position
that the work of the commission since its establishment
has been neither professional nor objective, but rather
has been highly politicized and was essentially based
on allegations and lies aimed at distorting the image
of the Syrian Arab Republic. In that regard, I would
like to stress that the Syrian Government rejects any
allegations made against the Syrian armed forces and
denounces the fact that such allegations continue,
especially in view of the fact that the Syrian authorities
have not received any requests from any offices of the
United Nations in Damascus or from the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to visit
any site to verify any information they received — be
it from their private sources or the Syrian Government.
I assure the Council without hesitation that the
relevant authorities in Syria would be happy to receive
any specific accurate information regarding such
violations, which our Government and army reject, and
that it would address such allegations with the utmost
firmness, in accordance with the law and the customs
and traditions of our people.
Secondly, we reiterate the need for the Special
Representative in her future reports to address the fatwa
regarding sexual jihad, which is part and parcel of her
mandate, and to put an end to these morally deviant
and barbarous fatwas, especially since representatives
of several States have affirmed that girls from their
countries have fallen victims to such heinous fatwas.

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

Recent among such statements was the statement of
the British authorities that they had lost contact with
three British girls who crossed into Syria, having fallen
victims to such a fatwa and having been recruited
through social media. The Syrian side will present to
Ms. Bangura some of the victims of the sexual jihad
and the practices of the armed terrorist groups against
women and girls.
Thirdly, the suffering of the Syrian women
displaced in the refugee camps in neighbouring States
is essential and should be stressed. In that regard, we
must express our serious concern over the continued
suffering of Syrian girls and women in those camps
and the fact that they are subjected to trafficking,
rape, forced marriage and insecurity. All of that has
been documented in reports of the United Nations and
international organizations concerned with the rights
of the child, including the recent report by UNICEF,
which indicated that the doubling in the number of
rapes of Syrian female minors in camps in Jordan and
Turkey was comparable to the incidence of rape at the
beginning of the Syrian crisis, which was 32 per cent
in the first quarter of 2014. We must also recall the
exploitation of the Syrian female minority in Lebanon
as one State has begun to arrange marriages without
registering them in their official records. Reports have
shown that they are married to wealthy men from the
Gulf who have become accustomed to buying Syrian
female refugee minors as wives in the slave markets
in the refugee camps, with the help and supervision
of non-governmental organizations working under the
cover of doing humanitarian work.
Finally, representatives of a number of States have
expressed concern over the spread of sexual violence
against Syrian women. However, they ignore the fact
of the policies of their own Governments against my
country, which is the reason for such suffering, due to
the involvement of those Governments in financing
terrorism, facilitating its spread, securing its financing
and building camps to train terrorists before they are
sent to Syria where they are re-branded as the moderate
opposition.
Syria is committed to supporting international
efforts to combat all forms of sexual violence and to
punish the perpetrators and instigators, on the one
hand, and to break the unjustifiable silence on the part
of numerous specialized United Nations bodies, on the
other.

S/PV.7428

We would also like to affirm our wish to continue
to cooperate with the United Nations, especially with
Ms. Bangura, to reveal the truth about Syria free of
politicization. The competent authorities remain ready
fully prepared to receive any names or incidents from
the Special Representative for investigation in the
context of continued cooperation with her Office.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Allow
me, at the outset, to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Zainab Bangura, as well
as the representative of civil society, Ms. Hamsatu
Allamin, for their briefings and for their daily
commitment. I am grateful to the Jordanian presidency
for convening this important open debate.
Luxembourg aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
Ever since the Security Council recognized,
15 years ago, that women were disproportionately
affected by conflicts and that this had consequences
for reconciliation and peace processes, the response
of the international community has been remarkable
with respect to legal norms. The Council has adopted
at least seven resolutions on the matter, including the
landmark resolution 1820 (2008), while the Declaration
of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflicts,
presented in 2013 during the sixty-eighth session at the
initiative of the United Kingdom, has been endorsed by
more than 150 Member States, including Luxembourg.
However, despite those efforts, the scourge of
sexual violence is far from having been eradicated.
Just the opposite is true. As the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2015/203) notes, disquieting new tendencies
have appeared. The emergence of violent extremist
groups such as Daesh and Boko Haram has aggravated
an already difficult situation for women and girls in
the areas concerned. Yesterday we observed the sad
anniversary of the abduction in Chibok, Nigeria, of
hundreds of high school girls, who were subsequently
reduced to slaves by Boko Haram. We condemn in
the strongest possible terms those savage acts, which
have also been documented in two recent reports by
Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch. The
inclusion of such gruups in the annex to the report of
the Secretary-General is amply justified.

15-1046645/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

What makes resolution 1325 (2000) so noteworthy
is the coherence with which it addresses the situation
of women in the context of conflicts and questions
of peace and security, proposing that prevention
and protection are two sides of the same coin. The
violence to which women and girls are exposed in
times of conflict — in particular sexual violence — is
exacerbated by the structural weaknesses of societies
during times of peace. That is also the reason that we
must pay particular attention to the warning signs of
conflict. In fact, conflicts are generally preceded by a
noticeable rise in human rights violations and violence
towards women.
Allow me to mention some of the tools that the
Security Council should use, in our view, to protect
civilians from acts of sexual violence.
The Council should continue to integrate the
provisions of its resolutions on women and peace and
security in all its decisions, including resolutions and
presidential statements of regional purview. The Council
should also ensure that sexual violence becomes an
integral criterion for designation within all the relevant
sanctions committees, and those committees should
ensure that the names of presumed perpetrators of acts
of sexual violence are systematically entered on their
lists. Resolution 2206 (2015), adopted on 3 March, is
a positive example in that regard, insofar as it defines
the fact of committing acts of sexual violence against
civilians, especially women and children, as a criterion
for designation to be monitored by the new Canctions
Committee on South Sudan. Finally, the Council should
act with determination to ensure that the presumed
perpetrators of systematic acts of sexual violence and
those in the chain of command should be handed over to
justice, including through referral to the International
Criminal Court those situations in which such acts are
committed. I am thinking particularly of the case of
Syria.
With regard to the concerned Member States,
they must respect international law and fight against
impunity. It is incumbent upon them to show that they
take women’s autonomy seriously by integrating them
into negotiations and conflict resolution processes, by
making the issue of sexual violence an integral part of
peace agreements and by reforming their security and
justice sectors. It is up to the international community
to support those efforts. Only by joining forces will
we succeed in putting an end to conflict-related sexual
violence.

46/82

15/04/2015

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): I thank the Presiden, for
organizing this meeting under the Jordanian presidency.
I would also like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zainab Bangura and Ms. Hamsatu
Allamin of Nigeria for their briefings.
We commend the attention devoted by the Council
to the issue of sexual violence in conflict, and the
efforts of Special Representative Bangura. We also
support the work of the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. The efforts
made so far to tackle the immense challenge at hand
deserve appreciation. Nevertheless, the severe effects
of conflicts on women and girls, as well as on other
vulnerable groups, in various regions of the world
continue to constitute a significant problem that needs
to be addressed.
Seventy years after the foundation of the United
Nations, the elimination of conflict and related
violence stands out as a challenge that the international
community has yet to meet, So long as conflicts exist,
pursuing the elimination of sexual violence in conflict
in isolation cannot yield the desired results. The new
complexities surrounding the changing nature of
conflicts create an even more worrisome development.
The challenges we collectively face today include a
growing number of intra-State conflicts, protracted
crises, humanitarian emergencies, the emergence of
violent extremist groups across a broad geographical
area and the effects of inhumane terrorist acts. The
international community should pay particular
attention to strategies for preventing and responding to
sexual-based violence, which is often used as a weapon
of war and as a strategy to deprive human beings of
their most basic rights — namely, their safety, security
and dignity. Such crimes should not go unrecorded and
unpunished. To prevent sexual violence in conflicts we
must end impunity for both the perpetrators and for
those in the chain of command. Punishment for crimes
often serves as a deterrent.
In the face of the threats and needs faced by
civilians, a stronger and more inclusive approach, in
line with the goals and objectives set by resolution 1325
(2000), is required.
First, strengthening our political will to achieve
gender equality, the empowerment of women and girls
and recognition of their human rights is a necessary

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

step. As we embark upon a process to develop a set
of sustainable development goals for the post-2015
development agenda, we believe that gender equality
and the empowerment of women should be at the centre
of all our solutions and commitments. That will also help
further our agenda on women and peace and security.
Ending violence against women is a part of this effort.
The Council of Europe’s Convention on Preventing
and Combating Violence Against Women, known as
the Istanbul Convention, stands out as a landmark
document in this regard. Turkey is committed to foster
the objectives of the Convention and stands ready to
share its own experiences in its implementation.
Secondly, the horrific acts perpetrated by terrorist
organizations such as Daesh, Boko Haram and
Al-Shabab require a comprehensive counter-terrorism
strategy. In that vein, eliminating the root causes of the
conflict is essential.
Thirdly, ensuring a comprehensive approach to
decision-making and policy, as well as peace processes,
mediation efforts, peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
are another important step. Women’s meaningful
participation in those cycles has the potential to ensure
better early-warning systems, ending impunity for
sexual violence-related crimes and stronger deterrence
and prevention strategies.
Lastly, broadening the gender perspectives in the
United Nations system’s normative and operational
frameworks, entities and practices will enhance the
effectiveness of its actions in responding to conflictrelated sexual violence, and help address the special
needs of women and girls in humanitarian emergencies
and protracted crises.
I will not take the Council’s time by responding to
one delegation’s renewed, baseless allegations, which
we categorically deny.
As the crisis in Syria enters its fifth year, millions
of Syrians, particularly women and girls, continue to
live under the threat of sexual violence. I would like to
mention some of the best practices we have implemented
to tackle sexual violence in conflicts, based on our
experience in responding to the forced displacement of
Syrians and Iraqis due the tragedies in their countries.
In terms of participation, we are giving priority
to women’s participation in the temporary protection
centres, with their inclusion in both decision-making
and administration. Regarding protection, an adequate

S/PV.7428

number of women staff is employed in the centres to
maintain quality health, education and security services
for women and girls. On prevention, special measures
are in place to prevent assaults within the centres and
to protect vulnerable groups. Outside the centres,
measures are taken to promote the monitoring and
prevention of domestic and sexual violence. In terms
of empowerment, the enrolment of girls in schooling
and continuing education for women remains a priority
policy.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our full
support to international, regional and national efforts
to end conflict-related sexual violence and to respond
to its consequences.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the ten member States of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) — namely
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and my own country,
Viet Nam.
We commend the Jordanian presidency for
convening this open debate on women and peace
and security, with a focus on conflict-related sexual
violence. We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2015/203) and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict for
her informative briefing.
ASEAN welcomes the progress made in implementing
key aspects of the Security Council’s landmark resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent relevant resolutions. We
are pleased to see more women participating as key
actors in conflict resolution and peace processes. The
capacity of national rule of law and justice actors in all
regions has been strengthened. More has been done to
better protect women and girls from sexual violence,
gender-based discrimination and social exclusion.
We look forward to the comprehensive review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) byMember
States, United Nations entities and other stakeholders.
ASEAN condemns all forms of violence against
women and girls, in particular sexual violence. We
are deeply concerned about the rise in conflictrelated sexual violence, which affects and threatens
the well-being of women and girls in many parts of

15-1046647/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

the world. It is particularly alarming to witness the
horrendous widespread sexual violence, including
abductions, sexual slavery, rape and forced marriage,
used by extremist terrorist groups as a tactic of war to
deliberately target civilian populations, as detailed in
the Secretary-General’s report. We urge Member States,
United Nations entities, the relevant international
and regional organizations and other stakeholders to
redouble their efforts to address the multidimensional
challenges relating to the prevention of sexual violence,
victim assistance and the empowerment of women.
Conflict-related sexual violence is best prevented
by addressing its root cause and preventing armed
conflict itself. Conflict-prevention mechanisms,
especially those under United Nations auspices, should
be promoted. Political reconciliation, the rule of law,
socioeconomic development and poverty eradication
are the foundations for sustainable opportunities for
women and girls. Institutions for gender equality and
respect for and promotion of human rights at national
and international levels should be continuously
strengthened.
The perpetrators of sexual violence must not go
unpunished. But more important, victims of conflictrelated sexual violence must be provided with assistance
and services tailored to their specific needs. They must
be protected against stigmatization and exclusion, and
given the opportunity and capability to re-engage and
reintegrate with their communities. In a broader sense,
we must promote the full and equal political, social
and economic participation of women. The inclusion of
women and their priorities in all aspects of the peace
process is crucial.
ASEAN is of the view that, while States must bear
the primary responsibility in these efforts, the United
Nations and international community can play their
important roles by, inter alia, providing assistance and
sharing best practices. In that regard, ASEAN wishes
to stress that reports on specific situations should
ensure accuracy, objectivity and impartiality, in full
consultation with the Member States concerned, and
include national efforts to address the situations.
ASEAN is strongly committed to ending sexual
violence wherever it occurs. The ASEAN member
States have been fulfilling their respective obligations
and commitments under the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination of Women
and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action.

48/82

15/04/2015

We have established legal and policy frameworks, as
well as mechanisms, both at the national and regional
level, to further enhance the status and welfare of
women and girls and to eliminate all forms of violence
against women, including sexual violence.
The ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission on
Human Rights and the ASEAN Commission on the
Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Women and
Children are actively implementing their respective work
plans that aim to promote and protect the human rights
and fundamental freedoms of women and children in
the ASEAN region. The recent workshop to strengthen
women’s participation in the peace process and conflict
resolution, organized by the ASEAN Institute for Peace
and Reconciliation on 18 and 19 March in Cebu, the
Philippines, highlighted the importance of women’s
participation in peace processes and conflict resolution
in the region, and helped raise awareness on, and
promote the implementation of, resolution 1325 (2000)
and existing national action plans on women and peace
and security.
Conflict-related sexual violence can be stopped
if the international community steps up its efforts to
put in place comprehensive strategies that protect the
rights and fundamental freedoms of women and deliver
necessary services for victims and survivors. For its
part, ASEAN reiterates its readiness and commitment
to join efforts to ensure the elimination of sexual
violence, protect and assist victims and enhance the
role of women in peace processes.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
on behalf of the Sudan, I express my appreciation to the
President for having organized this debate on women
and peace and security. We also welcome Ms. Zainab
Hawa Bangura, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. We
take note of the contents of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2015/203).
The Government of the Sudan attaches particular
importance to women’s issues, as reflected in a number
of our initiatives, including our 25-year women’s
strategy for the period 2003 to 2027, the national
strategy for combating violence against women,
the national women’s empowerment policy and the
national plan for the advancement of women. We also
established a unit to combat violence against women,

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

as well as an independent human rights commission,
in accordance with the Paris principles. Both of those
institutions are headed by women. The Government
also devotes particular attention to addressing violence
against women, in particular in refugee camps in
Darfur, Blue Nile and South Kordofan states. We do
so in cooperation with the United Nations Population
Fund (UNFPA) and the human rights division of the
Sudan United Nations country team.
On this day, as the Security Council is discussing
this topic, voters in my country are freely exercising
their constitutional rights in casting their votes in
presidential and parliamentary elections for the second
day in a row. Women participated fully at all stages of
the preparations for the elections and are now voting
side-by-side with men. The rights to run for office
and to vote have been enshrined in our legislation
and Constitution since the 1950s. Women now occupy
28 per cent of parliamentary seats, including that
of Deputy Speaker of the Parliament. In terms of
political participation, women have run as candidates
for President of the republic. Women now hold several
prominent positions, as presidential advisers and
ministers, and not only at the helm of ministries related
to women’s rights but also dealing with other areas of
Government.
The Government of the Sudan has adopted
legislation aimed at preventing the dangers posed
to women and girls by human trafficking. As a
transit country for this phenomenon due to our wide
expanses of desert, the Sudan hosted a conference to
combat human trafficking in the Horn of Africa. That
conference attracted broad participation.
With regard to the economic empowerment of
women, the Government has implemented the rural
women’s development programme and established
economic empowerment projects, including a women’s
portfolio, revolving loans and microfinancing projects
for women. Sudanese law guarantees equal rights for
men and women with regard to property and inheritance
without discrimination — in fact, it provides safeguards
for women’s rights to inheritance that in some cases
surpass the percentage accorded to men. Women also
enjoy the right to health care, which has resulted in
reduced maternal mortality thanks to programmes
implemented with UNFPA and UNICEF.
The Government of the Sudan is devoting efforts
to deliver services to displaced persons in Darfur, Blue

S/PV.7428

Nile and South Kordofan states. Those efforts have
been very fruitful, although this is not the appropriate
time to list them exhaustively. We must point out that
the rebel groups continue to undermine those efforts
and are seeking to destabilize the situation through acts
of violence, resulting in a severe humanitarian situation
for all vulnerable populations, including women. The
Government of the Sudan has therefore endeavoured
to facilitate the voluntary return of displaced persons
through development programmes once situations have
regained significant stability.
I must take this opportunity to reject the content
of the report presented today and the naïve allegations
that were previously propagated by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General with regard
to the actions in Darfur. I also recall the evidence
that we previously presented to the Security Council,
some of which has been issued as official documents.
That evidence was sufficient to dispel those naïve and
baseless lies, which no sane person would believe. The
members of the Security Council should know that
this microphone has been used as a mouthpiece for
lies. There is quite a difference between Amsterdam
and Darfur. It is enough that the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) has
visited the site and presented a report that has proven
those allegations to be lies. We therefore denounce the
fact that they have been mentioned again in another
report, in particular since reports presented to the
Security Council in the name of the Secretary-General
must rely on accurate and credible information, not just
rumours.
It is unfortunate that the paragraphs regarding the
Sudan in the report do not include any reference to, or
condemnation of, the acts of rebel groups. Anyone who
reads those paragraphs would get the impression that
the Government of the Sudan is the only killer — as if
it were fighting against itself and its own citizens. That
is naïve, and no sane person would believe it.
The paragraphs disregard the significant improvements
in the humanitarian situation during the reporting
period. The Security Council is currently considering
recommendations regarding the future of UNAMID
because of the great strides that we have taken in this
regard. In the concluding part of the report regarding
Sudan, there is a request for cooperation from the
Government to allow access to the regions. Apart
from the fact that this is an issue of sovereignty, it is
also inaccurate because the Government has been

15-1046649/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

cooperating fully with the United Nations and its
agencies operating in the Sudan. Immunity was never
an obstacle to prosecuting the perpetrators of crimes.
In conclusion, the delegation of the Sudan calls for
the adoption of a comprehensive approach to fighting
crimes against women. This is a noble cause that has
been corrupted by politicization. We must therefore
prioritize conflict resolution and provide assistance
for reconstruction and addressing refugee issues, and
all matters related to the cause of women in conflict.
The Sudan also calls for the lifting of restrictions that
hamper national efforts in various areas, including
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. I
refer in particular to the debts and unilateral sanctions
imposed on some conflict regions, including the Sudan.
The Sudan reiterates the importance of verifying the
accuracy of information, especially before including it
in reports presented to the Council.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): Mr. President,
we thank you for convening this open debate concerning
the grave crimes committed against women.
The bulk of such crimes are perpetrated by
non-State actors, in particular extremist and terrorist
groups, including those intending to establish
quasi-State entities. Atrocities against women,
adolescents and young girls require the attention and
immediate action of the international community.
Massive, unprecedented flows of refugees, internally
displaced persons, and the enforced displacement
of entire populations pose a security threat. The
Security Council, United Nations peacekeeping
operations and political missions must step up their
operating capabilities and strategies to deal not just
with the phenomenon of extreme enmity and hatred,
but also extrajudicial killings and sexual violence,
including rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution,
forced pregnancy and enforced sterilization, which
have become new weapons of war and tactics of terror.
Those threats call for the greater coordination of the
United Nations system, including entities concerned
with sexual violence and the protection of women, and
that also work with regional structures in Africa and
the Middle East. The United Nations country teams are
also called on to deliver as one. Hence, the mobilization
of resources to fund enhanced training and a greater
number of qualified personnel is a sine qua non.

50/82

15/04/2015

Through resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions, the role of women in conflict prevention
and resolution, recovery and development is considered
vital. They have to be fully engaged in decision-making
mechanisms and peace agreements, as well as in the
provision of basic survival needs, medical care,
education and economic self-reliance. As such,
enforcing the rule of law and transitional justice,
eliminating gender-based discrimination, and ending
all impunity must remain critical to the economic
and social empowerment of women. Their goals
must be part of comprehensive and multidimensional
peacekeeping efforts in hybrid operations to prevent
serious international crimes against women.
Commissions of inquiry on various conflicts and
UN-Women need to provide regular briefings to the
Council. The Council’s mandates on women, peace
and security should be made the focus of at least one
periodic field visit.
Kazakhstan has become increasingly engaged in
peacekeeping, starting in 2003 with Iraq and Nepal. We
are currently in the Western Sahara, with a deployment
to Côte d’Ivoire planned for May. The protection of
women and girls, and gender-sensitive approaches are
always given attention in the training of my country’s
peacekeepers. Kazakhstan considers the protection of
civilians to be one of its key priorities in its bid for
a non-permanent seat on the Security Council for
2017-2018. Over the past decade, my country has
witnessed increased and complex flows of asylum
seekers, refugees, migrants and victims of trafficking
in our region. Those challenges have been addressed by
numerous regional structures and national initiatives.
Kazakhstan initiated the creation of the Kazakhstan
Agency for International Development and the United
Nations regional hub in Almaty to address these threats
and develop resilience.
The stable development of Afghanistan remains
the primary focus of Kazakhstan. We have allocated
more than $70 million to a wide range of support, from
food security and facility, construction to creating
special market conditions for petroleum export. The
broad focus is also on education, especially for Afghan
women and girls. Finally, let me assure the Council that
Kazakhstan is commited to joining the global efforts
to achieve international peace and security, of which
promoting gender equality and empowerment of women
is an inseparable component.

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): At the outset, allow me
to pay tribute to Jordan for taking the initiative to
convene this meeting. We would also like to express
our appreciation to Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and her team for the preparation
of the informative report before us (S/2015/203). Egypt
also commends the activities of United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict and the activities
of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict.
Our meeting today is very timely, falling one month
after of the adoption of the political declaration of the
Commission on the Status of Women, which reflects
the international community’s firm commitment
to tackling the challenges and remaining gaps in
implementation in all 12 critical areas of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action — including, inter
alia, violence against women, and women and armed
conflict.
This year’s report of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence highlights several
emerging concerns, including the perpetration of sexual
violence not only as a tactic of war but also as a tactic
of terror and extremism. In response to those concerns,
the report sets out important recommendations,
including on the need to promote gender equality and
the empowerment of women in order to address the root
causes of conflict-related sexual violence, transform
harmful social norms and counter the rise of extremism.
In that regard, Egypt would like to highlight
several points. First, the threat of terrorism, both in its
magnitude and diversity, remains one of the gravest
challenges not only to international peace and security,
but also to human dignity. It has affected all aspects
of our life. It threatens the security and sovereignty
of States, the rule of law, freedom and developmental
aspects of our societies.
Secondly, sexual violence in conflict is a serious
violation of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. In that regard, Egypt
stresses the importance of zero tolerance for sexual
violence, ensuring the accountability of its perpetrators
by all possible means, whether they have committed,
commanded or condoned those crimes.

S/PV.7428

Thirdly, to eliminate conflict-related sexual violence,
efforts must be made to diminish the capacity of
non-State terrorist groups in Iraq, Syria, Somalia,
Nigeria, Mali, Libya and Yemen that perpetrate sexual
violence. The international community must be fully
committed to using all means to combat those non-State
terrorist groups.
Fourthly, more financial resources have to be
secured for the expeditious implementation of the
agenda on women, peace and security, with special
attention given to conflict-related sexual violence.
Egypt also believes that it is of utmost importance
to address the issue of sexual violence during the early
stages of peace processes, through mediation efforts
and ceasefire and peace agreements, particularly in
security arrangement provisions, transitional justice
and reparations. Due attention must be given to the
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence as an
integral part of States’ obligations towards them,
including by implementing mechanisms aimed at
preventing the recurrence of such crimes, as well
as providing them with all required services and
assistance, including rehabilitation and reintegration
efforts.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Bolaños Pérez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this open debate on conflict-related sexual violence, a
subject that my country has been very active on, based
on our firm conviction that we must keep fighting
violence against women and girls in every form. I would
also like to thank Ms. Zainab Bangura, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for her briefing, and Ms. Hamsatu
Allamin, the representative of the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security, speaking on behalf of
civil society.
Sexual violence is a deplorable phenomenon,
related to insecurity, to incomplete disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes, and to
the impunity that is associated with weak rule-oflaw institutions. We are concerned about the recent
cases of sexual slavery, forced marriage and rape by
extremist groups that demonstrate that sexual violence
has become a terrorist tactic. Every new report from
the Secretary-General describes horrendous situations
created by offenders, especially those systematic

15-1046651/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

violators identified in the annex to his most recent
report (S/2015/203).
The United Nations has adopted specific policies
in this area, including creating the office of Special
Representative Bangura, implementing provisions
for monitoring, analysis and briefings on reports,
and deploying women protection advisers in some
peacekeeping operations. Despite those achievements,
however, the problem persists, as we have recently
observed, sadly, in Nigeria, Iraq, South Sudan, Darfur,
Syria, Mali, the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, to name only a few.
We should not rest until we see the special needs
of women and girls on the ground receive the special
attention they deserve. We should improve our
collection of data disaggregated by gender and age, and
ensure gender mainstreaming in all mission activities
in the field, particularly in the context of humanitarian
assistance and care for displaced persons. The chief
challenge for Member States, United Nations and
humanitarian actors is the imperative of ensuring and
improving a protective environment. We reiterate that
it is the responsibility of Member States to protect
their own populations, particularly women and girls,
the most vulnerable, and we urge everyone to continue
making their worthy contributions to dealing with the
challenges presented by reality.
The Council should insist that States in conflict
or post-conflict situations adopt codes of conduct
and action plans for their military forces and work on
collecting and preserving evidence, instituting criminal
prosecutions and protecting the victims, witnesses and
even justice officials themselves, as well as achieving
a genuine zero-tolerance policy. At the same time,
it is essential that they involve non-governmental
organizations and women’s organizations dealing with
this issue in order to obtain the necessary support.
We reiterate that protecting the human rights of
women and girls is not negotiable. We must pool our
efforts if we are to ensure true empowerment and the
effective implementation of the activities that can help
us achieve full respect for international humanitarian
and human-rights law. We also stress how important it
is that gender equality and the empowerment of women
occupy a central place on the post-2015 development
agenda and that this goal should emphasize the creation
of peaceful societies and institutions, both of which are
fundamental to fulfilling our commitments regarding
women and peace and security.
52/82

15/04/2015

Guatemala has taken very concrete action to
address sexual violence and strengthen its own national
institutions. In recent years we have enacted laws
prohibiting femicide and other forms of violence against
women, as well as sexual violence, exploitation and
trafficking, enabling us to reform the characterization of
various crimes in our penal code. In a measure designed
to improve the access of women victims of violence to
justice, we have established several programmes in the
executive branch of the judiciary aimed at eliminating
impunity as it affects women.
Combating impunity must continue to be a
fundamental aspect of our efforts not just to respond to
sexual violence but also to prevent it. In that regard, we
support the policy on gender-based and sexual violence
crimes established by Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court. We must make
better and more consistent use of the tools available
to the Council in order to bring to justice those who
commit or order sexual violence, or who tolerate it
by not preventing or punishing it, in accordance with
responsibility as it is defined in international criminal
law. We should also redouble our efforts to strengthen
national judicial capacities and the framework of
international justice, including by referring those
responsible to the International Criminal Court, and we
support intensifying dialogue with the Court.
The Court’s 2012 conviction of Thomas Lubanga
Dyilo and the referral to it in 2013 of the case
concerning Bosco Ntaganda have sent a clear message
about the legal consequences of child recruitment,
which is considered a war crime. We welcomed the
announcement that the trial in the Ntaganda case will
be held in Bunia, since that is likely to have a major
impact on the affected communities and their victims,
showing that justice is being done and thus helping
them to close that horrific chapter in their lives.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Latvia.
Ms. Freimane-Deksne (Latvia): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of Estonia as well as my own country,
Latvia. We would like to thank Jordan for organizing
this debate on sexual violence in conflict. We also
thank Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and Ms. Hamsatu Allamin, representing civil society,
for their statements and their tireless work on this
complex and sensitive issue.

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s comprehensive
report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2015/203).
It also addresses very disturbing new challenges in
the form of sexual violence perpetrated in a context
of rising violent extremism. Sexual violence, in the
form of rape, sexual slavery, forced marriage, forced
pregnancy, torture and human trafficking, has been
used by terrorist groups, notably the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, as a tactic for spreading terror,
persecuting minorities and suppressing or forcibly
displacing communities that oppose their ideology.
Women and children are deliberately targeted and their
rights violated.
Latvia and Estonia strongly condemn all forms
of sexual violence and its use as a tactic of terror and
persecution on any grounds. In that regard, we share
the Secretary-General’s view that efforts to prevent
and address sexual violence should be closely and
strategically aligned with efforts to prevent violent
extremism. Empowering women and girls and
establishing respect for their human rights, as well as
ensuring women’s full participation in decision-making
processes, including conflict prevention and resolution,
are crucial to ending conflict-related sexual violence.
The effectiveness of efforts to prevent and
address conflict-related sexual violence can also be
undermined by under-reporting, impunity and a lack
of necessary support to survivors of sexual violence.
Better coordinated efforts are needed to ensure that
survivors of such crimes receive comprehensive
care and assistance, including access to sexual and
reproductive health services. The international
community must work to end the culture of impunity
for crimes of sexual violence in conflict. Ensuring
the accountability of perpetrators of crimes of sexual
violence among State and non-State actors alike is
crucial if we are to discourage and ultimately eliminate
sexual violence and bring justice to its survivors.
While States are primarily responsible for ensuring
accountability, the International Criminal Court (ICC)
has a central role to play in cases where States lack the
capability or political will to do so. Latvia and Estonia
support victims of gender-based and sexual violence in
countries affected by armed conflict through the Trust
Fund for Victims set up by the ICC.
This year is a special one for the women and peace
and security agenda, as we will be marking the fifteenth

S/PV.7428

anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
Latvia and Estonia look forward to the high-level
review of the resolution’s implementation and have
already made national contributions in that regard. Our
Governments also endorsed the 2013 Declaration of
Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict and
supported the Statement of Action issued at the Global
Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict, held in
London last year.
Moreover, we see the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) as an important element in our development
cooperation strategies. Latvia has implemented
projects aimed at supporting and promoting the role of
women in Iraq, Afghanistan and other parts of Central
Asia. Similarly, Estonia has contributed to different
projects and provided financial support to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Too many individuals, families and communities
have been affected if not devastated by conflictrelated sexual violence. Preventing and responding
to sexual violence is vital to resolving conflicts,
enabling development and building sustainable peace.
The international community has to work together to
respond to the urgency of this issue, and Latvia and
Estonia are ready to be an active part of those efforts.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, most
warmly on Jordan’s presidency of the Security Council
this month. I would also like to thank you for convening
today’s important debate.
I would like to praise the courage of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Bangura. She has indeed
played a key role in crystallizing the international
commitment to putting an end to sexual violence in
armed conflict.
In spite of the efforts of the international community,
including the Security Council, to establish legal
frameworks and standards, the phenomenon is
spreading and becoming increasingly more complex.
Sexual violence is used as a weapon to humiliate the
enemy, undermine its dignity, destroy communities,
force people to flee their homes, and deliberately
spread HIV/AIDS. This terror is particularly atrocious;

15-1046653/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

it is a scourge that cannot be ignored. It is true that wars
often lead to the collapse of legal systems but this does
not justify or explain such a horrible violation of human
rights. In this context, we reiterate our attachment
to resolution 1325 (2000) and all other resolutions
concerning sexual violence. We also endorse efforts to
swiftly eradicate violence, heal the wounds of victims
and reintegrate those who have fled back into society.
I have three points to make in this regard. First, there
is a need to scale up efforts to prevent violence — and,
naturally, sexual violence — by setting forth national
legal frameworks and strengthening the rule of law.
There is also a need to improve outreach and awareness
raising. The participation of women must be guaranteed
in these efforts and there must be a mainstreaming of
gender equality in all peacekeeping activities. Women
can and must play various roles in times of conflict as
in times of peace. In this context, there is a need to
provide appropriate training to mediators and all those
who participate in the peace process, the cessation of
hostilities and ceasefires. Peace agreements also need
to include provisions having to do with bolstering the
role of women. More attention must be paid to the fate
of women who are subject to rape and other forms of
sexual violence during conflict. There needs to be
a building of national capacity and the drafting of
legislation, with adequate resources being allocated.
These are sine qua nons for tackling this issue.
Secondly, there is a need to break the wall of silence
and raise awareness, which are two key conditions
for combating sexual violence and protecting victims
from humiliation and stigmatization, providing them
with the opportunity and ability to reintegrate into
their societies. I would also refer to the importance
of awareness-raising campaigns for the larger public,
not just through the sanctioning of perpetrators but
also through efforts to change mindsets. The end to
impunity lies in prosecuting perpetrators; there can be
no end to the scourge if perpetrators are not referred
to justice. In this regard, we welcome the contribution
of the Team of Experts in building national capacities
and strengthening national know-how in the area of
impunity. Victims of sexual violence have limited legal
recourse in the majority of cases. This has to be changed.
Otherwise, perpetrators will continue to remain at large
and justice will remain unattainable. In this context,
we stress the importance of prevention, protection and
reintegration. We would also highlight the important
role of civil society, women’s organizations and
religious and social leaders.
54/82

15/04/2015

Thirdly, while there have been high-level meetings
dealing with combating sexual violence in countries
in conflict or in post-conflict, including that held in
October 2013 (S/PV.7044), and consultations on such
international frameworks as resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008) and the Protocol on the Prevention and
Suppression of Sexual Violence against Women and
Children, our commitment is not limited to the United
Nations. In fact, there has also been an important
African Union initiative. We warmly welcome the
United Nations-African Union agreement on the
training of peacekeeping staff.
We continue to work nationally in an unstinting
manner to promote the role of women, as we continue to
believe that women play a key role in social progress and
bringing about the end of violence and inequality. We
also emphasize the importance of mainstreaming this
issue in the mandates of all special political missions
and peacekeeping operations. These missions should
also have special women protection advisers. We would
also like to address the possibility of considering this
question in sanctions committees.
Finally, I note that the drive for peace, security and
a better future will be in vain if we do not put an end to
all violence against women.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Dotta (Uruguay) (spoke in Arabic): Uruguay
would like to thank Jordan for having organized today’s
debate.
(spoke in Spanish)
Uruguay welcomes today’s meeting organized
by Jordan. The debate was initially presided over by
a woman, which is another source of pride for the
Kingdom of Jordan and for the Security Council.
Uruguay welcomes in particular the heightened
attention given to the subject and the valuable statements
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and by Ms. Hamsatu
Allamin of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security.
For my country, this is a human rights issue, and
human rights have priority over any national law. This
executive organ of the United Nations should therefore
address as effectively as possible an issue that is of great
concern to us, given that it affects the fundamental
values on which the international community is based.

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

This debate reaffirms the commitment undertaken
by the Council to defending the rights of women and
children on the basis of the conviction that violence
poses a threat to the maintenance of international peace
and security towards which this Organization works.
Sexual violence against women and children is
a terror tactic and in 1992 was designated as a crime
against humanity by the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. This was reiterated
in the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
which entered into force in 2002.
This year marks 15 years since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), which reaffirmed the important
role that women play in preventing and resolving
conflicts and in peacebuilding. As has been mentioned
today, that resolution will be reviewed in October, and
we are confident that the work of the Council will be
effective in making progress towards achieving the
goals of that resolution and subsequent resolutions on
the subject.
States must be held accountable to fulfil their
obligation to protect populations under their sovereign
power from massive crimes, as that type of crime,
namely mass rapes, forced pregnancies, sexual slavery
and other forms of sexual violence, are unfortunately
being used as a tactic of war in various conflicts, in
contravention of all legal and moral principles. As long
as these crimes have no effective punishment and while
there is no compulsory jurisdiction that perpetrators
are subject to, they will continue and even continue
to increase, to our great consternation and that of the
international community.
The situation described in the most recent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2015/203) is very serious.
The report states that sexual violence against girls and
adolescents in armed conflicts continued to increase
in 2014. It also notes an increase in this violence by
non-State armed groups. Despite the existence of a
normative framework and global tools to combat such
violence, as long as there is no effective implementation
of those tools at the various levels of countries’ domestic
law and as long as the perpetrators of such crimes are
not brought to justice, there will be no solution. I would
like to cite an aspect of what is happening, for example,
in Colombia, which is is starting to see success in its
fight against this scourge, having adopted policies at
the national, departmental and local levels. As noted
in the report of the Secretary-General, they have seen

S/PV.7428

positive results, which we hope will continue and
further increase in the future.
It is important that countries be obliged to give
account to the international community for what occurs
within their borders. We cannot remain passive before
such crimes. In his report, the Secretary-General
expresses deep concern for what is happening in wellknown situations such as, to cite a few, the Syrian Arab
Republic, the Sudan, South Sudan and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, among others. We ask ourselves
how long we will continue to witness such crimes. How
long will we have to watch them on television, to the
point that we start to become accustomed to seeing all
those women and girls being killed, raped and sold into
sexual slavery? How long will we see it as just another
news item, not worth stopping for? How long until
the Organization and the Council provide an effective
response to it?
For my country, sexual violence in armed conflict
is of the highest priority. Uruguay participates in
amission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
with approximately 1,000 troops engaged in protection
of civilian tasks, and employing joint protection teams
to monitor and address human rights violations in
remote areas. These peacekeepers collaborate with civil
society organizations, providing them with support in
various aspects, including water, food supplies and
medical attention. They also conduct patrols to prevent
the rape of women and girls in remote situations and
places, such as when they go to fetch water.
My delegation wishes to reiterate what has been
stated in previous debates regarding the positive
feedback loop that exists between participation and
protection, a concept that emerged and was highlighted
in resolution 1325 (2000). Through this instrument,
the Council reiterated the important role that women
play in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacebuilding.
Consistent with all this, my delegation shares
the view that if we are to improve the protection
environment for women and girls, we must increase
the number of women in the police and military. In
this regard, it is regrettable that the figures indicate
that, in 2014, approximately 97 per cent of military
personnel were men, as were 90 per cent of police
officers. We must implement measures to correct that
and undertake greater coordination in establishing an
effective protection strategy, first and foremost with

15-1046655/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

host countries, which have the primary responsibility
to provide protection. That would enable a greater
allocation of resources to this issue by the Organization
so that States can in turn offer greater protection.
Finally, it is of utmost importance that there be
strict enforcement of codes of conduct for United
Nations peacekeeping contingents and that there be zero
tolerance in cases of sexual violence that might occur in
peacekeeping missions. Only consistent commitment
on the part of the international community will protect
women and girls from sexual violence in armed conflict,
which is rooted in the objectives and founding ideology
of extremist groups, whose actions undermine the
foundations of our civilization and represent a return to
the most obscurantist and barbarous stages of history.
We cannot allow it.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Ms. Grignon (Kenya): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this very important debate on women
and peace and security during your presidency of the
Security Council this month. The Kenyan delegation
greatly appreciates this opportunity to share Kenya’s
experiences on the subject, and we thank you for the
concept note (S/2015/243, annex). My delegation also
expresses its gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on this agenda item (S/2015/203),
which, inter alia, showcases the key sectors where
tangible progress has been made by countries. Kenya
is particularly grateful that Member States are
increasingly providing more robust gender and conflict
analysis in their reporting. Please allow me to also
appreciate and thank the panellists this morning for
their inspiring statements.
Kenya is committed to the full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women’s participation in
peacebuilding, better protection from human rights
abuses and access to justice and services to eliminate
discrimination. Kenya is a critical and central player
in international peace and security, partly as a result
of neighbouring countries that have witnessed some of
the worst conflicts in the world. Kenya is also a key
player in peacebuilding and peacekeeping and has been
supporting and assisting its regional neighbours in
reforming their security sectors and in reconstruction
and recovery efforts after conflicts. These initiatives
must genuinely involve and include women to ensure
success.

56/82

15/04/2015

In order to implement resolution 1325 (2000) at
the regional level, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) has developed an regional
action plan for implementation of that resolution.
Members of IGAD, including Kenya, have been using
the regional action plan to reinforce their national
framework to ensure that sexual violence is not used
as a tool to terrorize communities in the region. Kenya,
under the auspices of the National Gender and Equality
Commission, has developed and adopted a national
action plan to augment the regional action plan and
strengthen its own national framework to implement
resolution 1325 (2000).
Mrs. Kawar returned to the Chair.
In today’s complex reality, asymmetric warfare
is one of Africa’s biggest challenges. Growing terror
organizations like Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram are
quickly spreading acts of terror that are paralysing the
continent. Kenya is still mourning its children who were
senselessly butchered by terrorists at Garissa University
College. For us, the achievement of sustainable peace
is urgent and cannot be achieved without women’s
full participation in the prevention of conflict and the
protection of Kenyans. At this juncture, please allow
me, on behalf of my delegation and of Kenya, to most
profoundly and sincerely thank all and everyone here
at the United Nations and beyond for their encouraging
and touching messages of love, courage, support and
solidarity during this trying time for Kenya.
Peace and security are the number one priority
for Kenya, and everyone, especially women, are
intricately involved. We still need to do more to ensure
that women take centre stage in peace negotiations
and peacebuilding institutions at all levels. We need
to ensure that women have opportunities to access
justice and to play their role in shaping policy and
legislation to achieve and sustain peace and security.
The Government of Kenya has formulated policies
and enacted laws to ensure that women participate
in peacebuilding at all levels. Women are also fully
engaged at the highest levels of the executive, the
judiciary and Parliament. In Parliament, women are
responsible for championing laws and policies aimed at
promoting women’s involvement in peace and security
issues and advocating for measures that protect women,
children and the elderly.
At all other levels, women work in strategic positions
of decision-making, which has greatly contributed to

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

gender mainstreaming. The Constitution provides for
women’s participation and inclusion at all levels of
Government in both appointive and elective positions.
It also provides for policies that must guarantee
sufficient budgeting allocations for women’s issues and
for gender budgeting. Local peace committees follow
guidelines that are in tune with the Constitution. At
operational levels, Kenyan women serve in the police
and in the military, which is key to prevention and
protection processes. Women are also being deployed in
conflict zones to participate in peacekeeping and peace
enforcement missions, just like their male counterparts.
My delegation wishes to underscore the importance
of education, capacity-building and the communication
tools for preventing and combating violence generally.
It is in that connection that my delegation urges the
Security Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and
other key stakeholders to continue prioritizing education
and awareness-creation on the critical role of women
in peacebuilding, peace and security. Issues of peace
and security cannot be addressed in isolation. Women
must have access to resources, entrepreneurial skills,
including job creation and the ownership of property.
We must emphasize a multi-pronged approach to the
elimination of violence against women.
While the Security Council has an important role
to play in dealing with peace and security matters,
States bear the primary responsibility for protecting
their citizens from violence. My delegation calls for
more concerted efforts on the part of the international
community and the United Nations system to support
national efforts to prevent and address issues surrounding
conflicts and violence, especially of a terrorist nature.
Indeed, countries in conflict and those recently
emerging from conflict have unique challenges and
require everyone’s goodwill to safeguard international
peace. More resources and assistance are needed to
ensure that where conflicts are raging, resources and
support are sent with urgency to minimize suffering and
to end the conflict. We must ensure greater coherence
and coordination in addressing women’s issues in a
holistic manner in conflict and post-conflict situations.
Finally, my delegation will seek to engage further
with Member States and stakeholders to further
enhance and strengthen mechanisms to ensure the
full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In
conclusion, I wish to reiterate Kenya’s commitment to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000).

S/PV.7428

The President (spoke in Arabic): I would like to say
to the representative of Kenya that what happened in
her country was the peak of barbarism and inhumanity.
We stand with Kenya in this very difficult war.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Mawe (Ireland): Ireland commends you,
Madam President, for your initiative in scheduling
today’s debate. We thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, whose work we highly
appreciate, and Ms. Hamsatu Allamin, speaking on
behalf of civil society, for their insightful briefings on
this topic.
Ireland associates itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/203) makes
for difficult reading. It details horrible and systematic
violations of the rights of women and girls and, to a
lesser but discernibly growing extent, boys and men.
The confluence of crises in 2014 wrought by violent
extremism has brought home once again how sexual
violence, rape, forced marriage and kidnapping are
employed as tactics of terror by radical groups in Iraq,
Somalia, Syria and Nigeria in order to dehumanize and
repress their victims.
Nevertheless, 2014 saw some positive developments
that are noteworthy. One highlight was the entry into
force in December of the Arms Trade Treaty — the first
treaty to recognize the links between the international
arms trade and gender-based violence. We look forward
to its effective implementation.
While the progress made must be commended,
we cannot shy away from the reality that 2014 saw
a resurgence of sexual violence in conflict. Faced
with such horrors, how can we translate the concern
voiced around this table into meaningful action on
the ground? Today, I would like to focus on just three
points: the deployment of women protection advisers,
the better participation and empowerment of women
in peacebuilding, and greater accountability for sexual
violence in conflict.
The Secretary-General’s report notes the real
difference being made by the deployment of women
protection advisers to United Nations missions. They
have improved the quality of information and analysis
received and have had a catalytic effect on the ground.
However, of the 170,000 personnel deployed by the

15-1046657/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

United Nations, just 20 are women protection advisers.
Ireland supports the accelerated deployment of such
advisers, as well as gender advisers, to facilitate the
full implementation of all women, peace and security
resolutions. The number and roles of those positions
must be systematically assessed during the planning
and review of each United Nations mission, and the
costs should be reflected in the regular budgets of
United Nations missions.
As Ms. Allamin stressed earlier today, the full and
equal participation of women in conflict prevention
and peacebuilding is fundamental to any prevention
and protection response, including to threats posed by
violent extremism.
In line with Council resolution 2122 (2013), we
must step up efforts to support women’s leadership and
participation. We must listen to, invest in and build up
the capacity of women-led civil-society organizations.
We need to eliminate legal and other barriers and
proactively support the participation of women on
an equal footing with men in economic and political
decision-making, from the household to the national
and international levels, in order to transform the social
norms underlying gender inequality.
We know that peace agreements are more likely
to succeed where civil society is included. And yet, in
disregarding the role of women, we manage to omit a
large segment of civil society. Women represent only
9 per cent of delegates to peace talks and 2 per cent of
mediators, and this is in a context where more than half
of peace efforts fail to sustain peace. There must be a
better way.
Ireland also calls for the inclusion of the issue of
conflict-related sexual violence in mediation efforts and
in ceasefire and peace agreements. We are encouraged
by the Havana peace talks on the Colombian situation,
where a group of 60 survivors of sexual violence
directly addressed the negotiations. As a result, the
issue of conflict-related sexual violence has been raised
in the negotiations by the stakeholders.
The Council has stressed on many occasions the
importance of holding perpetrators of conflict-related
sexual violence accountable, not only as an end in itself
but to address the culture of impunity which threatens
peace and security and post-conflict recovery. We
encourage the Council to use all means at its disposal to
bring perpetrators into the spotlight, including through
referrals to the International Criminal Court and

58/82

15/04/2015

mandating commissions of inquiry, and by explicitly
condemning such violations where they occur. Targeted
sanctions are another tool at the disposal of the Council,
and the Council needs to be more ambitious in their use.
Ireland strongly supports the recommendation
contained in the Secretary-General’s report, as echoed
by Ms. Bangura today, to fully integrate the issue of
conflict-related sexual violence into the work of the
Security Council sanctions Committees, including the
Al-Qaida sanctions list, as part of designation criteria.
Sexual violence in conflict can no longer be
considered collateral damage or something that is
“unfortunate”. It is the direct result of decisions taken
by parties to conflict. The history of denial must end.
We must incentivize national leaders to adopt the issue
of women and peace and security as their own agenda.
We must tackle the root causes of sexual violence. We
must not stop until the barriers that exist for women
are dismantled, so that they can claim their rights as
equal citizens and contribute to peace and security on
an equal basis.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important debate. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2015/203). It is appalling to note that the year under
review was marked by an increased incidence and
severity of conflict-related sexual violence. In this
regard, we commend the unwavering commitment of
Special Representative Bangura to expose and end
conflict-related sexual violence.
Sexual violence is not merely a consequence
of conflict. It is used as an instrument of war and,
increasingly, as a tactic of terror. Its use by extremist
groups and non-State actors is particularly alarming,
not only in its increasing frequency but in its calculated
and vicious intent.
Extremist groups and non-State actors terrorize
communities into compliance, displacing populations
and generating revenue through trafficking, slave trade
and ransoms. The rise of extremist groups such as
Boko Haram and Daesh, with their widespread reach
across cultures and geographies, is aided by existing
vulnerabilities within communities and systemic
gender-based discrimination.

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

The United Nations and the international community
more broadly must continue the work to integrate
the women and peace and security agenda into
counterterrorism and counter-insurgency efforts. That
will require a better understanding of the possible
options available to us and potentially different ways
of operating.
Addressing sexual violence in conflict must remain
a priority as long as women, men and children continue
to be victims of sexual violence in conflict-related
settings, and it needs to feature in every aspect of the
Council’s work.
Conflicts are more severe in situations where
women are excluded and marginalized, and we have
seen the tangible benefits of women protection advisers
and women peacekeepers in the field. These must
continue to be supported. The Council should continue
to give its full support to the Special Representative,
particularly on engagement with national authorities,
armed forces and others. The signing by the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo of
the declaration to combat rape in war is one concrete
example of the important progress that can be made
when there is sufficient political will. We commend the
Special Representative for achieving this outcome.
Efforts to prevent sexual violence in conflict
should also be considered in relation to all aspects
of United Nations conflict-prevention, stabilization
and peacebuilding work. This includes implementing
the International Protocol on the Documentation and
Investigation of Sexual Violence in Conflict and the
comprehensive implementation of the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court into domestic
legislation.
More needs to be done to ensure that no individual
can escape prosecution and act with impunity as well
as to support human rights defenders and build the
capacity of local civil society, including women’s
organizations.
The fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
provides an important opportunity to expand the scope
of the women and peace and security agenda beyond
participation and protection to focus on prevention,
including preventing sexual violence.
Australia strongly supports the Preventing Sexual
Violence in Conflict Initiative, of which Australia’s
Foreign Minister, Julie Bishop, is an active champion.

S/PV.7428

We are working to implement the commitment made
in London under the Declaration of Commitment to
End Sexual Violence in Conflict and will continue to
work with partners in our region and beyond to promote
universal application of the Declaration.
In conclusion, it is important to recall that men and
boys also suffer from sexual violence; so, too, people
with disabilities. These survivors often have different
needs and require specific medical, psychosocial, legal
and economic support services.
Ultimately, the international community must
respond before conflict erupts to reduce exposure to
conflict-related hardships and abuses, including sexual
and gender-based violence in all its forms.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): Thank
you, Madam President, for convening this open debate
on conflict-related sexual violence and for choosing
this important topic as part of your agenda. May I
also congratulate you on your dynamic and effective
presidency of the Security Council this month.
The United Arab Emirates joins others in thanking
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
on conflict-related sexual violence, and the briefers
this morning for their thoughtful and important
presentations. The United Arab Emirates further lends
its voice in commending the work done by Zainab
Bangura in her tenure as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
It is of particular significance that we are convening
this open debate under Jordan’s presidency, as the
Middle East faces a rising tide of extremism and unrest.
In that light, we welcome Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Bangura’s upcoming mission to the
Middle East, in the hope that her visit contributes to
creating a region-wide strategy to address conflictrelated sexual violence within the context of extremism.
As ever, the United Arab Emirates stands ready to
support the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in this critical mission.
As we are confronted by distressing accounts of
rape, sexual slavery and forced marriage by extremist
groups, we must also recognize that some progress
has been made in a relatively short period of time. It
is remarkable to reflect that it was only eight years
ago that the Security Council formally recognized the

15-1046659/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

use of conflict-related sexual violence as a matter of
international peace and security. The crime itself has
been used as a weapon of war for centuries, but it was
here, in this Chamber, that the international community
created the mechanisms to help national authorities
confront perpetrators and support the victims of these
crimes. And it is here where further progress can and
must be made.
Today, the Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/203)
takes us a step further as we move away from looking
at conflict-related sexual violence as a tactic of war, to
recognizing it as a tactic of terror. The report accurately
pinpoints how sexual violence is deployed by extremist
groups to achieve their heinous objectives. As such, it
should be firmly dealt with under this rubric of terror. In
this context, we fully endorse the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to integrate the issue of conflictrelated sexual violence into the work of the relevant
Security Council sanctions Committees, as part of
the designation criteria for the imposition of targeted
measures. We believe that the Security Council has a
key role to play and should remain actively seized of
this matter, in the interest of maintaining international
peace and security.
As the Secretary-General noted in his report, the
rise of non-State actors has made our landscape much
more complex. We are navigating a newly shifting
security context where the rise of violent extremism
has led to increased and targeted violence against
women and girls, men and boys. Extremist groups and
non-State actors are using sexual violence to achieve
tactical objectives and terrorize communities into
compliance, displacing populations and generating
revenue through trafficking, enslavement and ransom.
We need to develop more creative and innovative
solutions as part of a comprehensive strategy. While
the international community develops its responses to
counter these acts, we must at the same time develop
preventive approaches to empower women as their own
first line of defence. This includes promoting women’s
participation in the design and implementation of these
programmes and supporting their leadership in local
contexts. The education and empowerment of women
are our strongest weapon against extremism and
conflict-related sexual violence.
In the larger context of conflict, this agenda must
be pursued comprehensively. A full-fledged response
to combating conflict-related sexual violence will
be possible only with the full implementation of the

60/82

15/04/2015

objectives outlined in 1325 (2000) in practice and not
simply in theory. We must emphasize and ensure that
women’s agency and participation are an equal focus of
this agenda in order to address its underlying causes.
As many have noted here today, accelerating the
deployment of women protection advisers and gender
advisers is key to addressing conflict-related sexual
violence effectively. These differentiated roles are both
of importance and must be given equal weight and
resources. Let us commit to making the deployment
of both gender and women protection advisers a key
requirement of every mission.
Accountability for perpetrators is also fundamental
to our global strategy. This should include individuals
who commit, command or condone — by failing to
prevent or punish — conflict-related sexual violence.
We need to ensure comprehensive justice strategies
in line with international humanitarian and human
rights law, which includes providing survivors with
the full array of support needed after a crime has been
committed.
Our attention, however, should focus not only on
the aftermath of these crimes, but also on preventing
their occurrence in the first place. To this end, we
would like to share specific recommendations arising
from the panel discussion series convened by the United
Arab Emirates in partnership with UN-Women and the
Georgetown Institute for Women, Peace and Security,
in contribution to the global study on resolution 1325
(2000).
First, we are better armed and better equipped to
respond to conflict-related sexual violence when we have
accurate data. We welcome comprehensive reporting,
investigation and documentation in order to bolster
the United Nations ability to better fulfil its mandate,
stressing the need for sex and age-disaggregated data.
It is critical for the international community to deepen
its information base on the nature, scope and objectives
of sexual violence carried out within conflict in order
to define appropriate interventions in consultation with
women and affected communities.
Secondly, in peacekeeping operations it is critical
that missions be able to predict emerging threats,
react quickly and efficiently to instances of violence
and understand community needs in their response.
Digitizing early-warning mechanisms enables women
and girls to protect themselves from conflict-related
sexual violence. This requires cooperation among local

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

communities and peacekeepers, as well as additional
funding to expand the use of early warning tools as part
of a preventive approach.
Thirdly, victims need to be able to safely and
effectively report and document sexual assault in
conflict zones.
In one recent mission, under the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, mobile technology was utilized
to allow civilians to register reports of violence directly
to United Nations peacekeeping forces. This kind of
reporting and documentation needs to be supported by
the increasing presence of women protection advisers,
who are deployed in peacekeeping operations to prevent
and respond to conflict-related sexual violence.
Fourthly, crowd-sourced information can improve
women’s voice and agency in peace processes.
Improving women’s access to information and avenues
through which they can share their views helps ensure
that women are part of important discussions about
political processes, peacemaking and community
development as countries transition out of conflict.
All of these recommendations approach tackling
this issue in new ways and building on utilizing the
tools that have proven effective. We need to continually
improve our methodology by using new technology to
help us address this centuries-old crime.
It is the responsibility of the international
community and national authorities to promote gender
equality and empower women, not simply because it is
the right thing to do, but because we know it leads to
more stable and secure societies. As such, the United
Nations remains the central forum for addressing this
matter. Much progress has been made through the
continual, concerted efforts of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Bangura, the Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict and
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, among
other United Nations entities.
To that end, last month the United Arab Emirates
Government contributed $1 million to United Nations
Action’s multi-donor trust fund specifically to support
the important work being undertaken by the Team of
Experts in their efforts to build capacity on a national
level in the rule of law and justice sectors. The United
Arab Emirates stands with the United Nations and

S/PV.7428

international partners in this important endeavour and
hopes 2015 will be the year where we place the agency
and participation of women and girls front and centre in
our agenda. This is not only an issue of gender, but also
a matter of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica thanks the presidency of Jordan
for convening this open debate. The recent trend of
using sexual violence as a tactic of terror, described in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/203), is a source
of great concern for us because that abhorrent practice
annihilates in the cruellest way possible social cohesion
and the ties that bind communities, as well as dignity
itself and the autonomy of victims.
As stated in the concept note (S/2015/243, annex),
throughout history sexual violence has been widespread
in armed conflict. Unfortunately, throughout history
there are also many examples of various religions
being used as justification in power struggles and
the ideological background for conflict, and the
domination and dehumanization of other human beings
are justified merely on the basis of their being different.
The irrationality of violence and hatred can rise to
heights that put humankind to shame. The inability to
see ourselves reflected in the other as human beings
is an artificial construct derived from fanaticism that
alienates us from our own humanity.
We have previously discussed the alarming
expansion of restrictions on the rights of women and
girls promoted by extremist groups, how the control
of those rights is at the very core of the conflict and
the emergence of terrorist acts specifically directed
against them. Additionally, the report makes clear
that sexual violence is intrinsically linked to ideology,
strategic objectives and the funding of those groups.
The phenomenon that today repels and alarms us is just
one more element in the process of the radicalization of
ideologies based on exclusion and which subordinates
of women and girls. It is no coincidence that sexual
violence takes place against a backdrop of structural
gender-based discrimination. As the report points out,
“the disempowerment of women that attends the rise
of violent extremism is not incidental, but systemic”
(S/2015/203, para. 11).
An appropriate response involves first not
compromising with such world views. As underlined in

15-1046661/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

the recommendations presented, in order to address the
root causes of sexual violence we must promote gender
equality and women’s empowerment and transform the
harmful social standards, particularly at the community
level. Engagement with faith-based leaders and other
opinion makers to counter unacceptable religious
justifications for violence and reduce the stigma faced
by victims is also essential.
It is also necessary for conflict prevention and
peacebuilding efforts to have a strong gender focus,
including the consideration of sexual violence in
negotiations and peace agreements. The approach
in the fight against terrorism and violent extremism,
including the work of the sanctions committees, should
be revised in order to integrate gender issues and the
question of sexual violence. Similarly, greater efforts
should be made in order to prevent impunity, including
the referral of cases to the International Criminal Court
when necessary. It is also important to ensure, in the
Organization’s peacekeeping missions, the inclusion
of stronger mandates in this area and the necessary
provisions in their budgets to finance posts for gender
and women protection adviser.
The United Nations represents the last glimmer of
hope for many communities and we cannot fail at this
crucial time in the victims’ lives. Sexual exploitation
and abuse committed by personnel of the Organization
damage perceptions of the United Nations and its
credibility, and prevent the implementation of mandates.
We urge the departments responsible and countries that
contribute troops, police and civilian personnel to abide
strictly by the zero-tolerance policy. In that regard,
we support the protection measures described in the
report on special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse (A/69/779) and proposals
to enforce the prohibition of such conduct, contained in
staff regulations.
On the twentieth anniversary of Beijing, the
international community must send a strong message
about the empowerment of women as a prerequisite for
building lasting peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the observer of the Holy See.
Reverend Monsignor Grech (Holy See): My
delegation wishes to express its gratitude for Jordan’s
presidency of the Security Council this month and for
this open debate on sexual violence in armed conflict.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General

62/82

15/04/2015

for his report on conflict-related sexual violence
(S/2015/203), and commend the work of civil society
representatives on this issue.
Women are not spared any of the brutal
consequences of war, and are additionally subject to
uniquely degrading and traumatizing attacks and longterm consequences. It is only just and reasonable that
their voices should be present and influential in the
work of preventing and resolving violence and war.
It is well documented that sexual violence of many
kinds accompanies modern warfare. We all know the
awful litany. Women are raped and trafficked, forced into
prostitution to earn a living, and terrorized individually
and in their roles as protectors of their children and
other vulnerable family members. All violence against
human life is terrible, but sexual violence is designed
to debase, dehumanize and demoralize in a unique
way. The consequences are profound and long-lasting,
physical as well as psychological. The hatred and
humiliation these crimes can provoke are deep and
surely impede in powerful ways the achievement of the
goals of peace and security for which this institution
was created.
The recent year has been marked by new and
ongoing atrocities involving sexual violence in various
conflicts and by groups such as Boko Haram and the
so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham. Some are
also attacks upon women and girls purely because of
the faith they profess. Although this is of very serious
concern today for Christians, surely it is a matter
where our shared human nature, across all religions
and cultures, cries out for the common commitment
of members of all faiths and Governments to strongly
condemning and confronting such heinous acts and to
stepping forward to protect those threatened.
It seems that, in the past several years, there has
emerged a greater international consciousness of the
scourge of human trafficking, and even increased
response. It is to be hoped that there will be an ever
greater appreciation of what Pope Francis has called the
trauma, affecting the body and spirit, of rape as a tool
of war. To adapt an observation made by His Holiness,
a two-point drop in the stock market is front-page news,
while the violation of hundreds or even thousands of
women may go unreported.
My delegation supports those processes identified
in successive reports issued by the Secretary-General
as essential for ensuring justice to women assaulted

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

in conflict, effective investigation and documentation,
consistent and rigorous prosecution, and ongoing
investigation and responsibility regarding the root
causes of sexual and other violence in armed conflict.
We support efforts to provide adequate legal, medical
and social services to the particular women affected,
to witnesses and survivors, and to their family
members. Because of the Catholic Church’s permanent
local presence in the areas of the world most affected
by disasters, a network of Catholic institutions and
agencies responds rapidly and effectively to address the
consequence of violence in armed conflict.
It is always distressing, however, to see that some
are still promoting the abortion of unborn children as
part of the treatment or response to attacks on their
mothers. This contradicts the peace and security
mission of the United Nations, and proposes meeting
violence with more violence.
It has been observed many times on this organ,
and it is true, that women are not only victims but also
the necessary agents of and contributors to the work
of preventing and resolving conflicts. Without their
contributions, Governments, negotiators and civil
society groups can neither understand the problems nor
propose effective solutions. Moreover, it is important to
continue in every Member State the steady and patient
work of achieving structural justice for women in every
sector of society. A proper vision of women’s roles in
society and the integration of women into every social
sector are crucial aspects of violence prevention.

S/PV.7428

achieve tactical, military or political objectives. They
suffer the most devastating consequences of conflict and
pay a heavy price because of their great vulnerability.
Worse still, sexual violence has become a weapon of
war used by terrorist and extremist groups such as
Daesh, Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab in Somalia, which
we strongly condemn.
A year ago to day, 276 girls were abducted and taken
captive by the terrorist group Boko Haram in Nigeria
Despite the global outcry over their disappearance and
the launch of the international mobilization “Bring
back our girls” campaign, these kidnapped girls have
not been found and their fate remains unknown. We
express the hope today that they will not be forgotten
and that this meeting will help keep their memory and
sad and tragic fate at the forefront of the international
community’s priorities.
The report published by UNICEF on Monday,
13 April, indicates that 800,000 children have been
displaced by the violence caused by Boko Haram. The
March report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/203)
reveals that 2014 was marked by deeply distressing
reports of rape, sexual slavery and forced weddings
perpetrated by extremist groups, sometimes in the
framework of terror tactics. There has also been
an increased use of sexual violence as a form of
persecution, in particular against religious minorities,
or to displace populations.

My delegation would like to thank you also for
organizing today’s debate and for choosing the theme
of sexual violence in conflict, which is relevant not on
account of both its gravity and its timing.

Women and children fleeing violence and fighting
often find themselves once again exposed to the risk
of sexual exploitation, rape, prostitution, or forced
marriage, pregnancy or sterilization. Worse yet, they
may also be auctioned and sold in slave markets.
Rape is obviously the most common form of sexual
violence in conflict, especially in camps for refugees
and displaced persons, which offer, unfortunately, no
security for women, especially single parents or heads
of households. The majority of cases of sexual violence
in conflict remain unreported for fear of threats,
serious intimidation or reprisals, to which not only the
victims who speak are exposed, but also witnesses,
human rights defenders and anyone else who seeks to
denounce this guilty silence.

At all times and regardless of the victims, violence
has always been condemned. But sexual violence in
conflict is even more so. Women and children are often
the first victims of conflict. They face destructive forms
of sexual violence and are exploited systematically to

Sexual violence and threats of such acts or incitements
to commit them constitute a serious violation of
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and a very grave breach of the
Geneva Conventions. Morocco strongly condemns all

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow me
first to address my congratulations to the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan on its accession to the presidency
of the Security Council, and to congratulate you in
particular, Madam, on being the first Arab woman to
preside in this Chamber, of which we are very proud.

15-1046663/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

forms of sexual violence, including in times of conflict,
and considers them to be barbaric, brutal and inhumane
methods and practices, with serious consequences
for the process of establishing lasting peace and
reconciliation.
Prevention and the fight against sexual violence can
be effective only through an approach that takes into
account the complexity of the causes of the problem
and the interests and needs of the people concerned.
Firm measures must be taken urgently with regard to
the accountability of all those who continue to act in
defiance of standards of international law and civilian
protection, especially in relation to women, young
girls and children. It is also up to the parties to armed
conflict to take every possible measure to ensure the
protection of civilians and provide for their basic needs
by according special attention to the needs of civilians
who are particularly vulnerable, especially women and
children, in accordance with their obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights and
refugee law.
Non-State armed groups undoubtedly constitute
a major challenge due to their responsibility for
most recent armed conflicts and their involvement
in atrocities and massacres of civilians, in particular
women. The international community must therefore
respond and take appropriate measures to end these
violations.
Women play a key role in repairing the social
fabric of countries emerging from conflict. They
must therefore participate fully, effectively and on an
equal footing in all stages of peace processes. Their
marginalization may delay or hinder the establishment
of lasting peace, security and reconciliation.
Finally, national strategies to protect women and
girls remain dependent on measures to strengthen the
capacity of Governments and on the availability of
material, financial and human resources to ensure their
sustainability, empowerment and independence; hence
the importance of a prompt and generous response to
the Secretary-General’s call in his report on donors to
meet the funding requirements for the implementation
of national action plans and national programmes,
and in support of the initiatives of the United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.

64/82

15/04/2015

Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): Madam
President, Switzerland would like to thank you for
organizing this open debate, even if its very holding
is admission that we have all failed in our collective
efforts to eradicate sexual violence against women. The
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/203) is
bleak testimony to this fact. It reports on rape, sexual
slavery and forced marriage perpeatred mostly by armed
groups, sometimes as a tactic of terror, especially in
Iraq, Syria, Somalia, Nigeria, Mali, Libya and Yemen.
We previously heard examples of this in the past.
The many statements that we have heard today are
undoubtedly important, but we must act and adjust our
strategy in order to tackle this issue. In that regard,
Switzerland would like to put forward three specific
suggestions.
First, the examples that I have just given show
that acts of sexual violence are often committed by
non-State armed groups. To prevent such terrible acts,
we must engage in dialogue with these actors, even if
these are groups that we would rather not speak to. This
dialogue, of course, must be led in a way that is adapted
to each situation, but experience shows that it can help
to reduce sexual violence if it is led competently. For
example, the Swiss non-governmental organization
Geneva Call has already been able to obtain specific,
time-bound commitments from non-State armed actors
to put an end to sexual violence and to comply more
closely with humanitarian law and human rights law.
Switzerland supports the activity of such organizations.
Secondly, we must strengthen the implementation
of the Secretary-General’s recommendations to
prevent sexual violence with measures to fight extreme
violence. Conflict-prevention measures must take
gender specificities into account of course, and only
the inclusion of women in the analysis of conflicts
will enable States to design appropriate replies. We
must also support civil society, particularly women’s
organizations, and ensure that they are included in a
significant way in all preventive measures in ongoing
peace processes.
Thirdly, Switzerland believes that security and
justice institutions can have a decisive impact on
conditions that promote an increase or a reduction in
sexual violence. On 9 September, Switzerland will
convene a meeting in Geneva on resolution 1325 (2000),
at which we will take stock of innovative measures to
address the root causes of gender-based violence on the

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7428

women and peace and security agenda, including efforts
to reform security and justice institutions. Our aim is to
develop concrete recommendations to that end.

as the use of sexual violence as a tactic of terror by
extremist groups in Iraq, Syria, and Nigeria, as well as
in a number of other environments.

Finally, we commend the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Bangura, for her leadership and initiatives.
We also thank her for her update on the efforts deployed
by the United Nations system to date, including through
the inter-agency network United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict. Switzerland stands ready to
deploy experts within United Nations Action to support
Governments in the development of comprehensive
national strategies.

The alarming trends we are witnessing underscore
the need to promote gender equality and women’s
empowerment in order to address the root causes of
conflict-related sexual violence, transform harmful
social norms and counter the rise of extremism. It is
well known that conflict-related sexual violence is not
incidental, but inherently linked with ideology and
strategic objectives, and widely used as a tactic of war,
terror and intimidation.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I thank the Jordanian
presidency for convening this important debate on an
issue to which Croatia attaches great importance.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union, and I shall make
some brief, additional remarks in my national capacity.
In our view, taking action to prevent and redress
conflict-related sexual violence is not only of
fundamental importance to international peace and
security, but also a moral duty and responsibility
of Governments and citizens of the civilized world.
However, the universal eradication of sexual violence
in war and conflict is still far from being a reality.
That is why we particularly welcome this debate as a
contribution to keeping this issue high on the global
agenda in our joint efforts to translate commitments
into concrete and measurable actions.
Sexual violence has regrettably been used in all
recent wars and conflicts, including in the former
Yugoslavia, to achieve political and military aims, to
terrify and humiliate opponents, to uproot communities
and ethnic groups and thus to contribute to the collapse
of entire societies for generations to come. Despite
specific provisions prohibiting sexual violence in treaty
and customary international law, as well as the political
momentum and visibility gained in recent years, sexual
violence in armed conflicts and other violent situations
continues to spread around the world, with grave
and devastating consequences for victims and their
communities, as documented in this year’s report of
the Secretary General (S/2015/203). The present report
also brings to light a new dimension of the issue, such

Although women are widely recognized as effective
agents of peace and security, and their empowerment
can significantly contribute to economic growth, the
number of women participating in decision-making
processes in this sphere worldwide remains
unacceptably low. Women are not present enough in
post-conflict building processes either. In this regard,
we give our full support to the deployment of women
protection advisers alongside gender advisers in United
Nations missions.
During the Croatian homeland war in the 1990s,
women in Croatia suffered grave violations of their
human rights, including maltreatment and rape, which
was used as a tactic of war and an instrument of ethnic
cleansing. We have seen the impact of such violations on
their lives and their physical and mental health. Our own
experiences teach us of the importance of adequately
addressing conflict-related abuses of women’s rights,
including sexual violence, and of providing necessary
assistance, health-care, psychological counselling and
financial support to women. By introducing the Law
on the Rights of Victims of Sexual Violence in the
Homeland War, which is expected to take effect over
the coming months, special status will be assigned to
survivors, who will be entitled to additional psychosocial
assistance, and to financial reparations for the abuse
they have suffered. This Croatian law, developed in
close cooperation and consultation with civil society
organizations and victims, aims to ensure access to
reparations regardless of the results of the criminal
prosecution of perpetrators. Still, the punishment of
perpetrators remains a priority for Croatia, and we
firmly believe that impunity for conflict-related sexual
crimes must be addressed without any hesitation.
The extensive war and post-conflict management
experience that Croatia unfortunately gained on its

15-1046665/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

own territory, including our experience in drafting our
reparations law, can make an important contribution
to broader global efforts in preventing and combating
sexual violence in war and conflict. As a member of
the group of global champions in the Preventing Sexual
Violence Initiative, Croatia will spare no efforts to take
on a more prominent role in preventing and combating
sexual violence in war and conflicts, and to continue to
give its firm support to all areas of the women, peace
and security agenda. We see it as a gender-based peace
agenda, which involves addressing the disproportionate
effect of conflict on women and combating violence
against women in conflict situations. It is also about
women’s empowerment, securing the full, equal and
effective participation of women at all stages of the
peace process, and giving them an equal role in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts, as well as in
peacebuilding.
Our continued engagement rests on our firm
belief that the full realization of women’s rights is
an indispensable basis for safeguarding basic human
rights and achieving human security and lasting peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nepal.
Mr. Bhattarai (Nepal): Allow me first to
compliment you, Madam President, and to thank you
for having organized today’s important debate on
women and peace and security under the Jordanian
presidency this month. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report (S/2015/203),
as well as the Special Representative of SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Bangura,
and Ms. Allamin, representing civil society, for their
briefings this morning.
I had the honour to address the Council in October
2000 on how women were a source of strength in
Nepal and around the world. As many studies had
shown, women tended to be more sincere, more reliable
and more compassionate. In particular, compared to
men, they shunned violence more consistently and
resolved disputes more peacefully. Women made more
compassionate and, often, more effective leaders.
Empowering women, bringing them into policymaking,
and deploying them in the field as peacekeepers and
peacemakers would add a more empathetic and humane
dimension to our work, and provide us a more holistic
frame with which to view conflicts.

66/82

15/04/2015

In the 15 years since, all of this has been more than
proved through experience, thanks to the Council’s
resolution 1325 (2000) and the subsequent resolutions
on women and peace and security, which rightly
emphasized the need to work concertedly to eliminate
all forms of violence against women and girls, in
particular sexual violence during and after conflicts,
and doing all that is required to unleash their potential.
Over these years, Nepal has made steady advances
at the national level in empowering women, including
those affected by conflict. The Interim Constitution of
Nepal provided for 33 per cent of women participation
in elections at all levels, including in the Constituent
Assembly. It also made it mandatory for women to
comprise 33 per cent of the members of district level
peace committees to address post-conflict issues at the
local level.
Nepal continues to implement resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008) through a dedicated national
plan of action. The first of its kind in South Asia, the
plan intervenes in key areas, including participation,
protection and prevention, promotion, relief and
recovery, resource management, and monitoring
and evaluation. An interministerial implementation
committee coordinates its execution and a ministerial
steering committee ensures its oversight. Encouraged
by the continuing positive results, as also shown
by the plan’s 2014 mid-term monitoring report, the
Government is making efforts to localize the plan to
subnational levels.
Increasing the participation of women in
decision-making, protecting women and girls from
sexual and gender-based violence, and ending impunity
have been our top priorities. Nepal has a zero-tolerance
policy regarding gender-based violence. Violence
against women and rape constitute serious criminal
offences against the State. Polygamy, child marriage and
enforced marriage are punishable by law. Perpetrators
of human trafficking face severe punishment. A
national action plan on gender-based violence has been
in implementation since 2010.
As a committed and consistent major contributor
of troops and police to United Nations peacekeeping
for several decades, Nepal is determined to raise the
number of women in the national security forces and to
contribute more women to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Protecting women and girls from sexual

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

violence, both during and after conflict, is at the core
of the peacekeeping training of Nepal’s security forces.
Nepal has recently set up a transitional justice
mechanism that complies with its international
obligations. Both the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission and the Commission on Investigation of
Disappeared Persons are mandated to look into the
conflict-era cases, establish the truth surrounding
such cases, bring the perpetrators to justice, address
the needs of the victims, and ultimately pave the way
for reconciliation, lasting peace and stability. It is
an important step in our efforts towards seeking to
provide justice to the victims of conflict in addition
to the measures and mechanisms already in place.
The Government is committed to bringing to book
all perpetrators of serious violation of human rights,
including conflict-related sexual violence.
I wish to conclude by reiterating that, as a State party
to several core international human rights instruments,
including the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women and
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, Nepal’s
commitment to promoting and protecting human rights,
especially those of women and girls, remains total and
unflinching. We in Nepal are aware that much more
remains to be done at the global, regional, national and
subnational levels to realize the full potential of women
in peace and security, and we pledge our readiness to
work closely together and move forward as a responsible
member of the international community in the interests
of global peace and security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Winid (Poland): Let me thank you, Madam
President, for convening today’s debate. I also thank
Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
Ms. Hamsatu Allamin of Nigeria for their statements.
Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union. I would like to add some
comments in my national capacity.
Poland attaches great importance to the topic of
today’s debate. On Monday, 13 April, the President of
Poland, Bronisław Komorowski, ratified the Council
of Europe Convention on preventing and combating
violence against women and domestic violence, which
was adopted in Istanbul in 2011. I subscribe to the

S/PV.7428

comment made earlier by the representative of Nepal
on the role of women in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and in that regard I would like to
congratulate Ethiopia, South Africa and Ghana on
having the highest percentage of women peacekeepers.
I would also like to express our respect to Jamaica and
other Caribbean Community States for the prominent
role they played in commemorating the International
Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and
the Transatlantic Slave Trade, with this year’s thematic
focus on women and slavery. We also commend the
Department of Public Information for the exhibit at
United Nations Headquarters, entitled “Women and
slavery”, which was part of the Remember Slavery
Programme.
In the past, Poland was a victim of many foreign
aggressions and suffered the consequences of violent
conflict. In that respect, I would like to highlight the
role of the heroic women who led with vision, dedication
and courage, and stood up against aggression. One
example of such a woman comes from the history of my
own country, as well as that of a country rather far away
from Poland — the island of Tonga. Queen Sālote of
Tonga was the first foreign leader to officially oppose
the German invasion of Poland on 1 September 1939.
She and her action are a great example for us even now
in the twenty-first century.
Nowadays, women continue to be the victims of
conflict-related sexual violence across the world. The
widespread occurrence of sexual violence in conflict is
a threat to peace and security, and diminishes prospects
for reconciliation and peacebuilding. Combating
impunity and providing support for the victims are
concrete duties that we must assume with respect to
those who have suffered from sexual violence. We shall
support the judiciary at the national and international
levels, as well as those affected, through the Trust Fund
for Victims, to which Poland is a proud contributor.
Although international organizations play a pivotal
role in combating sexual violence in conflict, the
primary responsibility to protect their nationals lies
with States. In that context, the grass-roots approach is a
must, and that includes changing behaviour patterns and
teaching their citizens what is not acceptable under any
circumstances. Unfortunately, in many countries there
is resistance among victims with regard to reporting a
crime due to the potential social stigma. Furthermore,
a citizen must have confidence that the perpetrators of
such acts will be held accountable by State authorities

15-1046667/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

and, if necessary, that they will face consequences at the
international level — namely, before the International
Criminal Court. The International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda have played a historic role in the
prosecution of wartime sexual violence.
As my colleague from the delegation of the
European Union underlined earlier, we welcome the
entry into force of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT). I
appeal to all members of the Security Council to ratify
this treaty. Without their support, the ATT will not have
the impact it should have.
In conclusion, yesterday, 14 April, marked the
first year since the abduction of Nigerian schoolgirls
by Boko Haram. Despite the efforts of the national
authorities and the international community, the fate of
most of the girls remains unknown. That terrible crime,
as well as others that we have witnessed in conflictaffected areas in Africa or the Middle East, call for our
immediate action. We cannot leave them unpunished.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Logar (Slovenia): Allow me to start by
thanking Jordan for organizing this important debate,
as well as Ms. Bangura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
Ms. Allamin, from the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, for their important briefings.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union. I would like to
make additional remarks in my national capacity.
Sexual violence is present in every conflict
situation. It is a tactic of war and not just an incidental
by-product or collateral damage of a conflict. We
should bear in mind that rape and other forms of sexual
violence constitute war crimes and crimes against
humanity. Conflict-related sexual violence is also a
security issue, not just a humanitarian or human rights
issue.
Slovenia is deeply concerned by the findings of
the latest report of the Secretary-General on conflictrelated sexual violence (see S/2015/203). Violations
perpetrated by State actors or associated armed groups
remain of grave concern, although the majority of
incidents of sexual violence are perpetrated by armed
non-State actors. Slovenia joins others in condemning
grave violations committed against women in armed

68/82

15/04/2015

conflict by armed non-State actors, such as the heinous
acts perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant/Daesh in Syria and Iraq, and Boko Haram in
Nigeria and neighbouring States, as well as other such
non-State actors in Somalia, Mali, Libya and Yemen.
In that respect, let me reiterate that all perpetrators
should be held accountable, and an end should be put to
impunity in order to prevent and deter sexual violence.
The report of the Secretary-General also shows
that 2014 was marked by sexual violence in the context
of violent extremism. Extremist groups use sexual
violence to achieve tactical objectives with the aim of
terrorizing communities into compliance, displacing
them from strategic areas and generating revenue
through trafficking, the slave trade and ransoms. We are
also deeply concerned by the increased risk of displaced
or refugee women and girls to sexual exploitation, such
as human trafficking, and early and forced marriages.
States have the the primary responsibility to protect
civilians from such crimes. They should therefore lead
the efforts to prevent and end conflict-related sexual
violence. At the same time, the international community
should assist States in addressing these issues, including
by investigating and prosecuting the perpetrators and
others responsible for crimes, including United Nations
and other peacekeeping personnel.
Although women represent the majority of victims
in conflict-related sexual violence, this is not only
a women’s issue. Men and boys are also victims,
particularly in detention. Sexual violence against them
is used as a means of humiliation and, very often, as a
means of torture. Allow me to draw attention to another
finding in the Secretary-General’s report. Sexual
violence in conflict occurs where there is also systemic
discrimination against women. Therefore, it is of the
utmost importance to promote efforts to eliminate
discrimination in law and in practice in peace time, and
to promote the participation of women in peace-related
processes and activities, and in post-conflict rebuilding.
In conclusion, I would like emphasize that sexual
violence presents an obstacle to peace and security.
It hinders women from participating in peace and
democratic processes and in post-conflict reconstruction
and reconciliation. As a tool of war it can become a
way of life. Once entrenched in the fabric of society,
it lingers long after the ceasefire. Many women lose
their health, livelihoods, partners, families and support
networks as a result of rape. That in turn can shatter the
structures that anchor community values and disrupt

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

their transmission to future generations. That vicious
circle must be stopped.
A year after the holding in London of the Global
Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict, Slovenia
will contribute to the agenda on sexual violence in
conflict through a special event we are organizing
under the title “Ending Sexual Violence in Conflict:
One Year after the Summit”, within the framework of
an international conference, the Bled Strategic Forum,
to be held later this year under the auspices of the
President of the Republic. I invite all participants in
today’s debate to join us in Bled.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for organizing today’s open debate,
which highlights the challenges we face in addressing
sexual violence in conflict. We also appreciate this
morning’s briefings by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the representative of the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security, in which they raised
important points.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of Viet Nam on
behalf of the members of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations.
While we commend the efforts the Security
Council has made so far to address sexual violence in
armed conflict, there is a long and hard battle ahead
if we are to put an end to such acts. The important
work done on the ground to deter them must continue
both during and in the aftermath of armed conflict.
The voices of the survivors and those at risk matter.
The populations at risk for sexual violence, as well as
survivors of it, should have a channel for assistance
in which national authorities and other national
actors can play a role. We should focus on how to
empower both sectors — the at-risk population and
survivors — through collective community support and
other means that develop resilience. They can take part
in formulating preventive mechanisms, improving legal
mechanisms aimed at dealing with such horrific crimes
and devising protection, rehabilitation, repatriation and
reintegration frameworks as well as legal mechanisms
for survivors. Survivors themselves should be supported
with multisectoral assistance, including in the areas
of health care, psychological counselling, the law and

S/PV.7428

livelihood support, while differentiated and appropriate
responses should be made available for children and
male survivors.
We need to constantly ask ourselves what can
be done to promote a culture of peace, respect for
the relevant international laws and zero tolerance for
sexual violence in armed conflict. In his latest report
(S/2015/203), the Secretary-General makes some good
recommendations that we fully endorse and that merit
the Council’s consideration.
First, we should make use of the Council’s
monitoring of the security situation in conflict-affected
countries to home in on the risk factors and warning
signs for sexual violence. We should promote periodic
field visits on conflict-related sexual violence and
listen to the views of survivors, their families, affected
communities and all relevant actors, including those
from civil society and religious organizations.
Secondly, we should accelerate the deployment of
both women protection advisers and gender advisers in
priority settings and increase the deployment of women
in peacekeeping operations. However, there must be
an equal emphasis on quality. We need to ensure that
advisers and peacekeepers are well equipped with the
necessary resources and understanding, especially in
relation to sexual violence in armed conflict.
Thirdly, we must create a safe and supportive
environment so that survivors and their families,
witnesses and community members are able to come
forward without fear or stigma. All the parties involved
should have a solid understanding of the cultural
and local context. And adequate, timely funding is
vital to ensuring that ceasefire and peace agreements
comprehensively address and effectively implement
conflict-related sexual violence, and that perpetrators
do not get away with impunity.
Fourthly, since no cause or grievance can justify
any act of terror, including conflict-related sexual
violence, we must promote concerted efforts and a
multi-pronged approach to countering narratives of
violent extremism. In addition, we share the view that
the Security Council should develop innovative and
more aggressive approaches to dealing effectively with
sexual violence perpetrated by non-State armed groups.
Indonesia has played an active role in United
Nations peacebuilding efforts and has strengthened
its contributions to United Nations peacekeeping

15-1046669/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

operations. We have female personnel in the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
and we are committed to increasing the number of
Indonesian female peacekeepers. Mandatory training
for all peacekeeping personnel on addressing sexual
violence should be continued and supported. Indonesia’s
peacekeeping centre has included training on that
particular issue and will ensure that it continues.
But I would like to conclude by stressing that we
should not overlook civilian expertise. The pool of
civilian capacities can be broadened and deepened for
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict.
It should include countries with relevant experience in
post-conflict peacebuilding or democratic transitions,
and particular attention should also be given to
mobilizing capacities from developing countries and
among women.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): I would like to thank
you, Madam President, for convening this open debate,
and Ms. Zainab Bangura, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and Ms. Hamsatu Allamin of Nigeria for their very
comprehensive presentations.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2015/203), which provides us with important
information on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions on monitoring and reporting arrangements
designed to collect more consistent information on
conflict-related violence, and which also contains very
substantive recommendations on thematic and countryspecific situations.
In recent years, the Council’s resolutions have
recognized sexual violence as a tactic of war and its
potential for undermining peace and security. We know
that much has been accomplished. Monitoring, analysis
and reporting arrangements have been instituted in a
number of conflict or post-conflict situations in order to
collect more consistent information on conflict-related
sexual violence. A list of parties to conflicts who are
credibly suspected of committing sexual violence has
been created and updated. Portugal appreciates those
significant achievements. There can never be real
security if women are not secure. However, while we
recognize that with the adoption of various resolutions
significant progress has been achieved and a strong

70/82

15/04/2015

normative framework established, enormous challenges
still lie ahead, particularly owing to the changing nature
of conflicts.
As several of the Council’s resolutions have
underlined, ending conflict-related sexual violence is
crucial to improving international peace and security.
Conflict-related sexual violence has been used as a tool
of warfare in many armed conflicts around the globe,
affecting women and men, girls and boys and societies
as a whole. We note with concern, as the SecretaryGeneral’s report points out, that sexual violence
continues to be used by extremist groups in several
countries as a tactic of terror, forcing entire populations
into submission or displacement. Moreover, conflictrelated violence takes place against a backdrop of
structural gender-based discrimination. To be truly
effective, our fight against sexual violence should start
by promoting gender equality and the empowerment of
women and girls, in order to tackle the root causes of
this frightful crime.
The Council should make full use of existing tools.
For instance, it should guarantee the deployment in
peacekeeping operations of women protection advisers
and gender advisers, so as to strengthen efforts to
prevent and respond to sexual violence, and it should
ensure that provisions on conflict-related violence are
integrated into peace and ceasefire agreements. Despite
the fact that women are the largest group of victims
of sexual violence, they should not be viewed merely
as victims. When it comes to conflict resolution and
peacebuilding efforts, they represent a powerful but still
largely neglected group. The increased participation and
empowerment of women in these areas are crucial to
sustainable peace and security, as set forth in resolution
1325 (2000) and other related resolutions.
Sexual violence in conflict remains prevalent, yet
it also remains widely underreported. Those who come
forward and report such crimes are often burdened
with threats and stigma. We underline the need to take
all necessary measures to ensure the protection of
survivors, witnesses, humanitarian workers, medical
staff, human rights defenders and journalists who
collect information on sexual violence and actually do
help survivors.
Conflict-related sexual violence is prohibited under
international law, under specific provisions of the Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols, and under
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

Yet too often, sexual violence in conflicts is regarded
as an unavoidable consequence of the breakdown of
law and order. This culture of impunity must end. The
issue of impunity must be addressed, and Portugal, in
this regard, believes the International Criminal Court
plays a fundamental deterrent role, complementary to
the role of tribunals at national and international levels,
by holding perpetrators accountable and investigating
and prosecuting those responsible for sexual violence,
turning it into a liability for armed groups by exposing
their leaders to international scrutiny and pressure.
We must act to bring the perpetrators of sexual
violence to justice, but also to bring justice and adequate
care to the survivors and victims of such a terrible
crime. We can do this by lifting barriers to women’s
access to justice, establishing complaint and reporting
mechanisms, providing support to victims and making
health care accessible and affordable to them.
Sexual violence is simply not tolerable. To end
it, strong messages by the international community
are certainly important, but in practice only genuine
will and effective means can make a real difference in
ending this crime.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Zimbabwe.
Mr. Shava (Zimbabwe): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 15 States members of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC). Let me
at the outset congratulate Jordan on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council and express
our great appreciation for the President’s personal
leadership in conducting the business of the Council,
particularly in today’s open debate. I would also like
to express our appreciation to today’s briefers for their
valuable contributions to the discussion on women and
peace and security in the context of conflict-related
sexual violence.
SADC wishes to associate itself with the statement
delivered by Ambassador Téte António on behalf of the
African Union (AU).
In recent years, the world has witnessed a
multiplicity of conflicts leading to an unprecedented
increase in the scale of violence against women
and girls. There is growing recognition that newly
emerging unconventional conflicts associated with the
proliferation of militias, armed groups, terrorism and
violent extremism have had a disproportionate impact

S/PV.7428

on women and children. Conflicts have had devastating
consequences for women, including heightened risk for
human trafficking, sexual violence, forced and early
marriages as well as lack of access to basic services.
The Secretary-General’s report on conflict-related
sexual violence (S/2015/203) describes the year 2014
as a one marked by harrowing accounts of sexual
violence in the context of violent extremism. It details
how terrorists use sexual violence to achieve tactical
objectives, dispelling the notion that sexual violence is
a by-product of conflict.
This month marks the first anniversary of the
kidnapping by Boko Haram of more than 200 young
girls from their school in Chibok in northern Nigeria.
SADC condemns this barbaric act and stands together
with the Government and the people of Nigeria and the
international community in calling for their safe return.
The international community has recognized that
women’s participation is vital to achieving sustainable
peace. In this regard, in the year 2000 the Security
Council laid the foundation for the women and peace
and security agenda in the landmark resolution 1325
(2000) and other subsequent supporting resolutions.
Other key reference points include the Beijing Platform
for Action and the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women.
As we mark the fifteenth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000), SADC recognizes that significant steps
have been taken to address the plight of women and
girls to improve international, regional and national
responses to their protection. However, we wish to
underscore that States have the primary responsibility
to protect women and girls from all forms of genderbased discrimination and abuse, which are often
aggravated in conflict situations. While international
cooperation and assistance are important, they should
not replace the central role of the State in the protection
of women and girls.
SADC’s programmes on women and peace and
security are guided by the region’s commitment
to women’s rights. The SADC Protocol on Gender
and Development, signed in 2008, encompasses
commitments made in all regional, global and
continental instruments for achieving gender equality.
Articles 20 and 25 of the Protocol provide for the
implementation of a variety of strategies including
enhancing, reviewing, reforming and enforcing laws

15-1046671/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

aimed at eliminating all forms of gender-based violence
and trafficking.
At the continental level, tremendous efforts have
been made to ensure the adoption of laws, policies and
programmes to safeguard gender equality and women’s
empowerment. The AU’s five-year Gender, Peace and
Security Programme, launched on 2 June 2014, is
designed to serve as a framework for the development
of strategies and mechanisms for women’s increased
participation in the promotion of peace and security.
The African Union is working closely with the Office
of the United Nations Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict to translate this framework into
a plan of action containing indicators and directives
for implementation that will guide member States in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000).
The AU Special Envoy on Women, Peace and
Security, Ms. Bineta Diop, is mandated to lead the
AU efforts to promote women’s roles in preventing
conflict and peacebuilding. At the twenty-fourth AU
Summit, held in Addis Ababa in January, the year 2015
was declared the Year of Women’s Empowerment and
Development, in recognition of the vital role of women
in Africa’s development. We recognize that economic
empowerment also reduces women’s vulnerability to
violations of their rights.
While considerable progress has been achieved
in establishing the legal and normative framework on
women and peace and security, implementation remains
a challenge. SADC is concerned about continued
gross abuses, sexual exploitation and the abduction of
women in areas of conflict. We urge the international
community to collectively respond effectively to
violations of women’s rights in a holistic manner.
This entails addressing the root causes of conflicts
and strengthening national capacities for peace and
reconciliation.
In order to address sexual violence against women
in time of conflict and in post-conflict situations, we
have to work on preventive measures during peacetime.
Gender mainstreaming is a critical factor, as is putting
laws in place that protect women against abuse and
violations of their rights. Equally important is ensuring
that perpetrators of violence against women and girls
are held accountable.
We need to intensify efforts to address the plight
of women and girls in conflict situations to ensure
their effective participation in development. The high-

72/82

15/04/2015

level review of resolution 1325 (2000) in October will
provide an opportunity to take stock of what has been
achieved and what challenges still lie ahead.
In closing, I would like to reaffirm SADC’s
commitment and support to the women and peace and
security agenda.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to thank the Security Council, under
the presidency of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,
for convening this important debate. In particular,
I would like to congratulate you, Madam President,
on being the first Arab woman to preside over the
Council. I also thank Ms. Zainab Bangura, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and the representative of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security
for their important statements.
Fifteen years have passed since the Council’s
historic adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which
has led to many achievements in enhancing the role
of women in the field of peace and security. Indeed,
women play a singular role in conflict resolution,
combatting extremism, peacebuilding and providing
options for establishing stability, democracy, prosperity
and peace. Peace cannot be achieved when women are
marginalized and excluded from political life. There is
no doubt that our meeting today will allow us to build
on those efforts. We very much wish to see the adoption
of tangible conclusions during the high-level review of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). That will
be an important moment to step up States’ efforts to
confront the relevant challenges and concerns.
It is with great interest that we take note of the
Secretary-General’s report on conflict-related sexual
violence (S/2015/203). It paints a very grim picture of
the situation in 2014 in terms of abuses, rapes, sexual
slavery and forced marriages perpetrated by parties to
conflict, including extremist groups. These are tools
used to sow terror and terrorism. We are very concerned
by the report’s description of sexual violence as a
phenomenon that is not isolated, but rather intrinsically
linked to the strategic goals of extremist groups, as well
as to their ideology and funding. It is used as a tactic to
sow terror and draw civilian populations into conflict.
Despite the fact that acts such as sexual slavery
and sexual violence are considered to be international
15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

crimes, women and girls remain the vast majority of
the victims of armed conflict, especially when they
are displaced or refugees. They are the victims of
aggression, sexual violence and human trafficking,
which is very troubling. The parties responsible for
such horrific acts, whether Governments or non-State
actors, still go unpunished. This is why we agree with
the recommendations contained in the report regarding
the need for the Council to use all tools at its disposal
to guarantee accountability, bringing the perpetrators
to international justice and preventing impunity.
The conflicts taking place in different parts of
the world — and the instability in the Arab world in
particular — have caused the deaths of hundreds of
thousands of civilians, who were terrorized and the
victims of all kinds of rights violations, including
sexual violence. We therefore highlight the need
to reiterate Governments’ responsibility to protect
civilians by taking measures pursuant to international
law, implementing a zero-tolerance policy for the
perpetrators of these crimes, providing assistance to
survivors and strictly applying laws on the protection
of women from violence, especially sexual violence in
situations of conflict.
We reiterate Qatar’s commitment to guaranteeing
gender equality and guaranteeing the rights of women
during conflict and in post-conflict situations. To
that end, and insofar as sexual violence in conflict
situations constitutes a humanitarian emergency, we
welcome the joint mechanism between UN-Women
and the joint rapid response unit on sexual and genderbased violence in situations of conflict.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to thank
Jordan for convening this important debate, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zainab
Hawa Bangura and Ms. Hamsatu Allamin for their
statements, and the Secretary-General for his recent
report (S/2015/203) on conflict-related sexual violence.
Today we have heard in depth about the horrific
prevalence of sexual violence in conflict all over the
world. Ms. Allamin and others’ heart-wrenching
accounts have demonstrated the crippling effect of
sexual violence on women’s ability to lead healthy and
productive lives, on their psychological, emotional
and physical well-being and on their families and
communities. It is alarming, as the Secretary-General

S/PV.7428

notes in his report, that violence against women has
become a systematic pattern in conflict zones, and that
the suffering of women everywhere is being multiplied
by the unprecedented increase in violence and a new
wave of extremism around the world.
In Afghanistan, almost 40 years of war, terrorism
and violent extremism have created deep fissures
in the very fabric of our society, shredded human
relationships, restricted access to services and justice
and undermined the State’s capacity to protect its
citizens. Women have been the biggest victims of the
conflict, and their suffering has been compounded by
a culture of discrimination against women. Today, the
Taliban and other extremists continue to use sexual
violence as a tool not only to pursue their destructive
ends and their campaign of terror and fear, but also
to weaken communities, the rule of law and longestablished traditional values.
We recognize the need to hold all perpetrators
of violence against women to account, no matter
where they come from or with which group they are
affiliated. A few weeks ago, my country was appalled
to see young men commit egregious violence against
an innocent woman, Farkhunda, who was beaten and
then burned in one of the most brutal and inhuman
killings in our history. Farkhunda’s name has become
a powerful symbol of the plight of Afghan women, and
her story has moved the whole society to demand an
end to violence against women, once and for all.
The national unity Government of Afghanistan
is committed to ensuring the elimination of violence
against women by strengthening our justice system and
reinforcing and implementing legal frameworks that
guarantee human, religious and constitutional rights
for all Afghan citizens. As President Ashraf Ghani
Ahmadzai has said,
“There is no point talking about how much
we respect women’s honour, if we let rape go
unpunished or allow harassment in our streets”.
Afghanistan is party to global conventions to end
violence against women and has launched a women,
peace and security national action plan. Since 2009,
the Government has worked to implement the law
on the elimination of violence against women, which
criminalizes 22 types of violence against women and
establishes specific punitive measures for perpetrators.
The Government of Afghanistan has also drafted
national regulations on the prevention of sexual

15-1046673/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

harassment, and in November 2014 launched the firstever gender-based violence treatment protocol for the
health sector in Afghanistan.
Those steps are important, but ultimately combating
sexual violence in Afghanistan will require a paradigm
shift in the way that our society treats women. In that
regard, President Ghani Ahmadzai has called for a
mental and cultural revolution across Afghan society.
This requires women to play an active role in the
social, economic and political life of the country, as
well as commitments to educate Afghan girls. Civil
society, particularly the Ulema, and human rights and
women’s rights activists, are central to efforts to raise
awareness of women’s rights and to build a foundation
of collective action against the evils of violence, terror
and extremism.
Today’s debate compels us not only to bear witness
to the societies suffering from violence and conflict,
and the women who have survived the horrors of sexual
violence; it also compels us to work together, as an
international community representing the conscience
of the world, to ensure that even when the flames of
war are still burning, women and men and all citizens
can live in dignity and peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): It is great to see
you again, Madam, and to see you as the President of
the Council for the month of April. We appreciate your
convening of this important debate.
While we address the issue of sexual violence
committed by States and non-State actors in conflicts
today, we have a new disturbing trend to discuss,
namely, the use of sexual violence by extremist groups
as a tactic of war. The report of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2015/203) alerts
us to the fact that sexual violence is not incidental,
but integrally linked with the strategic objectives of
extremist groups. Exploiting sexual violence to terrorize
and displace people should never be acceptable. Against
that backdrop, my delegation would like to stress the
following points.
First, we would like to stress the critical role of
each Member State. A sovereign State should be the
first to act to protect the most vulnerable people under
its jurisdiction. The vast majority of cases of sexual
violence are perpetrated by non-State actors; is is

74/82

15/04/2015

therefore crucial that the international community
induce non-State actors to abstain from sexual
violence in compliance with the norms of international
humanitarian law. A firm stance against sexual
violence will enhance the legitimacy of the State that
discharges the primary responsibility for the protection
of its people.
Secondly, we support the Council’s full integration
of conflict-related sexual violence elements into the
work of its relevant sanctions committees as part of the
designation criteria for targeted sanctions. In order to
facilitate the full implementation of resolutions related
to women and peace and security, we also support the
accelerated deployment of gender advisers and the
integration of Department of Peacekeeping Operations/
Department of Field Support training materials into
missions’ pre-deployment training.
Thirdly, multidimensional programmes to assist
national authorities in seeking accountability should
be put to full use. The Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict mandated by
resolution 1888 (2009), and the Justice Rapid Response
mechanism, among others, need to be utilized further.
Last but not least, we believe that the myth that
sexual violence is an inherent, unfortunate aspect of
conflict should be dispelled. Such perceptions have
allowed what we are witnessing to persist and even
worsen. Promoting gender equality and empowering
women will be the most effective strategy in the
prevention of such crimes and the protection of women
in conflict. Ushering in the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000),
we look forward to another milestone in our collective
effort towards progress.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van der Vliet (Netherlands): The Kingdom
of the Netherlands welcomes this debate, as well as
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/203). I
appreciate the opportunity to make additional national
remarks, as I align myself with the general statement
made by the observer of the European Union. Also I
would like to reiterate my country’s commitment to the
fight against conflict-related sexual violence across the
world.
I would also like to applaud the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict and
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict for their efforts worldwide, both
as advocates and through their expert support.
With violent extremism on the rise, the report of
the Secretary-General rightly draws our attention to
the disturbing trend of sexual violence as a tactic of
terror. The mass-scale violence against Yazidi girls
and, exactly one year ago, against the Chibok school
girls are two horrific examples of the specific targeting
of women and girls by extremist groups.
Violent extremism leads to the systematic
disempowerment of women. It is part of the objectives,
ideology and funding of extremist groups. All of that
is taking place while a couple of doors away, down the
hallway in this very building, we are negotiating, in good
faith, a sustainable development agenda that includes a
strong goal on gender equality and the empowerment of
women and girls. It is those efforts — our efforts and
our determination — that must prevail.
Sexual violence is pervasive in conflict and postconflict situations and reflective of a broader and
unequal gender relations dynamic in those societies.
It is not a stand-alone problem that can be solved in
isolation. What is needed is a fully integrated approach
that addresses deeply rooted gender inequalities, that
is context-specific and that works to empower women.
The Netherlands strives to do exactly that. We
approach the issue of sexual violence in conflict
from several angles, using various concrete
instruments of foreign policy at our disposal. For
instance, in our civilian and military contributions to
multilateral missions — most recently to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Mission in
Mali — attention to the issue of gender inequalities
and sexual violence in conflict is an integral part of
our national preparation. Both our police and military
officers who are now in Mali received predeployment
training on gender, human rights and international
humanitarian law. Together with our valued partner,
Spain, we also offer regular training for other countries
on gender in operations to professionals from the
military, the police and the diplomatic community, as
well as to civilian experts and activists. Recently, we
launched a specialized pilot training, together with
UN-Women, for female military officers. This training
is meant to increase the number and capacity of female
peacekeepers.

S/PV.7428

Deploying women protection advisers and
gender advisers is another way to ensure the full
implementation of the resolutions on women and peace
and security. We make available such civilian expertise
on gender and combating sexual violence to United
Nations missions. In the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, for example, we support the deployment of
a senior women protection adviser, and I am glad that
Ms. Van Deuren is present here today at our debate. The
more structural inclusion of women protection advisers
and gender advisers in peacekeeping budgets is an issue
that requires further consideration.
Through our programme flow, funding leadership
opportunities for women, we support women’s rights
organizations around the globe, and our National
Action Plan 1325 comes with an annual fund for civil
society programming in support of women’s political
participation and leadership. We contribute to several
United Nations Trust Funds, including the United
Nations Trust Fund to Eliminate Violence against
Women
In situations where the justice sector is illfunctioning, survivors who have gone through the
trauma of an attack too often face additional risks, such
as rejection by their families and communities, double
victimization by State authorities, limited health
services, including a lack of access to safe abortion
and psychosocial support, and many other risks. They
should not go through this ordeal in getting the justice
and assistance they need and deserve. The perpetrators
of sexual violence, whether State or non-State actors,
should be brought to justice and held accountable. There
can be no justice or accountability in situations where
the stigma and shame associated with sexual violence
remain with the victim rather than the perpetrator.
Equally, there can be no justice or accountability in
situations where women and young girls are abducted,
enslaved and traded openly, while these horrific acts
are justified by extremist groups on the grounds of
religion.
There is no religion or culture that commands or
justifies these evil acts. Therefore, we need to fight
ideologies or propaganda by non-State actors that
advocate sexual violence against women and girls and
that want to deny the rights of freedoms of citizens,
particularly those of women. There is also a clear role
for the International Criminal Court (ICC) and other
tribunals. The Netherlands very much commends the

15-1046675/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

broad jurisdiction of the ICC on the issue of conflictrelated sexual violence.
We should not think of women and girls only
as victims. We know about the resilience of many
survivors. We also know that empowered women who
participate in decision-making and take up leadership
roles can make a real difference. Many brave women
are actively resisting the influence and rule of extremist
groups in Syria and Iraq. We believe in the power of
these women as agents for peace and justice and as
representatives of communities living in conflict, and
we work actively to support them.
In conclusion, if we are serious about realizing the
sustainable development goals, including achieving
gender equality and women’s empowerment, then we
must put an end to conflict-related sexual violence
everywhere and forever.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): Madam President,
let me join others in thanking you for organizing this
important open debate. I also thank Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
Ms. Hamsatu Allamin of the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security for their respective
statements earlier today.
In recent years, the international community,
especially the Security Council, has quite rightly
directed considerable energy to the fight against sexual
and gender-based violence. Unfortunately, as we gather
here today, one year has passed since the kidnapping
of 276 girls from a school in the Nigerian town of
Chibok. Today, of the many terrifying stories emerging
from Daesh-occupied Iraq and Syria, the violence
directed towards women is perhaps the most difficult to
contemplate. Last month, the United Nations estimated
that Daesh had forced some 1,500 women, girls and
boys into sexual slavery, which is unacceptable. In
the same vein, we also remain in solidarity with the
affected families of the victims of the recent attacks
at Garissa University College in Kenya, a majority of
whom were women.
All these crimes, like many others, present a
particularly egregious example of the use of sexual
violence in terrorist activities, and are testimony to the
fact that conflict-related sexual violence is one of the
most urgent challenges for affected Governments and
76/82

15/04/2015

communities, and a serious threat to international peace
and security. While the leadership and responsibility
of the affected Governments is critical to tackling this
issue, with the support of the international community,
we believe that the focus should now be on our
collective efforts to convert the political commitments
into concrete prevention on the ground.
Rwanda once again condemns all forms of violence
against women and girls worldwide, especially in
conflict and post-conflict zones. We believe that, as
previously stated in this Council, sexual violence in
conflict should now be qualified as sexual terrorism.
Now that sexual violence has also spilled over into
countries that are not in conflict, clarifications should
be established in regard to measures deployed both
in conflict and non-conflict situations. In conflict
zones, we believe that the protection of women and
girls should be given priority by ensuring that we take
full measures, in particular to provide more effective
protection to the civilian population at risk, create the
conditions for humanitarian assistance that remains
hampered, increase female peacekeepers and genderprotection advisers in all United Nations missions, and
conduct investigations on violations and abuses by all
parties.
We should all send a unified message to remind
those responsible that acts of sexual violence cannot
be tolerated. Perpetrators must face justice, and the
culture of impunity enjoyed by some non-State actors
should be shattered. Some of the groups enjoying
impunity are those that committed these types of
atrocities during the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi
in Rwanda, and continue such practices today in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo under the name of
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR).
On this particular issue, it is regrettable to see that,
as Rwanda commemorates the genocide against the Tutsi
for the twenty-first time, the international community,
which was quick to neutralize other armed groups in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, has turned
a blind eye to their heinous activities and continues to
offer them a soft landing. If this trend continues, not
only the FDLR’s sexual violence campaigns, but also its
destabilizing tactics, will have long-lasting, devastating
impacts in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the region.
In a non-conflict situation, we believe that national
security and justice institutions should strengthen
their response in addressing sexual violence, including
15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

awareness-raising and education, strengthen their
security institutions to detect acts of terror, and make
their border control measures more effective, among
other things. Furthermore, ending impunity for those
who commit sexual violence should be our collective
effort and goal. In the same line, we believe that the
Security Council should ensure that all country-specific
reports and mandate renewals evaluate the level of
protection and promotion of women’s human rights, as
enumerated in several Council resolutions. We call on
the established United Nations Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict to support
national institutions in discharging their duties.
I shall conclude by recalling that defeating sexual
violence in conflict should include addressing the root
causes of conflicts, as well as creating institutions that
fulfil their constitutional duties. Moreover, a successful
reform of the rule of law in conflict-stricken countries
will largely depend on the smooth demobilization of the
various militias run by war lords. With that being said,
let me pay tribute to the commitment of the SecretaryGeneral and his tireless Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict for their actions and
achievements in fighting sexual violence in conflict.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of El Salvador.
Ms. González López (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): El Salvador is grateful for the organization
of this open debate on sexual violence in conflict,
and we are pleased that a woman is presiding over
this debate. We thank the Secretary-General for his
annual report (S/2015/203) on this important theme.
We recognize the tireless work and leadership of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and we urge her to keep
up her efforts, in which she will undoubtedly require
the support of the whole international community.
El Salvador expresses its satisfaction with the
achievements of certain countries seeking to confront
sexual violence in conflict through the implementation
of specific laws, the prosecution of perpetrators and
the provision of compensation to victims. We agree
with the Secretary-General that the countries that
have shown such good progress should share their best
practices with other countries affected by conflict.
However, we would like to voice our concern about the
documented trends of the use of sexual violence as a
form of persecution involving the forced displacement
of populations, sexual violence against adolescents,

S/PV.7428

the ideological opposition of certain groups to the
education of girls and attacks against persons on the
basis of their sexual orientation, real or perceived, as a
form of social control and the continuation by various
groups of the practice of repression by using women
and girls as arms of war.
Allow me to indicate that the Government of
El Salvador recognizes the important role played by
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and
in peacebuilding, pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000).
We think, therefore, that it is vital to focus on the
situation of violence experienced by women, identifying
it as an important aspect in our public policies. Permit
me to point out that in 2013 the El Salvador Institute
for Female Development carried out a project called
“The memory of the fireflies” with female survivors
and family members of the victims of the massacres
that occurred in my country in December 1981. As part
of the project, an anthropological study was carried
out to compile testimony from women and to provide
them with psychosocial assistance in safe environments
where they could talk about their experiences. At the
same time, we intend to highlight the knowledge of
those events based on their vital experiences in order
to preserve a memory in the form of an oral history.
Through it we want to promote a process of reparation,
focusing not just on civil redress and compensation, but
also on highlighting the experiences of the women. We
have also defined as one of our priorities for a five-year
development plan for 2014-2019 institution-building
and specialized strategies for guaranteeing the rights
of women.
I am pleased to announce that El Salvador has
made efforts at the governmental level, with the help
of friendly countries and international organizations, to
create a State national committee for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions
adopted on the topic of women and peace and
security. Members of the committee were sworn in
on 12 November 2014, and the committee includes
representatives of 19 governmental organizations,
public ministries, academia and civil society. Their
main goal is to propose policies and standards aimed at
ensuring compliance with the resolutions on the subject
and to ensure the greater representation of women at
all levels of decision-making within national, regional
and international institutions and mechanisms with the
goal of strengthening the prevention and resolution of
conflict.

15-1046677/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

Finally, in August, El Salvador will hold, with other
members of the secretariat of the Central American
Integration System, the first regional training workshop
on resolution 1325 (2000) in order to ensure that as
many countries as possible in the region can commit
to drawing up national action plans leading to the true
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), adapting its
substance to the various security contexts that countries
are currently experiencing. It is in our interest to share
our experiences, since thus far we are the only country
in the region that has a national follow-up committee on
that theme at the highest level.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Ms. Rahimova (Azerbaijan): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for convening today’s open debate
on women and peace and security with a focus on
sexual violence in conflict. Our appreciation also goes
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the representative
of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security for their insightful statements.
In the context of armed conflict, parties should
ensure respect for the obligation under international
humanitarian and human-rights law to protect innocent
civilians, especially women and girls, who continue to
suffer from rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution,
forced pregnancy and other forms of sexual violence.
The continued practice of using gender-based violence
as a tactic of war is legally and morally unacceptable.
Azerbaijan reiterates its strong condemnation of all
acts of sexual violence committed against women and
girls in situations of armed conflict. There can be no
tolerance for such acts, and all necessary measures must
be taken to bring the perpetrators to justice and put an
end to impunity. We note in that regard the efforts of
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, which was established pursuant
to resolution 1888 (2009), aimed at strengthening the
capacity of national actors with regard to the rule of
law and justice.
Unfortunately, not all grave violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law,
including acts of sexual violence, have received
due attention and a response at the international and
regional levels. Measures that are more resolute and
targeted are now required to end impunity in such
situations. Commitments to protection efforts must be

78/82

15/04/2015

free of selectivity and politically motivated approaches
and preferences. In that regard, we note the role
played by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict pursuant to
her mandate. The involvement of women in peace and
security should be seen as one of the central elements
that can support conflict prevention and underpin longterm stability. We look forward to the 2015 high-level
review in October and the outcomes of the global study
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In that
regard, Azerbaijan appreciates the work of UN-Women
and its professional team and stands ready to contribute
to the review process.
At the national level, Azerbaijan has launched
regional projects, such as Women for Conflict Prevention
and Peacebuilding in the Southern Caucasus, aimed at
strengthening advocacy work calling for strengthening
the role of women in decision-making with regard to
conflict prevention and resolution at the national,
regional and international levels. Such initiatives can
be instrumental to the promotion of a culture of peace
and cooperation among interested actors.
Azerbaijan remains committed to the implementation
of the resolutions on the subject and is pleased to have
made a contribution to the work of the Council during
its presidency in October 2013, including the adoption
of resolution 2122 (2013). We look forward to the
high-level review on implementation and cooperation
with interested States, UN-Women and other relevant
entities in the process of the preparation of the global
study.
In conclusion, I would like once again to commend
the delegation of Jordan for convening this important
open debate.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Yaremenko (Ukraine): Ukraine associates
itself with the statement made this morning by the
delegation of the European Union.
My delegation attaches particular importance to
the issue of women and peace and security, and thanks
you, Madam President, for convening this debate, as
well as today’s briefers for their useful insights into this
important topic.
Resolution 1325 (2000), adopted 15 years ago,
established the basis for the women and peace and
security agenda, called for special protection and the

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

full and equal participation of women in all conflictprevention, conflict-resolution and post-conflictpeacebuilding efforts. The resolution has proved to be
an effective instrument for Member States to implement
their policies in this important area. Ukraine remains
fully committed to the implementation of the resolution
and actively supports international efforts aimed at
addressing the full range of human rights violations
and abuses faced by women in armed-conflict and
post-conflict situations.
In Ukraine, a national action plan in line with
resolution 1325 (2000) is being developed by the
Government, in close consultation with the United
Nations and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe as well as civil society. We
expect that document to be adopted in 2015. My
delegation also looks forward to the global review of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2015,
which will provide additional impetus to fulfilling
our common commitments on women and peace and
security.
Ukraine is alarmed at the fact that civilians still
constitute the majority of casualties in armed conflicts
worldwide. Many of them are women and girls, and
their number keeps growing dramatically. We are
deeply worried over the disproportionate impact of
armed conflict on women.
In my country, terrorist groups armed, financed and
supported by the Russian Federation continue to operate
openly in some areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions. Further ignoring the calls of the international
community, the Russian Federation keeps intensifying
its interference in the internal affairs of Ukraine by
stirring up separatism, exporting terrorism, inciting
ethnic tensions and provoking violent confrontations
in the eastern regions. Clearly, none of those actions
would have been possible without the involvement of
the Russian authorities.
Civilians, including women and children, continue
to die from Russian bullets and shells. In its recent
report, the United Nations Human Rights Monitoring
Mission in Ukraine found that, from mid-April 2014 to
15 February 2015, at least 5,665 people, including at
least 375 women and 63 children, were killed and at
least 13,961, including at least 630 women and 159
children, wounded as a result of the Russia-provoked
conflict in Donbas.

S/PV.7428

According to the latest official statistics, the
number of internally displaced persons (IDPs) in
Ukraine stands at 1,198,000. About two thirds of adult
IDPs are women. The Government fully understands
their specific needs, as most IDP families include
elderly and unaccompanied women with children. The
law of Ukraine on IDPs adopted on 20 October 2014 was
welcomed by the international community, including
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. This law is aimed at ensuring the rights and
freedoms of IDPs, including women, and at addressing
key issues in this area, inter alia through facilitating
humanitarian assistance. On 5 March, Ukraine’s
legislation on IDPs was amended in order to strengthen
their social protection, including through addressing
the issue of unemployment.
I would like to draw the Council’s attention
to the fact of the abduction and illegal transfer of
Ukrainian nationals from the territory of Ukraine
into the Russian Federation for so-called criminal
prosecutions. A political prisoner — member of the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe
Nadiya Savchenko — is still being detained in Russia
without legal grounds and despite the fact that, under
the Minsk arrangements, all hostages and illegally
detained persons must be released. We demand that
Nadiya Savchenko be immediately released and those
involved in her abduction and illegal detention be
brought to justice.
The Government of Ukraine is undertaking a
number of targeted steps in order to address the
challenges that the ongoing foreign aggression places
on women in Ukraine. In parallel with the elaboration
of the national action plan on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), my Government will continue to
ensure the greater participation of women in political,
economic and social life.
Making full use of the knowledge, skills and
experience of Ukrainian women is vital to reaching a
solution to the current crisis in and around Ukraine.
We encourage the United Nations, in particular UNWomen, to actively contribute to that end.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Madam President, we would like to thank you for the
initiative of convening this debate and for the concept
note (S/2015/243, annex) that you circulated to inspire

15-1046679/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

our commitment and our thinking on this issue. I
should like also to thank Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, for her statement. Every
day we are grateful for her consistency, commitment,
courage and honesty. We would also like to thank the
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, who shared with us this morning
her experiences and her desire to fight injustice and
impunity.
The issue of conflict-related sexual violence is
part and parcel of Argentina’s State policy. That policy
aims to protect and promote human rights; ensure that
there are full reparations for victims; protect, promote
and ensure equal conditions and opportunities for,
and treatment of, women in all areas; and fulfil the
commitment to eliminate all forms of discrimination,
xenophobia and racism, as well as the commitment to
not countenance impunity but, rather, to work with
truth, memory and justice to ensure that development,
human rights and peace can go hand in hand.
International law is of fundamental importance
in this respect, because therein lie the appropriate
mechanisms to ensure that when a State cannot or does
not want to protect human rights, we have the tools at
our disposal to do so. International law is in our hands
with these mechanisms, so we can listen to the victims
and ensure that violations of human rights do not go
unpunished.
In that context, Argentina strongly supports
the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
aimed at eliminating all forms of sexual violence, in
particular against women and children in the context
of armed conflicts, post-conflict situations and the
actions of violent extremist groups. We welcome
the report (S/2015/203) prepared by the Office of the
Special Representative and fully agree and adopt its
recommendations. We recognize that sexual violence
is used as a tactic of war and terror. It is therefore
necessary to coordinate efforts to address such crimes
in armed conflicts and prevent violent extremism.
We support the report’s recommendations with
regard to including sexual violence in the work of the
sanctions committees. The referral to the International
Criminal Court of cases in which crimes of sexual
violence in conflict have been committed is a substantive
part of the Rome Statute. We support the provision
of multidimensional support to survivors, including
80/82

15/04/2015

sexual and reproductive health services. We support the
provision of mulidimensional assistance to victims for
their effective reintegration. We support engaging in
dialogue with all stakeholders — State actors, non-State
actors and civil society, including religious leaders. We
support eliminating the stigmatization of survivors and
providing protection, prevention and support to families
and communities. We encourage the deployment of
women in peacekeeping operations and including in the
specific training of all that participate in peacekeeping
operations content and practices respectful of human
rights and women and children’s rights and making it
clear that sexual violence in conflicts is a war crime
and a violation of human rights.
Similarly, we want to recognize that yesterday was
the first anniversary in Argentina of the coming into
force of the third Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure.
We deposited that instrument at the United Nations,
and a few days ago the brotherly nation of Chile did
as as well. I also recognize with great respect the work
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflicts, Ms. Zerrougui.
My country calls upon other States to ratify the third
Optional Protocol. Today there are only 34 States that
have signed it, and only two current members of the
Council have ratified it. Doing so would set an example,
since the Council is making progress on substantive
resolutions on the protection of the human rights of
women and children and the protection of civilians and
the condemnation and erradication of sexual violence
in conflicts. Since we know that the majority of victims
are women and children, it would be good if all United
Nations States Members, not just Council members,
could sign the third Optional Protocol.
Argentina strongly supports, both when we
are members of the Council and when we are not,
the Council’s tasks and we recognize the various
resolutions that have been adopted. However, the
recent and increasing sexual crimes that have been
perpetrated by extremist violent groups, as well as by
States that enjoy impunity, as a strategy to terrorize,
intimidate and stigmatize specific groups — women,
children, the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender
population, refugees and displaced persons, people of
different faiths and religions — constitute some of the
most serious international crimes.
From the perspective of human rights, protection
from crimes of sexual violence perpetrated in conflicts

15-10466

15/04/2015

Women and peace and security

as a tactic or strategy of war, terror, intimidation or
stigmatization and the prevention of those crimes
must remain our priority. We must therefore continue
to insist on this matter. Very often, because of having
become accustomed or desensitized to these abhorrent
crimes, victims themselves do not see what they have
suffered as violations of their human rights and dignity.
But they are war crimes and human rights violations.
In conclusion, as an elderly Spanish lady said — she
was 88 years old at the time — from the collective of
the women of 1936,
“to think that the clock is ticking fast and every
day we tear off another page from the calendar, we
cannot wait for next year.”
Why do I mention this? Not because I always like to
quote poets, but sometimes they speak more plainly
than politicians or diplomats. When Enriqueta wrote
that, we all knew what she was saying. Do not rip
another page off the calendar until the victims have
been provided with reparations. We call for an end
be put to the slowness in providing reparations to the
victims and to prevent conflict-related sexual violence.
It seems that we may not have been alert when reading
that in a given country 48 women per day are subject
to sexual violence. We should awaken to our great
commitment and desire for a better world.
In my country, which suffered from State
terrorism during a bloody civil-military dictatorship,
the women who were victims of that dictatorship also
had to learn what it meant for their human rights to
be violated, including when it came to their bodies.
In Susana Chiarotti’s Grietas en el Silencio, a recent
book compiling testimonies of women who were
subjected to sexual violence during the civil-military
dictatorship — and this is something that people at first
either did not know or did not want to talk about — a
victim of sexual violence recounts,
“If you tell me that this is a violation of my
human rights because it is sexual violence, and is
so defined as a crime in the Rome Statute, then,
yes, I was abused. When I was arrested they put
the barrel of a gun in my vagina. They took away
my six-month-old baby while I was nursing. They
licked milk off me, saying it was the milk my baby
would be having if they themselves were not taking
it.”
At the end of the day, we are what we do in order
to change what we are. Those are not my words, but I

S/PV.7428

mention them in homage to the poet Eduardo Galeano,
who died yesterday and who was the writer of The Open
Veins of Latin America.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
representative of Argentina for her very eloquent
conclusion, which speaks to us all.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): If I may, I would like to comment on the
statement made by the representative of Ukraine. The
theme of today’s meeting was conflict-related sexual
violence. I do not recall hearing those words in his
statement, which we believe is a clear example of
abusing the forum of the Security Council.
That once again shows that those colleagues are not
so interested in the theme of the meeting, but rather they
wanted a pretext to set out a whole string of accusations
against Russia. The accusations do not change, and we
have repeatedly commented and responded, including
on the issue of Ms. Savchenko, which again has nothing
to do with today’s theme of sexual violence in conflict.
If we are going to speak of the real problems of
women living in the south-east of Ukraine, then today
their problems are above all due to the blockade of
the region by the Kyiv authorities. In Donetsk and
Luhansk there is therefore a lack of food and medicine.
Social benefits are not being paid out and the most
urgent services are not being provided. However, our
colleagues preferred not to mention that.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of Ukraine has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Yaremenko (Ukraine): If I am not mistaken,
the topic of today’s debate is women and peace and
security. With all due respect, I am quite sure that
Ukrainian women, including the female peacekeeper,
Nadiya Savchenko, are included in today’s discussion.
Moreover, for more than a year now, Russian
diplomats have stayed true to their own words:
“According to Goebbels, ‘The more improbable the
lie, the faster people believe it.” And it worked out;
he was a talented man.”
Those words were spoken by none other than Vladimir
Putin, President of the Russian Federation, on 9 July
2014, when he received a delegation of rabbis from Israel,

15-1046681/82

S/PV.7428

Women and peace and security

Austria, Belgium, the United Kingdom, Germany, Italy,
the Netherlands and France. Incidentally, the quotation
is still on the presidential website. I checked it an hour
ago.
Ukraine is fully committed to the provisions of
the Minsk agreements. Nevertheless, I must stress
that Ukrainian forces ceased fire as of midnight
on 5 February 2015 and that they have consistently
abided by the ceasefire since then. At the same time,
in clear and flagrant breach of the Minsk agreements
of September 2014 and February 2015, illegal armed
groups, with direct support from Russian regular forces,
did not cease fire as of 15 February. They undertook a
massive assault on Debaltseve. On 18 and 19 February,
some 2,500 Ukrainian troops retreated from the town.
That blatant violation of the Minsk agreements cost
the lives of 19 Ukrainian servicemen, with more than
135 wounded and 159 captured, while 12 went missing.
Yet the militants continued to shell the positions of
the Ukrainian forces, as well as civilian locations, and
undertook infantry and tank attacks aimed at squeezing
the Ukrainian forces from certain positions. Overall,
since 15 February, Russian-backed militants have
shelled Ukrainian positions more than 1,970 times,
killing 86 Ukrainian soldiers and wounding 460.
Russia and Russian-backed militants must
immediately cease fire and take all the necessary
measures to ensure that the ceasefire is sustainable.
Russia must stop manipulating and deliberately
distorting the facts based on false information.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.

82/82

15/04/2015

Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The second statement by the representative of
Ukraine proved once again that he does not understand
the subject of today’s debate. It is not Ukraine and not
the situation in Ukraine.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a further statement in my national capacity as the
representative of Jordan.
I would like to refer to certain allegations by the
representative of Syria with respect to Syrian refugee
camps in neighbouring States such as Jordan. Since the
beginning of the crisis, Jordan has stood by its brothers
in their humanitarian tragedy, receiving huge numbers
of them and facilitating the delivery of humanitarian
assistance in line with the relevant Security Council
resolutions. The reference to the refugee camps by
the representative of Syria insults United Nations
efforts. Those camps were established in Jordan, in
collaboration with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and other humanitarian
United Nations agencies. Jordan is a State of law and
institutions. We respect the human rights of all people,
including women. We are committed to providing
assistance to Syrian refugees who were forced to flee
their country, particularly women and children, in line
with international criteria. The comments made and the
Secretary-General‘s report (S/2015/203) demonstrate
the gross violations against women in Syria.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

15-10466
