A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/78
25 February 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 107
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/51/616)]
51/78.

International Decade of the World's
Indigenous People

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that one of the purposes of the United Nations, as set
forth in the Charter, is the achievement of international cooperation in
solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or
humanitarian character and in promoting and encouraging respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex,
language or religion,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the International Decade of the
World's Indigenous People, as well as those of the Commission on Human Rights,
Recalling also that the goal of the Decade is to strengthen
international cooperation for the solution of problems faced by indigenous
people in such areas as human rights, the environment, development, education
and health and that the theme of the Decade is "Indigenous people:
partnership in action",
Recognizing the importance of consultation and cooperation with
indigenous people in planning and implementing the programme of activities for
the International Decade of the World's Indigenous People,1 the need for
adequate financial support from the international community, including support
from within the United Nations and the specialized agencies, and the need for
adequate coordination and communication channels,

1

Resolution 50/157, annex.

97-76879

/...

A/RES/51/78
Page 2

Recalling Economic and Social Council decision 1992/255 of 20 July 1992,
in which the Council requested United Nations bodies and specialized agencies
to ensure that all technical assistance financed or provided by them was
compatible with international instruments and standards applicable to
indigenous people and encouraged efforts to promote coordination in this field
and greater participation of indigenous people in the planning and
implementation of projects affecting them,
Recalling its resolution 50/156 of 21 December 1995,
1.
Affirms its conviction of the value and diversity of the cultures
and forms of social organization of indigenous people and that the development
of indigenous people within their countries will contribute to the
socio-economic, cultural and environmental advancement of all the countries of
the world;
2.
Notes that the programme of activities for the International
Decade of the World's Indigenous People may be reviewed and updated throughout
the Decade and that at the mid-point of the Decade the Economic and Social
Council and the General Assembly should review the results of the activities
in order to identify obstacles to the achievement of the goals of the Decade
and to recommend solutions for overcoming those obstacles;
3.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the programme of activities for the Decade;2
4.
Welcomes the resolve of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights to strengthen efforts to achieve the goals of the programme of
activities for the Decade;
5.
Reaffirms the adoption of a declaration on the rights of
indigenous people as a major objective of the Decade, and notes that there
have been two sessions of the open-ended inter-sessional working group of the
Commission on Human Rights established pursuant to Commission resolution
1995/32 of 3 March 19953 with the sole purpose of elaborating a draft
declaration, considering the draft United Nations declaration on the rights of
indigenous peoples annexed to resolution 1994/45 of 26 August 1994 of the
Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities;4
6.
Underlines the importance of effective participation by indigenous
representatives in the working group, and encourages organizations of
indigenous people that are not already registered to participate and wish to
do so to apply for authorization in accordance with the procedure set out in
the annex to Commission on Human Rights resolution 1995/32;

2

A/51/499.

3

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1995, Supplement
No. 3 and corrigenda (E/1995/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
4

See E/CN.4/1995/2-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1994/56, chap. II, sect. A.
/...

A/RES/51/78
Page 3

7.
Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the existing
mechanisms, procedures and programmes within the United Nations concerning
indigenous people,5 and requests the Secretary-General to transmit the review,
prior to the fifty-third session of the Commission on Human Rights, to
Governments, indigenous people and relevant international organizations for
their comments;
8.
Recognizes amongst the objectives of the Decade, as listed in the
programme of activities, the consideration of the establishment of a permanent
forum for indigenous people within the United Nations system;
9.
Recalls its recommendation contained in resolution 50/157 of 21
December 1995 that the Commission on Human Rights, drawing on the results of
the workshop on the possible establishment of a permanent forum for indigenous
people within the United Nations system, held at Copenhagen from 26 to 28 June
1995,6 and the Secretary-General's review, consider the convening of a second
workshop;
10.
Recommends in the light of the review that efforts be made to
ensure that relevant United Nations organs, organizations and bodies take part
in any further consultations on the issue, and welcomes the offer of the
Government of Chile to host a second workshop on the possible establishment of
a permanent forum for indigenous people within the United Nations system;
11.
Emphasizes the important role of international cooperation in
promoting the goals and activities of the Decade and the rights, well-being
and sustainable development of indigenous people;
12.
Reaffirms the importance of strengthening the human and
institutional capacity of indigenous people to develop their own solutions to
their problems and, for these purposes, its recommendation that the United
Nations University consider the possibility of sponsoring, in each region, one
or more institutions of higher education as centres of excellence and the
diffusion of expertise, and invites the Commission on Human Rights to
recommend appropriate means of implementation;
13.
Emphasizes the importance of action at the national level for the
implementation of the goals and activities of the Decade;
14.

Encourages Governments to support the Decade by:

(a)

Contributing to the United Nations Trust Fund for the Decade;

(b)
Preparing relevant programmes, plans and reports in relation to
the Decade, in consultation with indigenous people;
(c)
Seeking means, in consultation with indigenous people, of giving
indigenous people greater responsibility for their own affairs and an
effective voice in decisions on matters that affect them;

5

A/51/493.

6

E/CN.4/Sub.2/AC.4/1995/7 and Add.1-3.
/...

A/RES/51/78
Page 4

(d)
Establishing national committees or other mechanisms involving
indigenous people to ensure that the objectives and activities of the Decade
are planned and implemented on the basis of full partnership with indigenous
people;
15.
Also encourages Governments and other donors to contribute to the
United Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations in order to assist
indigenous representatives in participating in the Working Group on Indigenous
Populations of the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities and the open-ended inter-sessional working group of
the Commission on Human Rights charged with elaborating a draft declaration on
the rights of indigenous people;
16.
Appeals to Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to support the Decade by identifying resources for activities
designed to implement the goals of the Decade, in cooperation with indigenous
people;
17.
Invites the United Nations financial and developmental
institutions, operational programmes and specialized agencies, in accordance
with the existing procedures of their governing bodies:
(a)
To give increased priority and resources to improving the
conditions of indigenous people, with particular emphasis on the needs of
those people in developing countries, including by preparation of specific
programmes of action for the implementation of the goals of the Decade, within
their areas of competence;
(b)
To launch special projects through appropriate channels and in
collaboration with indigenous people for strengthening their community-level
initiatives and to facilitate the exchange of information and expertise
amongst indigenous people and other relevant experts;
(c)
To designate focal points for coordination with the Centre for
Human Rights of the Secretariat of activities related to the Decade;
18.
Recommends that the Secretary-General ensure coordinated follow-up
to the recommendations concerning indigenous people of relevant world
conferences, namely, the World Conference on Human Rights, held at Vienna from
14 to 25 June 1993, the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, held at Rio de Janiero, Brazil, from 3 to 14 June 1992, the
International Conference on Population and Development, held at Cairo from 5
to 13 September 1994, the Fourth World Conference on Women, held at Beijing
from 4 to 15 September 1995, and the World Summit for Social Development, held
at Copenhagen from 6 to 12 March 1995;
19.
Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
when developing programmes within the framework of the United Nations Human
Rights Education Decade, to give due regard to the dissemination of
information on the situation, cultures, languages, rights and aspirations of
indigenous people;
20.
Encourages Governments to consider contributing, as appropriate,
to the Fund for the Development of Indigenous Peoples in Latin America and the
Caribbean, in support of the achievement of the goals of the Decade;

/...

A/RES/51/78
Page 5

21.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-second
session the item entitled "Programme of activities of the International Decade
of the World's Indigenous People".
82nd plenary meeting
12 December 1996
