S/PV.7711

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7711th meeting

Friday, 10 June 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ayrault/Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Hamachi
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ndiaye
Mr. Ybáñez
Mr. Kyslytsya/Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Cancela
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Protecting civilians in the context of peacekeeping operations
Report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2016/447)
Letter dated 27 May 2016 from the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/503)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-16677 (E)
*1616677*

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Protecting civilians in the context of
peacekeeping operations
Report of the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict (S/2016/447)
Letter dated 27 May 2016 from the Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/503)
The President (spoke in French): I wish to warmly
welcome the Secretary-General, the Ministers and
other representatives present in today’s meeting. Their
participation is an affirmation of the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, Botswana,
Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Canada, the Central
African Republic, Chad, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Djibouti, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Georgia, Germany, Guatemala, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Mexico, Montenegro, Morocco, Nepal, the
Netherlands, the Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Paraguay,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania,
Rwanda, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand
and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera, President of the
Central African Republic, and thank him for attending
this important meeting in person. I request the Protocol
Officer to escort him to his seat at the Council table.
Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera, President of the
Central African Republic, was escorted to a seat at
the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, to participate
in this meeting.
2/94

10/06/2016

On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Maurer,
who is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Geneva.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following to
participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Ioannis
Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, and His Excellency
Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations, to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/447, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
I wish to also draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/503, which contains a letter dated
27 May 2016 from the Permanent Representative
of France to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, whom I warmly thank
for all his efforts as Secretary-General. I have met with
him frequently, and I know that he spares no effort in
travelling wherever the work of the Organization takes
him, with the exclusive aim of keeping the peace and
protecting civilians.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I thank you,
Sir, for this opportunity to address this important subject.
(spoke in English)
This is the right moment to address the contributions
of United Nations peace operations to the protection of
civilians. My latest report on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/2016/447) underlines the urgent
need for concrete measures and makes recommendations
to that end. Enhancing the protection of civilians was a
key focus of the World Humanitarian Summit and the
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Agenda for Humanity (A/70/709, annex). It was one of
the dominant themes to emerge from the recent reviews
of peace operations, the peacebuilding architecture,
and the women, peace and security framework.
These reports, reviews and events all stressed the
political, legal, moral and operational imperative of
protecting civilians and the primary responsibility of
national authorities. They underscored the modest but
vital role that United Nations peace operations can play
in protecting civilians, and they stressed the need for a
concerted effort by the Council, Member States and the
Secretariat to further strengthen this contribution.
Protecting civilians is an overarching responsibility,
involving all the critical functions of the United
Nations: human rights, humanitarian, political
and peacekeeping. In the same way, peacekeeping
operations are most effective in protecting civilians
when protection is considered a mission-wide activity,
driven by a sound political strategy. The political
engagement of civilian staff and their dialogue with
the parties to conflict-affected communities and
with partners is essential. Civilian staff also monitor
and investigate abuses — which is the only basis for
accountability. Likewise, United Nations police make
an important contribution. United Nations police are
currently protecting tens of thousands of internally
displaced people at peacekeeping mission bases in
South Sudan.
I urge the Security Council to give precedence to
political strategy and whole-of-mission approaches
when it considers mandates to protect civilians. Those
can be even more critical than military assets and troop
numbers. The Secretariat is working to support the
Council in this by providing better analysis of threats
and better advice and recommendations on the most
effective course of action, depending on the context. As
I told the General Assembly yesterday, we are reviewing
our administrative and logistical procedures to see how
we can best support peace operations, and looking at
policies to make us more flexible and responsive.
The Secretariat is also doing its utmost to support
missions through a renewed focus on performance and
accountability. We will continue our efforts to prevent
and address abuses committed by peacekeepers.
Working with troop and police contributors, we are
generating peacekeeping forces and police in a way
that matches capabilities with requirements. We need
troops that speak the right languages, bring with them

S/PV.7711

the right technology and equipment and have the right
skills and training, in the right places. Member States
have a critical role in that regard, in contributing
troops and police who are ready, willing and able to
take up protection duties. The Kigali Principles set out
critical benchmarks for troop- and police-contributing
countries, and I urge all States to endorse them.
We also rely on the Security Council to set mandates
that are in line with resources and to use its influence to
increase those resources in certain circumstances.
Protecting civilians is a United Nations systemwide responsibility. But the primary responsibility lies
with parties to a conflict, non-belligerent States and the
Security Council. My Agenda for Humanity, drawn up
as the framework for the World Humanitarian Summit,
sets out core responsibilities, principles, courses of
action and ambitious targets for all to improve the
protection of civilians. At the Summit, Governments,
non-governmental organizations, United Nations
agencies and others pledged to take concrete actions to
implement the Agenda. Later this year, I will report to
the General Assembly and propose ways to take those
commitments forward.
We must also look outside the United Nations
and increase our engagement with civil society,
non-governmental organizations and regional partners.
In the Central African Republic, for example, the
United Nations has been coordinating a group of
international partners, including the African Union
and the Economic Community of Central African
States, to promote stability and security. We will also
continue pressing Governments and parties to conflict
to uphold their protection responsibilities, comply with
international law and take precautions to prevent harm
to civilians — for example, by minimizing the impact
of explosive weapons in populated areas.
Governments and parties to conflict also have an
obligation to provide for the basic needs of civilians in
conflict. When they fail to do so, they should facilitate
principled humanitarian assistance by humanitarian
organizations. Many parties are failing to live up to
those obligations, and it is essential that we use all the
means at our disposal to hold them accountable.
The United Nations is determined to work
collectively to support Governments to protect their
people, and to persuade parties to conflict to abide by their
obligations. But even the most effective peacekeeping
can never protect every civilian from harm. No amount

16-166773/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

of strategy, resources or accountability will mitigate
the grave and tragic consequences of war for ordinary
women, children and men. The ultimate solution to
protecting civilians in conflict is to find sustainable
political solutions based on the rule of law and human
rights standards. That is the core responsibility of the
Security Council, and I urge the Council to exercise it.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera, President of the
Central African Republic.
President Touadera (spoke in French): This
meeting of the Security Council is taking place at
an opportune moment, in that it is focused on the
question of peacekeeping operations and the protection
of civilians. I believes it affords us an opportunity to
discuss the case of my country — the Central African
Republic — which hosts an international peacekeeping
operation on its territory that has ensured the protection
of civilians for some time now.
With the support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), the
European Union-led peacekeeping force in the Central
African Republic, the European Union Military
Advisory Mission in the Central African Republic
and Operation Sangaris, the Transitional Government
was able quickly to put an end to mass atrocities.
The security environment was also conducive to the
success of popular consultations, the Bangui Forum,
the referendum and the parliamentary and presidential
elections. I would especially like to thank MINUSCA
and the entire United Nations system for its efforts
to protect civilians throughout our territory — from
Paoua to Obo and from Berbérati to Birao. The effects
of those efforts are particularly evident in the return of
displaced persons and refugees populations, which has
accelerated in recent months, for example in Bangui,
Berbérati and Kaga Bandoro.
In spite of that strategic success, the task remains
enormous, while the capabilities of MINUSCA,
combined with those of the security forces of the
Central African Republic, are unfortunately to date
insufficient to put an end to the violence affecting
our citizens. The continued presence of armed
groups — whether anti-Balaka or ex-Séléka — as well
as that of the Lord’s Resistance Army, poses a daily
4/94

10/06/2016

challenge to the security of civilians. Added to that are
the ongoing inter-communal tensions, including with
regard to herding migration, which are being fuelled by
the presence of those groups.
The grass-roots consultations as well as the Bangui
Forum accorded significant attention to the issue of
victims, who were able to share their views and their
expectations. Displaced populations and ethnic and
religious minorities are at particular risk of violence,
while women and children all too often suffer from
gender-based violence and are victims of recruitment
by armed groups. The refugees from the Central
African Republic want to go back to their country, and
they want there to be a return to justice, reconciliation
among communities, freedom of movement and peace.
Against a backdrop of heightened vulnerability
due to a drop in agricultural production, forced
displacement, rampant crime and the still too great
number of atrocities being committed by armed groups,
we together must do more and better to protect the
population throughout the breadth of the country. In
the immediate term, and this is the number one priority
of my Government, the Central African Republic needs
the unwavering support of the international community,
particularly of MINUSCA, to protect populations
sustainably. That is why the protection of civilians
must remain the priority mandate of MINUSCA and be
carried out in support of Government action.
In order to guarantee such protection, particular
support from the international community is needed to
equip and train our personnel and enable them to fulfil
their primary responsibility in respect of protection
and security. First and foremost, the Central African
Republic must first rebuild its army, gendarmerie and
police, in addition to its judicial and correctional system.
This will require the establishment of professional,
honest, equipped, trained operational structures that
are representative of all segments of the population.
Coordination of security operations must be
strengthened, and joint operations, particularly with
the internal security forces, can enable our forces to
benefit immediately from rapid response capacities and
contribute directly to the security of the population.
These operations will make it possible to apprehend
the perpetrators of mass crimes, as well as criminals
or even armed groups that continue to violate the rights
of citizens. These security operations must be carried
out in support of a political process focused on political
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

solutions, disarmament, demobilization, repatriation
and reintegration, and security sector reform in order to
contain and gradually reduce the presence and negative
action of armed groups.
In order to have a lasting impact, our joint security
efforts must, of course, be sustained and extended by
continued work towards national reconciliation, justice
and the fight against impunity and, more broadly,
towards the restoration of State authority and the
promotion of human rights throughout the country.
These actions aimed at establishing a protective
environment must remain a priority in the mandate
of MINUSCA, and be undertaken primarily in areas
where insecurity persists.
The deployment of administration throughout
the national territory is absolutely vital to providing
the population with basic social services so as to
effectively contribute to national reconciliation and
the restoration of State authority, as well as to respond
to the marginalization that fuels the country’s cycles
of crises. The Government is resolved to undertake a
major reform of the decentralization policy in order to
help the population govern itself better, by asserting
its presence throughout the entire country and
meeting the basic needs of the citizens of the Central
African Republic.
At this point, I wish to express the Government’s
gratitude to the international community for its support
in restoring the authority of the State. This support has
enabled the redeployment of 16 prefects, 71 sub-prefects
and 174 special delegations, as well as of 425 staff
professionals working in social services, 70 per cent of
whom work in the education sector. However, I note that,
in the context of restoring the authority of the State and
protecting civilian populations in the Central African
Republic, strengthening the functional and operational
capacities of the police and gendarmerie also remains
a priority. In this context, the internal security forces,
with the support of the MINUSCA police component,
have developed a plan for capacity building and
development that deserves to be implemented.
Here, I would like to highlight the Government’s
efforts to engage all Central Africans on the path of
reconciliation and forgiveness, bearing in mind that
justice must be served in order to combat impunity and
promote human rights. By combining the referral to the
International Criminal Court with the establishment
of a strengthened specific national mechanism, the

S/PV.7711

Central African Republic has recently blazed a new trail
in the fight against impunity. However, it is important
for the international community to provide us, as soon
as possible, with experts and international judges
with real experience in prosecuting the most serious
crimes. Furthermore, the imminent establishment of a
national human rights commission, in accordance with
international standards, will enable my country to take
a crucial step in this area.
In addition, the establishment of the Truth,
Justice, Reconciliation and Reparation Commission
recommended at the Bangui Forum will also enable
the country to lay the foundations of lasting peace.
The consolidation of public finances and reform of the
productive sectors will be among the major pursuits of
this new presidential term. It will be a major reform
of State-owned financial agencies to increase and
secure State resources and contain public spending. A
relentless battle will be waged against fraud, corruption,
embezzlement and extortion.
In the same spirit, the Government will relaunch the
productive sectors — agriculture, trade, energy, private
foreign investment, public/private partnership — in
order to stimulate growth and ensure not only food
security but also increased exports and reduction of
imports. Social measures to combat unemployment,
improve the professionalization of the educational
system and enhance access to health care, medication
and housing are envisaged.
The various gains made have required the support
and assistance of the international community. Such
support should continue in a framework of mutual
engagement with international partners in the Central
African Republic to support its Government and people
in implementing the nationally agreed priorities of
peace and security, justice and reconciliation, the
restoration of State authority, and social and economic
development. Our hope is that the framework of mutual
engagement focuses on the immediate challenges.
Priorities for recovery and long-term development
will be taken into account in a framework in the style
of the New Deal, of which the Central African Republic
is a pilot country. The Government will undertake an
assessment of recovery and peacebuilding with the joint
support of the United Nations, the European Union and
the World Bank. The assessment will make it possible
to formulate a priority national action plan for recovery

16-166775/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and peacebuilding at the donor meeting to be organized
by the European Union in Brussels in November.
These are the topics that I wanted to present
to the Security Council. I express the hope that the
international community will provide its support for
the actions included in the Central African Republic’s
agenda for recovery.
The President (spoke in French): I thank President
Touadera for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Maurer.
Mr. Maurer: I thank the Council for giving me
the opportunity to address it again in this important
debate today.
War equals destruction — the destruction of the
enemy, of military targets, of assets and of infrastructure.
It might be regrettable, but it is not prohibited under
international humanitarian law and therefore has to
be accepted. What we cannot accept — what we must
not accept — is that war destroys the lives of countless
civilians. The protection of civilians lies at the heart
of international humanitarian law and at the heart
of the missions of both the United Nations and the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
Peacekeepers are often deployed on the front lines
of armed conflict with increasingly robust mandates.
We know this because in many places, from South
Sudan to Mali and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the ICRC works right alongside them. Since the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone in 1999, the
Organization’s mandates have increasingly included
the protection of civilians, and I commend the Council
for its commitment to using the resources at its disposal
to ensure that people affected by conflict are spared
whenever and however possible.
The deployment of peace missions in violent
environments, with robust mandates, inevitably raises
the question of when and under which conditions
international humanitarian law applies to them. I
believe that this legal discussion of a technical nature
should not preclude anyone from aiming for the highest
standards, at all times, and that means impeccable
respect for international humanitarian law.
The more than 120,000 members of the United
Nations forces form, in theory, the world’s third largest
army, and they are standard setters. Their exposure to
some of the worst atrocities in human history, from
6/94

10/06/2016

Rwanda to Bosnia, from South Sudan to the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo or Somalia today, means that their actions can
make a difference in the most difficult situations. They
are held to the highest of standards, and where they
fail, for whatever reason, the Council, as the organ
responsible for establishing peacekeeping missions,
must draw the appropriate conclusions and act on them
in cooperation with the troop-contributing countries
concerned, including on allegations of sexual violence
against children and the murder of civilians, which
have recently received media attention.
All delegations know that the ICRC works on the
front lines of armed conflicts around the world, and
my organization is often among the last international
humanitarian actors staying on the ground, close
to the people. What we know from being close to
people, in over 80 countries, is that communities
possess tremendous strengths, particularly in times
of fragility and emergency. Neither humanitarians nor
peacekeepers must limit or prevent the empowerment
of people. After all, it is the people in the communities
who know their environment and the changing
dynamics best. I have myself seen remarkable
examples of local men and women negotiating access
for humanitarian organizations, for instance. There is
a role for peacekeepers in community engagement, as
the Secretary-General also highlighted ahead of today’s
meeting. Peacekeepers must create and support those
spaces in which locals can negotiate.
As close as peacekeepers and humanitarians
are to each other geographically in the field, it is of
vital importance for the ICRC to be perceived and
understood as the strictly neutral, independent and
impartial humanitarian organization that it is. Any
kind of confusion or blurring between the political
mandate of peacekeeping missions and the Red
Cross and Red Crescent Movement’s principles can
potentially jeopardize our access to people in need and
risk the lives of my colleagues. We will continue to
protect our distinctiveness so as to ensure that we can
deliver to the best of our abilities to people suffering
in wars, and we ask peacekeepers and the Council
to do the same. We will continue to rely on our own
security protocols, which are not based on weaponized
security, but on engagement with and consensus among
all those bearing arms, and transparency about our
strictly needs-based action. We also want to continue
to work with peacekeeping missions, troop- and
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

police-contributing countries and the United Nations
Secretariat to further build on the fruitful cooperation
that we have established over decades.
We are ready to increase in volume and depth our
training programmes on international humanitarian
law and the protection of civilians for peacekeepers,
ahead of deployment and in theatre, and to strengthen
our protection dialogue with all parties. We are ready
to engage on the front lines of conflict and with all
those bearing arms to find arrangements through which
civilians are protected and international humanitarian
law is respected. Often the first step towards better
protection is by rebuilding minimal trust among
belligerents across contact lines.
Through our substantial experience in the area of
detention, we can assist the Council in preparing for
those moments when peacekeepers will likely have
to arrest and detain persons. We have seen in the past
that preparation is more fruitful than scrambling in
an emergency. We need the necessary protocols and
procedures on detention, transfer and access for ICRC
to be in place before operations start.
There are other active measures that the Council
can take for the effective protection of civilians. The
Council can scale up peacekeepers’ presence where
necessary, so as to effectively deter violence and
adequately train, equip and resource peacekeepers
so they can do their job; develop model operating
procedures for mixed peacekeeping missions; ensure
the highest standards of behaviour; and lastly, as
stated in the Geneva Conventions, respect and ensure
respect for international humanitarian law, at all
times, including neutral, independent and impartial
humanitarian action.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Maurer for his briefing this morning.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Development of France.
In this special year for the United Nations, I
wanted to invite representatives to take stock of the
progress made in protecting civilians in peacekeeping
operations. I welcome the Secretary-General, who has
made such a big contribution to the progress achieved,
and the President of the Central African Republic,
whom I thank for having accepted my invitation and
who has reminded us of what the United Nations has

S/PV.7711

done for his country. Finally, I thank the President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, who
unfortunately could not join us, but who wanted to
share with us his recommendations for ensuring better
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
As we have just heard, a transformation of
peacekeeping is under way. We all remember the
failures of Srebrenica and Rwanda. We have taken
note with concern of the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on the protection of civilians (S/2016/447),
which indicates that international humanitarian law is
increasingly being disregarded by parties to conflict.
And it is always civilians that pay the price. However,
the United Nations has taken stock of those challenges
and has won decisive battles and saved thousands of
lives. I am thinking, of course, of the Central African
Republic, but also of Côte d’Ivoire where the United
Nations has prevented mass atrocities from being
committed. I am also thinking about northern Mali,
where the United Nations protects the citizens and
supports the implementation of a political solution.
To those who doubt the value of the United Nations,
those successes show that it can successfully protect
civilians, as long as three conditions are met. The
first condition is that of setting an example. Violence
committed by United Nations-mandated forces against
populations must be combated with absolute firmness
and in full respect of the rule of law. As troopcontributing countries, it is our duty to immediately
refer to justice any substantiated allegation brought
to our knowledge and to take the necessary protective
measures, while respecting the presumption of
innocence. It has to do with the dignity of the victims,
as well as the honour of the United Nations and of all
the military who fight tirelessly for peace.
The second condition is effectiveness. Effectiveness
means setting a clear mandate for the protection of
civilians, if need be by planning all the necessary
measures for their defence. However, a clear mandate
will be effective only if it is fully implemented by
those — civilian and military — who should ensure
that it is respected. We have seen progress in that areas
as well, thanks to the regular dialogue between the
Security Council and the troop-contributing countries,
which has become the norm. Investment in favour of
peace is also better distributed with the arrival of new
countries. But we also need modern means — drones,
intelligence, forecasting. While there has also been
progress in that area, we must do more, especially for

16-166777/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

missions operating in a dangerous security environment.
Let us together draw lessons from history. In the face
of difficulties, withdrawal is not an option. Rather, we
must ask ourselves how to strengthen and better ensure
the security of our Blue Helmets.
In addition to military action, effectively
protecting civilians implies an integrated policy. That
means the deployment of legal experts and human
rights experts; a visible United Nations presence on
the ground, including in remote areas; cooperation
with non-governmental organizations to develop an
early-warning network; and partnership with judicial
authorities so that the criminals arrested by Blue
Helmets are brought to justice.
The third condition is the necessary political will
of the countries concerned and of the international
community to resolve the root causes of conflicts and
to ensure inclusive and lasting political solutions. The
violence in the Kivus will not cease as long as the armed
groups responsible for it benefit from support in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in neighbouring
countries. Crimes in South Sudan will continue if we do
not put pressure on the belligerents. The Blue Helmets
in the Sudan will not be able to assist civilians as long
as the Government continues to obstruct their work.
In this collective effort, France has played, and
will continue to play, its part. Our main commitment
is to continue to tirelessly push for early action by
the Security Council whenever there is a risk of mass
atrocities. That is the whole meaning of our initiative
with Mexico, but also with that of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group, to which we
have subscribed, on restricting the use of the veto
whenever civilians face crimes that shock the universal
conscience. When States no longer play their role,
the United Nations has the responsibility to protect
civilians, and it must fully assume that responsibility.
We must therefore act collectively.
That is why we will continue to seek stronger action
by the Security Council to end the horrific war waged
by the Syrian regime against its own people. That is why
we will continue to work for the deployment of a credible
police presence in Burundi. All that is with one thing
in mind: we must not repeat the mistakes of the past.
As announced by the President of the French Republic
from the podium of the General Assembly in September
(see A/70/PV.13), the use of the veto must be suspended
in cases of mass atrocities. It is our responsibility as
8/94

10/06/2016

a permanent member of the Council. More than half
of Member States have already given their support to
that initiative and, as far as we are concerned, we will
implement it unilaterally. In February 2017 in Paris, a
ministerial conference on the protection of children in
armed conflict will be organized. Finally, violations
of international humanitarian law in Syria, Yemen,
South Sudan, the Sudan and elsewhere must always be
condemned. The fight against impunity is essential and
must include unwavering support to the International
Criminal Court so that the perpetrators of those crimes
are held accountable.
Our second commitment is to defend a robust
stance in peacekeeping in the service of people. The
Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians are
guidelines and provide a useful direction. France
has decided to apply them, in compliance with its
international obligations, including the Charter of the
United Nations.
Our third commitment is to give the United Nations
the means to achieve its ambitious objectives in the
protection of civilians. France is one of the principal
contributors to the budget of peacekeeping operations.
With nearly 900 Blue Helmets deployed around the
world, it is the second-largest troop contributor among
the permanent members of the Security Council. In
addition, several thousand French soldiers are deployed
in a national capacity and provide daily support to
peacekeeping operations. France, through me, is
committed to maintaining its participation. It is our
duty as a permanent member.
We also support the modernization of operations
equipment, particularly in the area of intelligence. We
encourage our partners to commit to peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, I welcome the fact that,
beyond the usual troop-contributing countries, Europe
is back in full force, as is Canada.
We are committed to training 20,000 African
soldiers a year. I wish to announce that, in Paris this
autumn, we will organize a ministerial meeting on
peacekeeping in francophone countries. Our goal is to
secure concrete pledges for the provision and training of
personnel serving in francophone countries. Training is
fundamental before the deployment of troops. It is the
best way to prevent conduct that is contrary to the noble
mission of Blue Helmets.
Our fourth commitment is to work for zero
tolerance in United Nations-mandated operations.
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7711

Whenever necessary, we must refer to justice systems
allegations of violence committed by soldiers engaged
in peacekeeping operations. We will apply that rule
to our own forces, as we already do. Our soldiers
also receive systematic training on respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law prior to any
deployment in the field.

very timely, and one that brings us together less than a
month after the World Humanitarian Summit, held in
Istanbul. I would also like to thank and congratulate
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his important
briefing, as well as Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, for his own
excellent briefing.

Finally, we provide support to the Special
Coordinator on Improving United Nations Response
to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse, through a financial
contribution and the provision of a senior officer.

The holding of a ministerial meeting of the Security
Council on the protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations gives us an opportunity to take stock of
the actions undertaken in that area, and in particular
to deepen our reflection on the challenges before the
United Nations in general, and the Security Council in
particular, in terms of implementing the mandates of
peacekeeping operations.

The example of the Central African Republic shows
us how the United Nations can promote the prevention of
mass atrocities when the Security Council stands united.
We must pursue this path, while also strengthening the
existing peacekeeping operations and making every
effort to ensure that civilians are no longer by far the
largest group of war victims throughout the world.
To denounce and to act; to denounce for acting — that
is our collective responsibility so as to live up to the
ideals that have inspired the Charter of the United
Nations. That is what we owe to the soldiers who, on the
ground and at peril to their lives, keep these ideals alive
wherever tragedy forces them to intervene. The Council
can count on France to fully assume its responsibilities.
I now resume my functions as President of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and of Senegalese Abroad of the Republic of Senegal.
Mr. Ndiaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): I want to
congratulate you personally, Sir, and the French Republic
on its presidency of the Council of the month of June
and for organizing this extremely important debate.
France, we must stress, has always stood firmly
by our side in the quest for and the construction and
consolidation of peace in Africa. Without France,
entire countries today would be in much more difficult
situations. I am thinking in particular of Mali and the
Central African Republic. In that connection, I welcome
the presence here of the President of the Central African
Republic, Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera.
I would like to say how pleased I am to take
part today in this discussion, which focuses on the
protection of civilians in the context of peacekeeping
operations. That is a topic that is both important and

We have all seen that, in various conflicts across
the world, in particular in Africa, armed conflicts have
always been characterized by the indiscriminate use
of violence and the high number of civilian casualties,
among which, unfortunately, the majority are children
and women. The gloomy picture painted in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2016/447) on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, as well as the current
humanitarian disasters around the world, remind us of a
reality that bears repeating: the majority of the victims
in armed conflict are civilians.
Allow me to express the great interest that Senegal
attaches to the protection of civilians in the framework
of peacekeeping operations. The commitment of my
country to peacekeeping operations is intrinsically
linked to the protection of civilians, and is further
bolstered by the various international instruments
on international humanitarian law, inter alia, the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their multilateral
protocols relating to human rights, not to mention the
various African legal instruments, in particular the
Organization of African Unity Convention governing
the specific aspects of refugee problems in Africa
of 1969.
Concern for the protection of civilians remains a
major priority for Senegal in peacekeeping operations.
I would like to recall that my country signed the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians and, long
ago, took a number of measures aimed at ensuring the
protection of civilians. In that regard, the Senegalese
armed forces, in particular contingents that are
preparing for peacekeeping operations, have benefited
from initial training and ongoing training in the legal

16-166779/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

aspects of conflicts with a view to better acquainting
them with international humanitarian law and human
rights issues in order to ensure better respect for the
obligations that are incumbent on them.
In saying that, I would like to recall the courage
demonstrated by Captain Mbaye Diagne of Senegal, who
sacrificed his life to save civilians during the genocide
in Rwanda. It is commendable that the Security Council,
in resolution 2154 (2014), enshrined his memory in
the glorious pages of its history by establishing, on
8 May 2014, the “aptain Mbaye Diagne Medal for
Exceptional Bravery to honour military, police and
civilian personnel of the United Nations and associated
personnel who demonstrate exceptional courage in the
service of humankind and the United Nations.
Furthermore, it is important to underscore the need
to strengthen mobilization aimed at protecting civilians
in armed conflicts. It is true that States have the primary
responsibility to protect civilians, but it is also true
that the United Nations, through the Security Council,
has an essential role to play. To do that, it is important
to strengthen the culture of preventing violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights, in all
its forms, and to combat impunity for the perpetrators
of such violations.
Senegal is firmly convinced that progress in
peacekeeping operations in the protection of civilians
needs to be measured against the way that the current
threats to peace and international security have evolved.
The new threats are terrorism and violent extremism,
which require us to adapt radically so as to deal with
them. In addition to peacekeeping and the maintenance
of security, today’s mission activities include various
components, such as economic and humanitarian
assistance, the protection of human rights, assistance to
internally displaced persons and refugees, involvement
in political processes, reforming justice systems, the
training of police forces, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants, demining,
peacebuilding and much more.
The police component of peacekeeping operations,
which was initially supposed to monitor, observe and
report, is today called upon to play a more important
role in the implementation of the new peacekeeping
operation mandates established by the Security Council.
Current missions go beyond the strict security
framework of peacekeeping operations and are being
transformed into peacebuilding and protection-of10/94

10/06/2016

civilians missions, which requires enhanced synergy
between the military, police and civilian components.
We need to work more on that point.
At this stage, I would like to mention the reform of
peacekeeping operations, which is necessary. We need
to continue that process, even accelerate it, in order
to better adapt peacekeeping operations to the most
urgent present and future needs. The recommendations
made by senior officials in their various reports, as
well as those adopted by the General Assembly, include
very ambitious measures, such as the modernization
of troop equipment and increased financial support.
The effective implementation of those measures should
enable peacekeeping operations to enter a new phase in
achieving their missions, thanks to an ongoing dialogue,
inter alia on defining the contents of mandates and the
roles to be played by the various stakeholders, including
troop-contributing countries such as ours, donors and
the United Nations.
Senegal is honoured to be the seventh largest
troop- and police-contributing country in the world,
the third in Africa and the first in West Africa, with
approximately 3,769 men and women serving in seven
peacekeeping operations. My country is also the first
global contributor of police forces to peacekeeping
operations. Our experience has shown that, in order
to be effective, peacekeeping operations must not only
be based on clear mandates, but also need to have the
requisite financial resources and adequate equipment.
In Mali, for example, we think, like other member
States of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), which met in Dakar on 4 June, that
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali needs to be
more robust, with equipment that is adapted to the
threats and murderous terrorist attacks directed against
the troops almost daily, as well as with strengthened
capacity in logistics and troops.
I would like to emphasize the importance of
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations, such as
the African Union and ECOWAS, in the framework
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
which is devoted to regional agreements. That
cooperation needs to be strengthened and intensified in
order to provide greater support to regional economic
communities. In the same vein, I would advocate for
greater support by the international community to
the African Peace and Security Architecture, so that
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Africans can better manage the conflicts that take place
in Africa.
The Security Council adopted resolutions 1265
(1999) and 1894 (2009), through which it established the
protection of civilians as a top priority and expressed its
determination to deal with situations in which serious
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights are committed. The Security Council must do
more in the face of those challenges. In the same spirit, it
is important to take into account resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security, and the involvement
of women in conflict prevention and the management
and resolution of conflicts. It is also important to
implement resolution 2282 (2016), on post-conflict
peacebuilding, which the Council adopted on 27 April.
One month earlier, on 11 March, the Council adopted
resolution 2272 (2016), which aims to prevent sexual
abuse and exploitation by peacekeeping mission staff.
In that regard, it is important to note that His Excellency
Mr. Macky Sall, President of the Republic of Senegal,
is a co-sponsor of the International Campaign to Stop
Rape and Gender Violence in Conflict.
Senegal, as the Chair of the Security Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations, has
launched a reflection on two important topics, namely,
the use of technology in peacekeeping operations and
cooperation among the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union. In that
context, we also plan to hold a thematic debate on the
protection of civilians by focusing on the links between
various political strategies.
Senegal is also thinking very seriously about the
length of service of contingents, which sometimes
puts men and women in pecaekeeping operations in
situations that are very difficult to bear. We believe that
contingents should be relieved more frequently.
In conclusion, I would like to once again express
to you, Mr. President, and to France our warm
congratulations and gratitude for the initiative of
holding today’s important ministerial debate. Through
me, Senegal would like to reiterate its commitment to
continuing to contribute to the protection of civilians
in peacekeeping operations around the world, with
the hope that these operations have sufficient and
appropriate resources and that their mandates are
sufficiently clear and robust, as necessary, for them to
perform tasks that have become increasingly complex
and dangerous.

S/PV.7711

Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Minister Ayrault for being here with us to provide over
today’s debate. His presence is an affirmation of the
importance that France attaches to protecting civilians,
as evidenced in recent years by President Hollande’s
decision to send French forces to Mali and to the Central
African Republic in the hour of their greatest need.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing and for his sustained efforts in pushing
Member States and United Nations officials to protect
the vulnerable. We are grateful to the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
Mr. Peter Maurer, for his briefing today and for the
valiant efforts of the ICRC staff every single day to
provide vital assistance to people in dire circumstances.
Let me last welcome President Touadera, whose
inauguration I had the honour of attending and whose
commitment to making a clean break from the past is a
much-needed change in the Central African Republic,
a country that knows too well the human consequences
when civilians are attacked and when those who can
help them stand by. I was most moved at President
Touadera’s inauguration by his decision to have on
stage with him the 19 opponents who had run against
him in the election. That was a very moving gesture
of reconciliation and one I am not sure many of our
countries would be able to muster in our politics.
Today’s meeting comes a critically important time,
as recent news has cast light both on the serious risks
peacekeepers continue to take with so little fanfare to
fulfil their mandates in some of the most dangerous
parts of the world and, unfortunately, on the horrific
consequences when peacekeepers violate the trust
placed in them to protect innocent people in those
same vulnerable circumstances. On 29 May, five
Togolese peacekeepers serving in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali were killed and one was wounded when their
convoy was ambushed by terrorists in Mali’s Mopti
region. Two days later, a Chinese peacekeeper was
killed and others injured when the camp where they
were stationed in Gao was attacked. And, as we all saw
just yesterday, terrorists reportedly killed and wounded
many Ethiopian troops in a massive coordinated attack
on an African Union Mission in Somalia base in the
town of Halgan, Somalia.
I would like to express sincere condolences on
behalf of the American people and the United States

16-1667711/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Government to the people of Togo, China and Ethiopia,
and in particular to the families of the victims for their
immeasurable loss. I would also like to convey our
collective gratitude for their honourable service.
At the same time, we have seen other reports in
recent days on the alleged extrajudicial execution of
civilians in the Central African Republic by soldiers
serving in the African Union-led peacekeeping
mission in March 2014. The discoveries underscore
the need for the Republic of the Congo, from where
the peacekeepers alleged to have been involved in this
incident have hailed, to ensure that the investigations
and judicial proceedings under way are thorough and
impartial, and to ensure that if any soldiers are found
responsible they are held accountable. Again, we must
treat these crimes as if they were crimes committed
against our own people and act with equal vigilance
and urgency. In this context, I would like to focus my
remarks today on three ways the Security Council can
help address chronic shortcomings when it comes to
civilian protection in peacekeeping.
The first, reporting, should be easy. We strongly
support the Secretary-General’s demand in the
report he released last month that “[a]ny failure by
peacekeepers to act or follow orders will be brought
to the attention of the Security Council” (S/2016/447,
para. 58). However, we all know that such failures
are rarely reported to the Council in a timely manner.
More often, reports take many months to emerge if they
emerge at all. To give just one example, a report by the
United Nations Office of Internal Oversight Services in
2014 found that, in 507 attacks against civilians from
2010 to 2013, peacekeepers virtually never used force
to protect those coming under attack, likely resulting
in the deaths of thousands of civilians. And yet those
same investigators could not find a single case — not
one — in which the failure of a peacekeeping unit to
execute the order of a force commander was conveyed
to the Security Council, or even included in the
mission’s situation reports that are regularly sent to
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. This is
not a functional system, nor is it a system acting in
accordance with the will expressed by the SecretaryGeneral or in appropriate response to the necessity for
the Security Council to know what is happening in
the field in missions that we have mandated and that
we must take responsibility to try to strengthen. This
situation must change, and we collectively have to be
the ones to make it change.
12/94

10/06/2016

Reporting is critical both for accountability and
for bringing to the surface problems that have to be
solved to make the collective enterprise more effective.
Without reporting, impunity persists and bad practices
become more common. Civilians are the ones who get
hurt. When, on the other hand, a problem is reported to
the Council, that is not a panacea, but we at least have
a shot at using the bilateral and multilateral tools in our
toolkit to address it.
Regular reporting can also help the Council rightsize missions, taking into account the performance of
peacekeepers on the ground, while allowing Council
members’ international capacity to offer targeted
training and equipment to address the challenges the
troop-contributing countries face. When appropriate,
it also allows the Secretary-General to repatriate
contingents that prove unwilling to protect civilians
or that fail to investigate allegations of abuse or hold
perpetrators accountable.
To cite just one example, of why reporting matters,
take the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in the Sudan, where
the Government of the Sudan continues to block vital
equipment and supplies from reaching peacekeepers.
As of Tuesday, 7 June, peacekeepers at Port Sudan only
had 20 days worth of food remaining. Meanwhile, in
southern Darfur, an entire battalion has been prevented
from receiving personal weapons. Without such basic
supplies, peacekeepers cannot even be expected to
protect themselves, never mind to protect civilians who
count on them. Yet word of the Sudanese Government’s
latest obstruction took longer than it should have to
reach the Security Council. Now that these reports have
reached us, the Council must do much more to demand
that the Government of the Sudan comply with its
obligations under the Status of Forces Agreement with
the United Nations and that the Government respect
UNAMID’s freedom of movement.
The Council’s inability to address this issue over
the course of the past year is a shameful failure and a
breach of our responsibility to the troops that we deploy
who risk so much to advance peace in profoundly
hostile environments. Some participants today were
at the meeting of the troop- and police-contributing
countries yesterday in which we heard first hand about
what those troops are going through not being able to
access food and basic supplies (see S/PV.7709). It is an
embarrassment to the Council that we cannot make a
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

collective demand on the Government to let that food
reach those peacekeepers.
The second way the Council can improve protection
of civilians is through improving the way it plans and
adapts missions to conditions on the ground. Fulfilling
our responsibility to protect civilians demands
anticipating and preempting threats that analysis
suggests are likely to emerge. This has to have not only
at the planning stage for missions but also at regular
intervals for as long as the mission is deployed, in order
to respond kinetic and evolving circumstances in real
time. This is basic common sense and yet as we all
know it is far too rare.
Thirdly, and finally we must get better at matching
the will and capacity of troop-contributing countries
with mandates. Let us be honest: this was hard to do in
the past, due to the scant supply of troops and police. But
the nearly 50,000 additional troops and police pledged
at last September’s peacekeeping summit and in the
days that followed were a game-changer, allowing us
and the United Nations system to help ensure a better
fit between what missions demand and what troops
and police from a given country are willing and able to
do. Troop- and police-contributing countries that have
qualms about the mandates or that doubt their capacity
to do what is asked of them should no longer deploy to
missions simply because nobody else will. And neither
the United Nations nor the Council should feel forced
to leave in place Blue Helmets who are unwilling or
unable to do what is asked of them.
Here I agree with the Minister that the Kigali
Principles can be extremely helpful in aligning the
will and capacity of contributors with the demands of
respective missions. The Principles are designed to
provide a concrete blueprint for shaping the practice
of peacekeepers in volatile situations, particularly with
respect to the theme of this meeting: the protection
of civilians.
To give just one example, the Principles call for
troop-contributing countries to empower the military
commander of a peacekeeping contingent to make
decisions on whether to use force to protect civilians,
because experience has taught us that if a commander
has to wait hours for guidance it may mean not being
able to react in time to repel a fast-approaching attack
on a nearby village. If properly implemented, the
Principles can make peacekeeping missions more
effective, improve security and save lives.

S/PV.7711

At present, 29 countries, including the United
States, Senegal — as we heard — Uruguay and France,
have announced support for the Kigali Principles,
accounting for more than 40,000 troops and police
currently serving in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. That is over one third of the uniformed
personnel on the ground right now. We encourage all
troop-contributing countries to make these Principles
their own, as we believe they are indispensable to
effective peacekeeping in the twenty-first century.
Given the real-life implications of the Principles
and what they suggest about a country’s willingness
to protect civilians under threat, we urge the United
Nations to attach considerable weight to a country’s
commitment to implementing the Kigali Principles
when it is selecting units for peacekeeping operations,
particularly those operations deployed to volatile
environments with civilian protection mandates.
In February of this year, armed men attacked a
United Nations protection-of-civilians site in Malakal,
South Sudan, where nearly 50,000 civilians were
seeking protection and shelter from the country’s civil
conflict. At least 19 people were killed and more than
100 were wounded. Thousands more people who had
been living in the camp fled and chose not to return,
deciding that they felt safer outside the gates than under
United Nations protection. The day after the attack,
one resident told a reporter: “I saw the United Nations
soldiers run away. What happens next time? I do not
know. I saw many people die.” Soon after the attack,
the United Nations took the initiative to set up a board
of inquiry, which will brief the Council on its findings
in a few weeks, findings that will be useful not only
for ensuring that there is accountability — if, indeed,
peacekeepers fail to protect civilians — but also to learn
what the Council can do to prevent the next Malakal.
While the horrors of that attack will leave an
indelible mark on the victims and their families, actions
like these could ensure that the more than 170,000 people
who continue to live in camps under the protection of
peacekeepers in South Sudan are more secure. Reporting
that is regular, rigorous and transparent, planning
that anticipates threats and is constantly adapting to
evolving conditions on the ground, and deployments
that ensure that the peacekeepers who serve in the most
dangerous situations have the capacity and the will to
protect civilians — these are steps that, if implemented,
will not only make peacekeeping more effective, but
will save countless lives.

16-1667713/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine) (spoke in French): At
the outset I wish to thank the French presidency of the
Council for this timely initiative and the opportunity to
have a fruitful discussion on such an important aspect
of peacekeeping as the protection of civilians.
Ukraine, as an active troop-contributing country
and a country where an armed conflict directed from
outside is raging, views the issue of protection of civilians
as the most important task of peacekeeping operations.
Civilians continue to constitute the vast majority
of casualties in situations of armed conflict worldwide.
Each day civilians are killed or wounded, often with
absolute impunity. Sexual violence destroys the lives
of women and girls and young men. Artillery shelling
and air strikes destroy vital infrastructure and unleash
massive displacement. Families are separated, entire
communities are torn apart and generations of children
grow up without enjoying the right to education. It is
disturbing that nearly 60 million people worldwide
have been forced to leave their homes because of
conflict, violence and persecution. Among them are
nearly 20 million refugees, over half of whom are
under 18 years of age. Humanitarian needs are at
record levels and more than 80 per cent of the United
Nations humanitarian funding is directed at conflict
response. The fate of civilians in conflict remains
extremely worrying, and much more needs to be done
for their protection.
According to the outcomes of the three most
recent comprehensive reviews of peace operations, the
peacebuilding architecture and the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), the United Nations nowadays
has to play a proactive role to prevent the outbreak,
resurgence or continuing of armed conflict. Therefore,
preventive diplomacy represents an important but
underused tool that the Council should deploy more
actively to ensure that peace is maintained. This tool
should be brought in as soon as possible when a conflict
is emerging. For instance, we see the need to expand the
Council’s highly positive experience in the framework
of visiting missions this year in Africa to all parts
of the world where situations warrant the Council’s
involvement on the ground.
14/94

10/06/2016

(spoke in English)
While Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the European Union delegation, I would
like to make a few remarks in my national capacity.
As a non-permanent member of the Council, Ukraine
knows at first hand that sometimes the Security Council
cannot react promptly to threats to a civilian population
because the absence of a host country’s consent stands
in the way of the rapid deployment of a peacekeeping
mission. However, it is hard to explain the Council’s
inaction in response to a direct request to host a United
Nations mission, whose presence on the ground would
provide additional protection to civilians and contribute
to stopping the violence.
Our calls for Council action on such a request from
Ukraine — where the civilian population continues to
suffer from foreign military aggression — were not
heeded. Russian-led illegal armed groups, with direct
support of the Russian regular military forces, continue
to wage war in certain areas of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions of Ukraine, with dire consequences
for civilians residing there. According to reports on the
situation in Ukraine by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR),
civilians have paid the greatest price for this conflict.
Since 2014, OHCHR recorded more than 9,000 people
killed and more than 21,000 injured in the conflict area
in eastern Ukraine. Up to 2,000 civilians have been
killed in armed hostilities, mostly as a result of the
indiscriminate shelling of populated areas from various
artillery systems.
In a situation where the Council finds itself blocked
from discharging its direct responsibilities, Ukraine
is compelled to use other possibilities at the regional
level to establish an international armed presence in
the occupied territories in order to protect civilians and
ensure full implementation of the Minsk Agreements.
I would like to use this forum to call on the occupying
Power to implement the respective provisions of the
Minsk Agreements.
Just a few weeks ago, we marked the International
Day of United Nations Peacekeepers. I would like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute to all of the Blue
Helmets who are risking their lives to bring peace
and stability to people in different parts of the world.
Since its inception, United Nations peace operations
have proved to be an adaptive instrument and flagship
activity of our Organization.
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The protection of civilians has become an obvious
objective for United Nations peacekeeping operations,
and the success of a peacekeeping mission is often
judged by its ability to protect civilians. Ukraine is
a State contributor to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, has recognized the Kigali Principles
and again committed itself to the policy that the
protection of civilians is an overarching goal of United
Nations peacekeeping.
We strongly believe that the peacekeeping
operations authorized by the Security Council have
to be provided with robust mandates for civilian
protection. Any uniformed personnel who witnesses
violence against civilians should not hesitate to do
everything possible to stop it is. We should the view
that the United Nations should build and enhance its
strategic partnership with regional organizations and
work alongside them, sharing its unique experience
in peacekeeping activities. We welcome the close
cooperation and partnership of the United Nations with
the European Union and the African Union.
As we can clearly see from the Council’s interaction
last month with the African Union (see S/PV.7694),
these regional organizations have their own vision and
approach to the issues of regional peace and security. The
African Union has also become one of the key partners
of the United Nations in conducting peace operations
on the African continent. We share the view that the
common purpose between the United Nations and the
African Union should be established throughout the
whole process of peacekeeping activity, with protection
of civilians as an integral part of these efforts. We see
potential in establishing closer interaction between
the United Nations and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). In that regard,
we would welcome United Nations initiatives aimed
at contributing to the peace activities of the OSCE on
the ground, especially when regional organizations’
missions are displayed in an insecure environment.
It is a generally recognized approach that those
responsible for war crimes, violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human
rights are to be held accountable. Therefore, a peace
achieved by parties to a conflict should not in any way
mean impunity for perpetrators of atrocities against
the civilian population. All victims of crime deserve
justice and nothing less.

S/PV.7711

The President (spoke in French): I now give the floor
to the Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like at the outset to thank the French presidency
for having organized this very timely debate, and
I hope that this meeting will provide elements that
will make it possible to renew the commitment to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and strengthen
the instruments available to peace operations to carry
out this task.
I will focus on the specific aim of this debate, but
first I should like to point out that the task of protecting
civilians through United Nations peacekeeping
operations represents the top of a pyramid whose base
must include efforts to address the structural causes
of conflict and to strengthen the institutions and tools
necessary to achieve a sustainable peace.
In any case, no political, economic or other type of
consideration should supersede the human dimension of
international action. It is a legal and ethical imperative
to protect vulnerable people and those who are most
exposed to violence, exploitation, discrimination
and the deprivation of their rights. This imperative
underpins the responsibility of the United Nations to do
everything in its power to protect civilians. That is why
the protection of civilians must be the cornerstone of the
mandates and resources allocated to peace operations.
This is also crucial for the legitimacy and credibility of
the entire United Nations system.
In this connection, Uruguay deems it crucial that
we be capable of assessing the current state of this
contribution and work to adapt the capabilities of the
United Nations peacekeeping system to new challenges.
First, it is crucial to understand that protecting
civilians is a multidimensional task that includes many
players and that does not mean only the use of force
as a response to the imminent danger of violence.
The protection of civilians is much more than rules
of engagement.
In that respect, we believe that it is crucial that we
strengthen non-armed strategies, which have a great
potential. From our experience on the ground, we can
conclude that the ability of peacekeepers to carry out
protection tasks depends largely on their ability to
gain the trust of the local population. The creation of
confidence-building mechanisms is crucial in order to
comply with the mandate to protect civilians, because

16-1667715/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

it makes it possible to involve the local population in
the work of the mission and provides access to larger
information networks, which, in many cases, makes
it possible to prevent crimes from being committed
against civilians.
Likewise, I would point out the importance of
forging communication networks with local populations
through various early-warning mechanisms. By way of
example, I would point out the early-warning network
established by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo through the distribution of cell phones
to members of the local population, thus fostering
direct contact in a context where there are few means
of communication.
The development of a climate of tolerance and
understanding through recreational activities, including
mixed activities, among communities in conflict, such
as the Uruguayan contingent has promoted in the
town of Pinga, in North Kivu, can help to improve the
relationship between troops and civil society, which
leads to positive results in terms of establishing an
environment conducive to peace.
It is undeniable that beyond these experiences
of cooperation, early warning and direct links, as I
mentioned earlier, there are extreme situations that
require physical protection measures for which the
troops that are deployed must be mentally prepared and
appropriately equipped and trained. As was pointed
out in the Ramos-Horta report in relation to the basic
principles of peacekeeping operations, although they
were still valid they should in no case be used as an
excuse to not protect civilians.
In this respect, we reaffirm Uruguay’s full
commitment to the protection of civilians through
peacekeeping operations. That is why our country
has adhered to the Kigali Principles, reaffirmed the
importance of strengthening pre-deployment training,
and encourages the consideration and implementation
of the recommendations emanating from the RamosHorta report, such as the establishment of sequential
mandates. We also support resolution 2272 (2016).
United Nations personnel at the very minimum must
not undermine the trust placed in them by the civilian
population, nor should they exploit the vulnerability of
those whom they are supposed to be protecting.
We reject the impunity that continues to be enjoyed
by the perpetrators of deplorable acts of violence and
16/94

10/06/2016

remain convinced of the importance of the Security
Council strengthening its cooperation with the
International Criminal Court.
In this connection, we believe that we should assess
the role of peacekeeping operations in this framework,
for example, when it comes to collecting evidence.
We highlight the importance of developing a record
of victims of mass attacks, both to help in attributing
responsibility and also to prevent future atrocities.
In 2008, the General Assembly was able to reach
consensus on the use of the term “protection of
civilians” as applied to peacekeeping missions. Today,
eight years later, much progress has been made, but
we are aware that the road ahead is long and fraught
with difficulties. Let us therefore walk it together, like
a mother in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
who recently walked more than five hours through the
jungle to give away one pineapple to our contingent at
the Kimua base to save the life of her son.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Spain.
Mr. Ybáñez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I want first
to thank France, through Foreign Minister Ayrault, for
organizing this open debate that is also the first after
the publication of the annual report of the SecretaryGeneral on the protection of civilians (S/2016/447). The
report confirms once again that civilians are the main
victims of armed conflict in the twenty-first century.
The recent World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul
has allowed us to affirm the importance of complying
with international humanitarian law. Conduct in
hostilities is subject to a number of rules that cannot
and should not be violated with impunity. I refer to the
use of explosives in densely populated areas, barrel
bombs and cluster munitions, among others.
Spain is particularly concerned about the
growing trend of direct attacks on doctors and
hospitals. The recent adoption of resolution 2286
(2016) — sponsored by Egypt, Japan, New Zealand,
Spain and Uruguay — has allowed us to further address
this issue in the Security Council, but it is only a first
step. Reversing this trend will require a coordinated
effort of the Council, the Assembly and the Secretariat,
in coordination with specialized organizations such
as the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Médecins Sans Frontières.
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Ensuring humanitarian access has become,
unfortunately, the new task to be addressed in
various theaters of conflict, most notably in Syria,
where hundreds of thousands of civilians are trapped
in besieged or inaccessible areas. International
humanitarian law is very clear that parties to conflict
have a responsibility to ensure safe, free and ongoing
access to the civilian population. Their failure to do so
may constitute a war crime.
Before turning to the peacekeeping operations,
the main subject of this open debate, I wish to refer
to the protection of journalists in armed conflict. We
are currently witnessing a growing threat to freedom of
expression, which plays a key role in conflict prevention
and the denunciation of war crimes. Spain therefore
supports the creation of a post of special representative
for this matter.
As the report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) notes, when a
peacekeeping operation is deployed with a mandate to
protect civilians, it must do everything in its power to
protect threatened civilians, and non-military strategies
should be at the forefront of that effort. Peace operations
should be conceived as political instruments, and the
best way they can protect civilians is to help to end
conflicts by supporting peace processes, promoting trust
between the parties, reporting to ensure accountability,
and generally using their political influence.
People are the victims of conflicts and must be
at the heart of our task in the search for peace. This
requires recognizing the centrality of political solutions
and ultimately prioritizing prevention and mediation to
the utmost as essential tools in finding such solutions,
without which there can be no peacekeeping in our
time. This is particularly clear in the case of protection
of civilians mandates, because without progress in the
political settlement of conflicts it is very difficult for a
mission to effectively ensure the necessary protection
to civilians, as the reality on the ground shows in too
many instances.
Of course, recognizing the centrality of political
solutions does not mean that we can avoid paying urgent
attention to the operational aspects of the protection
of civilians. I will return to this point, but I want to
emphasize that my country welcomes the general
direction of our efforts in the context of the review
of peace operations, including in such crucial as the
protection of civilians. Not surprisingly, mediation and

S/PV.7711

conflict prevention are two of the priorities of Spain’s
foreign policy, as is the protection of civilians. We are
sincerely convinced that the review of peace operations
is therefore heading in the correct direction.
Conflict prevention is closely linked to women
and peace and security agenda, to which Spain is also
particularly committed. My country led the review
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, and is now working to put it into practice.
Last October, the Security Council held an open debate
(S/PV.7533) with a record number of speakers, at which
it unanimously adopted resolution 2242 (2015). The big
challenge now is to move from rhetoric to fulfilling our
commitments in deed. Spain continues to work in that
direction. Among other measures, alongside the United
Kingdom it has headed the creation of an informal
group of experts of the Security Council on women,
peace and security, which we want to become a key tool
for integrating gender issues into the discussions of the
Council on the situation the countries on its agenda.
Naturally, the women and peace and security agenda
is not relevant solely to the protection of civilians, given
its aspects related to conflict prevention. Unfortunately,
women and children are the primary victims in conflict,
and as such are the first in line in need of protection. In
that sense, I would stress the importance of deploying
protection of women advisers in all United Nations
missions. The same is true of child protection advisers.
Protection mandates should also continue to enjoy
support at the highest level to fulfil their essential task
of ensuring effective and consistent protection.
Spain also wishes to support the proposal, made by
Foreign Minister Ayrault in his statement, to strengthen
protection of civilians mandates, focusing on combating
human trafficking.
(spoke in French)
As a Francophile, if not Francophone country, we
also welcome the organization by France of a ministerial
meeting on peacekeeping in Franchophone countries,
to be held in Paris in the autumn.
(spoke in Spanish)
As I mentioned earlier, recognizing the centrality
of political solutions does not mean that we can avoid
paying urgent attention to the operational aspects
of the protection of civilians. We must redouble our
efforts to improve the planning and capabilities of
peace operations.

16-1667717/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

First, if we want the operations to be effective in
the protection of civilians, it is essential to improve
their design, with clear mandates on the content of such
protection. If we wish to create mandates that are clear,
phased and properly adapted to the reality on the ground
we must also improve information. In this sense, Spain
supports the development of the new United Nations
intelligence policy framework.
Secondly, as noted in the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations, we must close
the gap between means and ends that is found often in
the mandates of operations — a gap that has especially
severe consequences in the case of the protection of
civilians. It is imperative to equip our Blue Helmets
with the assets and capabilities necessary to fulfil
the missions we assign them, as well as with clear
rules of engagement, and to make efficient use of the
possibilities offered by new technologies.
Thirdly, we must redouble our efforts in training,
both general and specific, on the implementation of
mandates and force generation, and ensure that we have
the best possible mission leadership.

10/06/2016

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Parliamentary Vice-Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Japan.
Mr. Hamachi (Japan): Japan highly appreciates the
French initiative to afford us this opportunity to discuss
this topic frankly at an open debate of the Security
Council. My appreciation also goes out to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, Mr. Peter Maurer and Mr. Faustin
Archange Touadera for their insightful briefings.
The protection of civilians is now one of the
most important mandates given to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. However, there is a persistent
gap between the mandates conferred by the Security
Council and their implementation in the field. Japan
commends the various efforts by the United Nations
to address that issue. They include the development
of guidelines and training programmes aimed at
enhancing the implementation of mandates on the
ground by promoting a common understanding on
concrete actions in the field.

I cannot fail to mention the absolute need to
eradicate sexual abuse and exploitation. It is intolerable
for those responsible for ensuring the protection of
civilians to also be the same who assault them in the
most humiliating way. We must move from a zerotolerance policy to a reality where this scourge no
longer exists.

The protection of civilians should be undertaken by
the entire mission, including not only military but also
police and civilian personnel. On the one hand, physical
protection with the use of force is necessary when the
need for protection is most imminent. On the other
hand, preventive efforts against attacks on civilians
are equally important. In addition, improving access
to humanitarian aid and creating safe environments
for refugees and internally displaced persons are also
important components of the protection of civilians.
For example, Japan’s engineering unit deployed in the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan contributes to
the implementation of its mandate through engineering
activities, such as setting up protection-of-civilians
sites and undertaking road maintenance and repair.

Finally, I recall that sovereignty not only gives a
State the right to control its own affairs, but also confers
the primary responsibility to protect the population
within its borders. We cannot remain indifferent to the
suffering of thousands of the world’s citizens. In the face
of their pain, inaction is not an option. Peacekeeping
operations with a mandate to protect civilians are
the best tool we have to strengthen the necessary
implementation of the responsibility to protect. I refer
specifically to its second pillar, that is, providing States
with the crucial assistance they need to meet their
primary responsibility for protecting their populations.

Japan shares the recognition that capacitybuilding for personnel is essential for the effective
implementation of the protection-of-civilians mandate.
To that end, Japan has provided financial support
to the United Nations training-the-trainers course
on the protection of civilians, in which Japanese
trainers also participate. Furthermore, Japan assists
in the development of training materials for women’s
protection advisers in missions, who play a critical
role in protecting women. Finally, Japan also supports
the development of an e-learning programme on the
prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse that targets

Fourthly, we must ensure that there is effective
dialogue among the Security Council, the troopcontributing countries and the Secretariat. We should
also be able to have better information by developing
strategic communication from the earliest stages
of a mission’s establishment and right through its
conclusion.

18/94

16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

all categories of field personnel, including military,
police and civilian.
I would like to recall that the primary responsibility
for the protection of civilians rests with the host country.
In addition, harassment against civilians by the host
country is unacceptable. Against that backdrop, it is
crucial to clarify and promote understanding among
local communities of what the United Nations can
and cannot do. With a view to achieving the future
departure of a United Nations peacekeeping operation,
it is imperative to foster ownership on the part of the
host country and to support its capacity-building. In
that regard, institution-building, including securitysector reform, is essential. An open debate will be held
next month under the Japanese presidency on the topic
of peacebuilding in Africa, with a particular focus on
institution-building. We hope to carry over the results
of today’s fruitful debate to our open debate in July.
The international community is watching closely
to see whether peacekeeping operations can effectively
implement the protection of civilians, as well as what
the Security Council can do in that regard. I would
like to conclude my remarks by promising the Security
Council that Japan will continue to apply its expertise
and capacities to contribute to the protection of
civilians, both here in the Council and on the ground.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the initiative of France to hold today’s open
debate on the protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations. We welcome Foreign Minister Ayrault’s
presence in New York to preside over the meeting. We
also welcome His Excellency Mr. Faustin Archange
Touadera, President of the Central African Republic.
We also thank His Excellency Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing. And we listened attentively
to the briefing by Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali suffered terrorist bomb
attacks on 31 May, in which the young Chinese
peacekeeper Sheng Liangliang unfortunately lost his
life. He had devoted his precious life to the cause of
peace. His body returned to his home country yesterday,
where he will forever rest in the soil of his fatherland.
Nevertheless, China’s commitment to the
peacekeeping cause is unflinching, and our support for
United Nations peacekeeping operations will remain
unswerving. United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.7711

are an important means of safeguarding world peace,
security and stability. The Security Council adopted
resolution 1265 (1999) in 1999, while more recently it
has adopted many other resolutions and presidential
statements on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, thereby establishing a legal framework for
protecting civilians in armed conflict. Protecting
civilians has also become a mandate conferred on United
Nations peacekeeping operations. China supports the
Council’s discussing the topic of protecting civilians in
peacekeeping operations. We would like to highlight
several points.
First, peacekeeping operations, when implementing
the mandate of protecting civilians, should, on the
premise of respecting the ownership of host countries,
clarify their perimeters, conditions and limits; maintain
objectivity and neutrality; ensure the recognition and
support of the host countries and the international
community; and form useful complementarity with the
operations of host countries. Peacekeeping operations
cannot replace the responsibilities and duties of host
country Governments or parties to the conflict to
protect civilians, and they should try to avoid becoming
a party to the conflict.
Secondly, when formulating the mandate to protect
civilians, the Council should comprehensively take
into account the prevailing circumstances and specific
needs of host countries,as well as the conditions and
capacities of the peacekeeping missions, and ensure
that related mandates are specific, clear, realistic and
viable. The Council should assess the implementation
of the mandates by the mission in a dynamic manner
and make timely adjustments in accordance with the
changing circumstances. The international community
should strengthen the capacity-building of the troopcontributing countries (TCCs) and ensure that
peacekeeping missions acquire the equipment and
resources needed for completing their mandate.
Thirdly, advancing the political settlement of
hotspot issues is the fundamental way to attain the goal
of protecting civilians. The international community
should strengthen the sense of urgency and the
political settlement of regional hotspot issues, and
ensure sustained protection for civilians in conflict
areas. Peacekeeping operations should fully use their
own advantages to actively promote the peaceful
settlement of disputes, work with the related efforts
of the international community to seek political
settlement of hotspot issues, and create conditions and

16-1667719/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

an environment conducive to advancing the process of
political settlement of the hotspot issues.
Fourthly, protecting civilians requires emphasis
to be placed on the role of the African Union and
other regional organizations. Nearly 60 per cent
of peacekeeping operations are deployed on the
African continent. The African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the Economic
Community of Central African States and other regional
and subregional organizations know best the realities
of Africa and can therefore come up with responsive
recommendations designed to protect civilians.
Peacekeeping operations should pay attention to
strengthening communication with the African Union
and other regional and subregional organizations, fully
use the role of these organizations and, with respect
to the protection of civilians, listen carefully to their
opinions and recommendations so as to support the
resolution of African problems in an African manner.
Fifthly, it is essential to prioritize addressing
sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers.
Peacekeepers are devoted to the noble cause of
maintaining international peace and security, yet in
the course of doing so a handful have been implicated
in sexual exploitation and abuse in some countries,
seriously damaging the reputation and contravening the
purposes of peacekeeping operations. The Council, the
Secretariat, TCCs and host countries should strengthen
their cooperation, resolutely implement a zero-tolerance
policy, firmly punish acts of sexual exploitation and
abuse by permiiting no impunity, bring perpetrators to
account, restore justice to the victims and uphold the
image and reputation of peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We wish to start by
acknowledging France’s contribution on the front
line of efforts to protect civilians in Mali, the Central
African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire and elsewhere. We also
thank the President of the Central African Republic
and we particularly welcome the remarks about his
Government’s commitment to national reconciliation.
New Zealand has learned from our own experience how
important this is to long-term stability.
Twenty-two years ago this week, the Council
adopted its first explicit protection of civilians mandate
in resolution 925 (1994) relating to Rwanda. Tragically,
in spite of this resolution, nothing significant was
done to stop the subsequent genocide. We have come
a long way since that historic failure, and today United
20/94

10/06/2016

Nations peacekeepers play a decisive role in protecting
civilians, saving many thousands of lives and delivering
many more from the threat of violence. Their work is
difficult, and many peacekeepers have paid the ultimate
price. We pay tribute to their commitment and their
sacrifice. Today I wish to focus on four areas where
New Zealand believes action is needed to improve
United Nations performance.
First, protection mandates need to be clear, realistic
and part of a coherent political strategy. We need to
avoid exposing our peacekeepers to unacceptable levels
of risk, or setting expectations that they cannot fill. New
Zealand echoes the call by the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations for more sequencing and
prioritization of mandates. These need to be grounded
in clear strategies for addressing the factors that make
civilians vulnerable in the first place. Political solutions
will always deliver more for protection of civilians than
boots on the ground will.
If we are honest, we have not seen Council practice
improve much since these recommendations were made.
Mandating remains a relatively pro forma exercise, often
without much consultation or policy deliberation on the
key implementation challenges. Recent adjustments
to the mandate of the United Nations Mission in the
South Sudan were a more positive experience in terms
of prioritization and phasing, but we would like to see
more of this.
Secondly, we need to build better understanding
among all stakeholders of how protection mandates
should be carried out. Progress has been made in
developing protection strategies, clear doctrine and
operating procedures, but coordination is still lacking
across political, humanitarian, military, human rights
and development actors. The experience in South Sudan
has highlighted many serious challenges, including
cooperation with humanitarian actors, questions of
mission authority and host-State relations.
We believe that protection of civilians sites should
never be a strategy of first choice. They should be
employed only in extreme circumstances, as we saw
in South Sudan, or when the mission is genuinely
unable to provide more proactive protection further
afield. New Zealand has pushed for the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to report on lessons learned
from the protection of civilians sites in South Sudan
and we look forward to acting on the findings from
the report.
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Meaningful consultations with stakeholders are
also essential for making sure mandates are fit-forpurpose and effectively implemented. Engagement
with troop and police contributors is critical. It is
unreasonable to expect countries to take on the difficult
and dangerous job of protecting civilians while
excluding them from key discussions. New Zealand has
been working over the past year to improve the quality
of Council engagement with contributing countries and
the Secretariat. Through the informal, off-the-record
format, these triangular consultations give Council
members a deeper understanding of the realities on the
ground, and they help contributing countries to better
understand the Council’s approach. We believe that
over time they will mean better mandates and more
effective implementation. New Zealand has facilitated
these consultations with four missions so far and we
are working with Council colleagues and contributing
countries to make them an established and consistent
feature of the Council.
Thirdly, decision-makers at all levels need to
receive better, more timely and reliable information
on emerging threats and protection needs. This
requires close engagement with local populations
and an understanding of why and how civilians are
being targeted. It requires relevant information to
be systematically gathered, collated, analysed and
provided to those who need it, whether that be arealevel commanders or the Council itself. To ensure that
key challenges and risks to civilians are understood
and effectively managed, the Council requires better,
unfiltered reporting. The Secretariat should be more
open regarding the difficult policy and operational
choices facing missions.
Mechanisms, such as the one New Zealand helped
establish last year for the Council to monitor the
operational risks and protection challenges faced by
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, can help in
this regard, but they need to be expanded. We hope that
we can move forward on practical steps to ensure the
Council is regularly informed of key risks to civilians
and United Nations personnel across all missions. This
is an essential complement to the Council’s existing
tools for situational awareness.
Finally, protection mandates must be backed by
the necessary political will to enable them to succeed.
For the Council and the General Assembly, this means
providing missions with the resources and political

S/PV.7711

support to carry out their mandates. For contributing
countries, it means ensuring deployed personnel have
a clear understanding of their mandated tasks and
are trained, equipped and empowered to implement
them effectively. It also means being restrained
and transparent in imposing caveats and respecting
the United Nations chain of command and mission
leadership. The protection of civilians would also
benefit enormously from a more systematic approach
to reviewing implementation at the mission level. The
Council needs to know in what areas and by whom
protection mandates are being implemented effectively
and where they need to be improved.
During our remaining time on the Council, New
Zealand wants to achieve practical progress in these
areas. If we succeed, we will be more likely to generate
the political will needed to protect civilians in crises.
Let us make sure we do.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola) (spoke in French):
Allow me to commend you, Mr. President, for a very
rich French presidency of the Security Council this
month and for the choice of the theme of this morning’s
debate. I would also like to congratulate and welcome
President Faustin Touadera, who has honoured us
with his presence today and with the living example
of a country that gives us hope for the possibility of
emerging from crises, thanks to the President’s clearsighted leadership of the Central African Republic at
the present time.
(spoke in English)
Would like also to thank the Secretary-General for
his opening remarks and Mr. Peter Maurer, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
who spoke to us from Geneva, for his insightful and
comprehensive briefing to the Council.
There is wide agreement on the postulate that
prevention is the most effective way to address
potential conflict situations; that States bear the
primary responsibility for the protection of its civilian
populations and that the international community plays
a subsidiary, but very important, role in addressing
these serious issues. The latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2016/447) outlines how civilians account for the vast
majority of casualties in today’s armed conflicts, which
are characterized by high levels of brutality and a
disregard for human life and dignity. Civilians are killed,
severely injured, maimed, tortured, taken hostage and

16-1667721/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

disappeared. They are abducted, forcibly recruited into
armed groups, displaced from their homes, separated
from their families and denied access to the most basic
necessities in targeted and indiscriminate acts. Sexual
and gender-based violence is widespread in schools,
while direct attacks on schools and hospitals have
become commonplace.
Humanitarian needs have reached a peak with over
60 million people displaced, owing to conflicts, and
over 80 per cent of United Nations humanitarian funding
directed to respond to conflicts, and humanitarian access
remains a key challenge, limited or restricted as it is
in many complex situations. Humanitarian and healthcare workers are deliberately targeted and international
humanitarian law is permanently violated against a
backdrop of prevailing impunity. For these reasons, we
fully share the Secretary-General’s view that ensuring
accountability should be a priority since most parties
in today’s armed conflicts consistently disregard their
obligations under international humanitarian law by
deliberately targeting and brutalizing civilians and
attacking civilian infrastructure, while widespread
impunity deprives victims of any kind of justice.
The report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) underlines the
protection of civilians in armed conflict as a core
principal of international humanitarian law and a moral
responsibility of the United Nations. We acknowledge
that the crucial role of peacekeeping operations in the
protection of civilians is an important element of the
global commitment to prevent and resolve conflicts.
Angola welcomes the commitment of the SecretaryGeneral to involve the United Nations and the Security
Council in particular in situations of escalating
risks to civilians. In countries where United Nations
peacekeeping operations are deployed, the missions’
capacities to fulfil their mandates must be ensured,
especially the protection of civilians. In fact, we are of
the view that the credibility of a given peacekeeping
mission depends on its capability and resolve to act
when civilians are under threat.
The High-level Panel calls for sustained, predictable
and flexible funding mechanisms in support of
peacekeeping operations. Since most peacekeeping
operations are deployed on the African continent, we
join the Panel in recommending the strengthening of
the United Nations-African Union partnership in order
to guarantee a more effective protection of civilians,
22/94

10/06/2016

particularly in African Union-led peacekeeping
operations. The case of the Central African Republic
clearly illustrates the importance of this and the
example and the testimony presented to the Council by
President Touadera is quite clear on this.
That is why Angola welcomes the adoption, in 2015,
of the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians as
a tool to assess the effectiveness of the implementation
of the protection of civilians mandates and enhanced
accountability. Timely coordination between missions
and humanitarian actors is crucial in pursuing enhanced
strategies, as those partners often work closely with the
communities, especially internally displaced persons.
Engagement with the local communities in the
promotion and protection of civilians is also vital.
Community alert networks and community liaison
assistants are of crucial importance in understanding
perceptions of threats at the community level with a
view to reducing risks and understanding how they
should be addressed by peacekeeping operations.
We welcome the deployment of senior advisers on
the protection of civilians in all missions, with an
advisory role on the development of strategies and in
coordinating protection of civilian mandates. Another
measure that has demontrated great effectiveness is
the deployment training of peacekeeping personnel on
the protection of civilians, in particular children and
women, and on conflict-related sexual violence, in
accordance with United Nations standards, mandates
and the rules of engagement.
We reiterate the key importance of ensuring
political solutions to conflicts by non-coercive means.
We recall that preventive diplomacy remains the most
effective way of reducing the risk of armed conflict and
protecting civilians.
Finally, we highlight the critical importance
of improving the accountability, transparency and
performance of United Nations peace operations. The
proper conduct and discipline of personnel are crucial
to their credibility and effectiveness. The United
Nations should continue to advocate the political and
peaceful settlement of disputes, in accordance with the
Charter, at the core of the international effort to prevent
and resolve conflicts and protect civilians.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we
welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of France, Mr. Jean-Marc Ayrault, which reflects the
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

importance that his country attaches to this subject.
We also welcome His Excellency Mr. Faustin Archange
Touadera, President of the Central African Republic,
and thank him for his statement. It is an honour to have
him and Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, here today.
Venezuela aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the delegation of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
In many contemporary armed conflicts, civilian
populations have become the main victims of the
conflict situations that impact different parts of the
planet, where the loss of lives and the suffering of
civilians far exceed those of the combatants. Punitive
military action is taken deliberately against civilians,
who have become military targets. That tragic reality
is evident in the conflicts that are rocking the Middle
East and Africa, where women, children and the elderly
have become targets of attacks perpetrated by the actors
involved in those bloody wars, particularly terrorist
groups, in violation of international humanitarian
law. In that respect, Syria, Iraq, Yemen, Libya, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic, the Sudan, South Sudan and Palestine, among
others, are scenarios in which the civilian population
has suffered the ravages of indiscriminate violence.
The recourse to violence and terrorism to
undermine societies, civilizations, religions and
beliefs is assuming terrible manifestations, such as the
recruitment of children, abductions, the destruction
of the cultural heritage of humankind, slavery and
sexual violence as weapons of war, as well as the use
of chemical weapons. Nevertheless, at the very heart
of all this is the terrible tragedy that has impacted the
civilian population as a result of practices in response
to intolerance, violent extremism and sectarianism.
Those actions paint a very clear picture of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide, the perpetrators
of which must be brought to justice.
Those armed conflicts have caused the displacement
of civilian populations fleeing war to protect their
lives. By late 2015, more than 60 million people hade
been displaced by conflict, violence and persecution.
The number of persons internally displaced by conflict
and violence increased by more than 2.8 million
people in 2015, and reached an unprecedented total of
40.8 million. In addition, the number of refugees has
exceeded 20 million for the first time in 20 years.

S/PV.7711

Despite the gravity of those challenges, we wish
to highlight the important review processes undertaken
by the Organization in 2015. All of those processes
underscored the need to prevent crises instead of
responding to them once they occur, which exacts
great human and financial costs, and to work beyond
institutional divisions to address complex problems.
Those messages are crucial to strengthening the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts.
Civilians who find themselves in the midst of
armed conflict require protection. United Nations
peacekeeping operations should play a more active and
central role in that regard. They must always conduct
themselves impartially, in defence of their own security
and their mandate, and with the consent of the host
State. In that context, non-armed strategies should be at
the forefront of United Nations efforts in the protection
of civilians. Peacekeeping operations, as inherently
political instruments, can protect civilians more
effectively by helping to build trust among the parties,
ending conflicts and facilitating peace agreements.
The quest for a political solution must guide the
design, deployment and withdrawal of United Nations
peacekeeping operations on the ground.
Humanitarian organizations, such as the Red
Cross, play a crucial role to that end. The success of
non-armed United Nations strategies for the protection
of civilians depends to a certain degree on their
ability to forge strong alliances among those players
and to work closely with local communities. The
United Nations must make due use of those important
resources, highlighting the capabilities and practices
of local communities and humanitarian organizations
on the ground in order to create an environment that is
conducive to the protection of civilians. In that respect,
it is very important to guarantee humanitarian access so
that civilians can receive the assistance and protection
necessary to their survival. In that regard, we condemn
the siege practices used by actors involved in armed
conflicts that prevent the delivery of food and medicine
for civilians in humanitarian need.
However, in situations where the civilian
population finds itself under imminent threat of attack,
peacekeeping troops must always be ready to act
assertively. To that end, forces should always have the
equipment and training necessary to successfully deal
with those situations. At the same time, we reaffirm
emphatically that the protection of civilians cannot in
any circumstances be used as an excuse to undermine

16-1667723/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of States.
Taking into account the provisions of international
humanitarian law and the need to protect civilians in
the midst of such bloody conflicts as those in Syria,
Yemen and Iraq, we cannot fail to stress the my
Government’s focus on the situation of violence that
continues in the Palestinian territories as a result of the
Israeli illegal occupation, and that affects in particular
the human rights of Palestinians, who are the victims of
the repressive policies of the occupying Power, whose
actions inflict indescribable human suffering and
represent a protection crisis for the Palestinian people.
Given this very clear picture of systematic violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law,
the international community must raise its voice in
defence of the Palestinian people and take the measures
necessary to guarantee their human rights. We therefore
reiterate our appeal for a response to the request made
by the President of the Palestinian National Authority,
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, for the establishment of a
system of international protection for the Palestinian
population in the occupied territories, in accordance
with the Fourth Geneva Convention and resolution 904
(1994). That is one instance of concrete action that the
Council could take to protect civilians.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to warmly thank France for organizing
this very important ministerial debate on the protection
of civilian populations during peacekeeping operations.
I also wish to welcome your presence here with us today,
Mr. Minister, and that of His Excellency Mr. Faustin
Archange Touadera, President of the Central African
Republic. I also thank Mr. Peter Maurer, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
for his statement.
(spoke in Arabic)
The atrocities that civilians endure in the many
conflicts raging around the world today, particularly in
the Middle East and Africa, represent an unprecedented
challenge to the basic pillars of international law,
international humanitarian law and the enforcement
of the principle of protecting civilians in times of
conflict. Such atrocities particularly impact women and
children, the groups most vulnerable to such violations.
Despite the great advancements on the conceptual
level in the protection of civilians since the adoption
of resolution 1265 (1999), which established the
24/94

10/06/2016

protection of civilians as a key priority for the Security
Council and made it one of the major pillars of the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
the continued plight of civilians in many armed
conflicts has clearly exemplified the degree of failure
of our efforts to provide protection on the ground. The
most appropriate way for peacekeeping operations to
undertake a role in protecting civilians is still unclear.
There is no agreement yet among Member States on
the effectiveness of the use of force by United Nations
missions to protect civilians. In that context, Egypt
pays tribute to the Kigali Principles on the Protection
of Civilians in armed conflict.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo was granted an
active mandate in the field of cooperation, in particular
with the Force Intervention Brigade, which was an
offensive component. Despite its relative success,
that mandate did not succeed in providing enough
protection to civilians in eastern Congo, where they
are still the victims of atrocities at the hands of armed
groups. Turning to South Sudan, the Organization
provided direct protection to civilians in the United
Nations camps. However, despite those efforts, that
style of direct protection — notwithstanding its
moral imperative — is still extremely costly and not
sustainable. It also does not expand its protection to the
hundreds of thousands of civilians at risk beyond the
gates of United Nations camps. In addition, they face
overcrowding in such camps, particularly the ones that
impose security inside those walls.
We should first stress that States and Governments
shoulder the primary responsibility for the protection
of civilians. The objective of peacekeeping operations
is to promote the capabilities of States to meet
their obligations, while respecting the principles
of sovereignty, national ownership and the cultural
specificity of the host country. In that context, we can
look at the role of peacekeeping operations in providing
protection to civilians in terms of three main pillars.
First, as a political tool that enables them to play
a central role in providing a conducive environment
to end conflicts and reach a peaceful settlement and
in providing support to the parties to the conflict in
the implementation of the peace agreements reached
among them.
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Secondly, those missions play a role in providing
physical and material protection to civilians through
the military and police forces in cases where the State
is unable to provide protection and the peacekeepers
establish refugee camps or counter the attacks of
armed groups.
Thirdly, the missions can provide a safe environment
through the implementation of a number of measures,
including promoting and developing relevant national
institutions in the country concerned, such as the
justice and security sectors.
Therefore, efforts to develop the capabilities of
peacekeeping operations must stress the following:
First, operations should standardize the concepts
regarding the protection of civilians and set policies
that accurately define the duties demanded of the
peacekeeping operations, including clarifying the rules
of engagement that the forces must adhere to while
undertaking their duties.
Secondly, troop-contributing countries should
be involved in establishing the mandates of the
peacekeeping operations and a planning process aimed
at ensuring the presence of a common vision and
common objective with regard to the tasks that the
operations should carry out.
Thirdly, troop-contributing countries must include
a component on the protection of civilians in their
predeployment training so that they can inform their
troops of the scope of their duties.
Fourthly, the Secretariat should be encouraged to
initiate better communication on the social level, have
an early-warning system, report any attack against
civilians and ensure a prompt response from the
peacekeeping operations.
Fifthly, peacekeeping missions should be provided
with the necessary expertise and components so as
to enable them to provide protection to civilians, and
the Secretariat must regularly provide a report on all
United Nations missions on the extent to which they
have implemented their mandate.
Indeed, there have been great advancements in
the capability of peacekeeping operations to provide
protection to civilians. However, the increasing number
of conflicts and gross violations, including the resort
to violence, forced displacements and cutting access
to humanitarian aid, are factors that we need to take

S/PV.7711

into account in order to promote a better role for the
United Nations in the framework of peacekeeping
operations, in particular with regard tor the protection
of civilians. Here I would like to refer to the fact that
ending conflicts is the only sure way to sustainably
protect civilians. The effective protection of civilians
in armed conflict should not be limited to physical or
material protection. It should focus, first and foremost,
on providing political solutions aimed at ending
conflicts and preventing their resurgence. It should
also address the root causes of such conflicts so as to
prevent their recurrence.
That might be the central message emanating
from the reports of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (S/2015/682) and of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture (S/2015/490), in addition to the need
to accord greater attention in the future to the new
challenges and difficulties that threaten civilians,
which, apart from armed conflicts, consist mainly of
the spread of international terrorism as a nefarious
phenomenon. Any effort to promote only material or
physical protection will end up being only a marginal
effort that tackles the symptoms and not the source of
the problem. It will not ensure a genuine and sustainable
protection of civilians. Peacekeeping operations are
merely a tool to protect civilians and should therefore
be used in the framework of a more comprehensive
strategy aimed at settling conflicts and preventing
their resurgence.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are happy to welcome you, Mr. Minister,
presiding as the President of the Security Council.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General and the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross for their briefings. The statement of the President
of the Central African Republic is particularly important
for the Security Council in the context of our discussion
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The theme of the protection of civilians is extremely
important for the Security Council. This is the third time
this year that we are having a general discussion on that
topic. In the meantime, the number of problems in that
area is not diminishing, while recently the attention of
the United Nations and the international community
has been drawn to new worrisome phenomena.
The need for the protection of civilians is a most
direct and important consequence of conflicts. We are

16-1667725/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

convinced that in order to remedy the unfavourable
situation with regard to the protection of civilians, it is
important to move away from selective and unilateral
approaches and focus on violations of international
humanitarian law. We need strict compliance with
human rights standards and the full implementation of
the relevant Security Council decisions by all parties
to armed conflicts. However, the political resolution of
conflicts is the only effective way to eliminate threats to
civilians. Its promotion is the most important function
of the Security Council.
The primary responsibility for ensuring the
protection of civilians lies with the parties to a conflict.
At the same time, in the difficult conditions of an acute
crisis, the host country is not always able to carry out
those functions.
In that connection, most of the peacekeeping
missions endorsed by the Security Council have
a mandate to protect civilians, to assist national
efforts. That is one of the key aspects of peacekeeping
operations. We believe that the actions of peacekeepers
should be holistic and involve close cooperation
among the military, police and civilian components,
in coordination with national authorities, local
communities and relevant humanitarian organizations.

10/06/2016

of civilians should be a priority, but no less a priority
should be the security of peacekeepers.
We think it is very important, in developing the
mandates of peacekeeping missions, that Council
members realize how dangerous it is to link the task of
protecting civilians with conducting offensive counterterrorist operations. These specific tasks can be dealt
with only by specially trained and equipped national
security forces. We welcome to the corresponding
conclusions in the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (S/2015/446), which was
supported by the members of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations.
United Nations peacekeepers, in carrying out
their duties, deservedly enjoy the respect and trust of
the civilian population. That is why their actions and
behaviours should be exemplary in every way. It is
essential to take all measures to prevent any kind of
violation, including sexual abuse. Resolution 2272
(2016), on sexual exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping
operations, clearly states that measures to prevent and
combat that phenomenon apply to all missions deployed
with the endorsement of the Security Council.

When speaking of the protection of civilians by
United Nations Blue Helmets, we have to underscore
the main principles of peacekeeping: the consent of
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except
in self-defence or in implementing the mandate
approved by the Security Council. These conditions,
unfortunately, have recently been considered by some
countries as almost a hindrance to carrying out the
missions of their mandates. And yet we think that these
principles are what guarantees the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations.

Incidents of serious law-breaking and acts of
violence by foreign contingents, including those of a
sexual nature, are identified with increasing frequency.
Troop-contributing countries have full responsibility
for punishing their peacekeepers. Disciplinary action
is not enough when it comes to criminal violations. We
also think that when national peacekeeping contingents
operating under the mandate of the Security Council
commit sexual exploitation or abuse, it is unacceptable
to release them from responsibility. If we are speaking
of a zero-tolerance policy on this issue, the standards
for combating such violations should be the same
for everyone.

In today’s conditions, when we have mostly internal
conflicts, civilians are in particularly vulnerable
situations, associated with sides in a conflict. In
some cases, it is difficult to separate them from the
combatants. In this context, it is particularly important
to establish contacts with the sides and to make clear
the impartiality of peacekeepers. At the same time, host
States must not only take the primary responsibility in
protecting their populations; they must also provide all
necessary support for peacekeeping missions deployed
in their territory. There is no doubt that the protection

I have one further comment. In his statement, the
representative of Ukraine rebuked the Security Council
for supposedly not reacting to its initiative seeking
the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in his country. I wish to note for the
record that the Security Council never received such
a proposal. Obviously, the Council is not obligated
to react to periodic public statements by Ukrainian
officials that are mainly publicity stunts and are aimed
at diverting attention from Kyiv’s non-compliance with
the Minsk agreements.

26/94

16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Ukraine should stop its daily shelling of civilian
targets in Donbass, which has led to the destruction
of vital infrastructure and the death of civilians. Also,
Ukraine should enact laws on the special status of
Donbass and on amnesty. It should establish a dialogue
with the representatives of Donetsk and Luhansk, as
provided for in the Minsk agreements. That will be the
best form of peacekeeping.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join earlier speakers in
welcoming Foreign Minister Ayrault to the presidency of
theSecurity Council. I also thank the Secretary-General
and the President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for their respective briefings. On this note,
I greatly appreciate and value the participation of His
Excellency Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera, President
of the Central African Republic, and thank him for
for his briefing, which my delegation followed with
much interest. His presence here today signifies to us
the commitment of the Government and people of the
Central African Republic to moving forward and leaving
behind the troubling days of the past. The presence of
so many high-level dignitaries among us today clearly
manifests the importance of the topic of our discussions.
We thank the French presidency for bringing it into
sharper focus by organizing today’s debate.
In aligning ourselves with the statements to be
delivered later by the representatives of Thailand
and Iran, who will speak on behalf the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations and the Non-Aligned
Movement, respectively, and with a view to engaging
on the question posed in the concept note (S/2016/503,
annex), I wish to highlight the following points.
The Secretary-General’s latest report on the
protection of civilians (S/2016/447) underscores the
grim reality that, overwhelmingly, civilians and
non-combatants continue to bear the brunt of armed
conflict at all stages. The numbers are staggering
and horrifying. In 2015 alone, hundreds of thousands
perished during conflict and even while fleeing it. The
survivors, after enduring perilous journeys, have ended
up living in appalling conditions where the majority
eke out a miserable existence as refugees and displaced
persons in desperate need of food, shelter and medicine.
Others who are unlucky face death and the destruction
of their villages and homes. The horrors of conflict
became even more gruesome when women and girls
became targets of terror groups like Da’esh and Boko
Haram and were sold into sexual slavery or were used
as objects for recruitment or ransom.

S/PV.7711

In many instances, we have followed the stories
with a sense of helplessness, strengthening our resolve
that the perpetrators must be held accountable. We have
been briefed on how emboldened the perpetrators are,
continuously committing heinous crimes with a sense
of impunity. In today’s world, we are no longer remotely
detached from the battlefields and conflict zones. Our
conscience bleeds at the savagery and brutality inflicted
on the innocent trapped in conflict zones.
Humankind has seen so many killing fields. We
must do more to stop this carnage. Where we can
make difference, we should make a difference. In
conflict zones where we conduct United Nations peace
operations, we must ensure that the hopes that we bring
to the people are not dashed. We need to invest greater
efforts to translate civilian-protection norms and
standards into actions that ultimately save lives.
The lessons learned in Bosnia, Rwanda and
elsewhere on the role of the United Nations, particularly
with respect to the efficacy of peacekeeping operations,
have been instructive in spurring our collective
efforts to prioritize the protection of civilians. The
Security Council has since sought to address the
gaps and challenges exposed during the handling
of those tragic situations by the United Nations. A
paradigm shift occurred with the introduction of
multidimensional mandates, a core component of which
is civilian protections.
In addition to prioritizing protection for the
most vulnerable segments in conflict situations, we
established clear normative standards prohibiting harm
directed against humanitarian personnel, including
medical and health-care personnel and even journalists.
The call for protections also extends to civilian
infrastructure, especially schools and hospitals.
The civilian-protection agenda has also benefited
from further mainstreaming during the course of
the three-year review exercises last year, in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and at the recently
concluded World Humanitarian Summit.
In the light of these recent positive developments
and the far-reaching commitments made by States, it
would seem that the civilian-protection agenda is firmly
entrenched and fully implemented. Unfortunately,
much more needs to be done by States.
There are key issues that we must collectively
address and on which the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (S/2015/446)

16-1667727/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and the Secretary-General’s implementation report
(S/2015/682) have provided relevant commentary
and recommendations Among them are the tensions
inherent in the first principles of the United Nations
peacekeeping and protection-of-civilian imperatives.
In this context, we are of the view that the Council
should remain open to reviewing mandates if or
when a situation warrants it. Furthermore, given that
United Nations peace operations today are deployed in
increasingly complex and challenging environments,
sometimes in theatres where there is hardly any peace to
keep, mandates should be realistic and implementable.
While closer triangular cooperation and coordination
are central, particularly during the mandate design
phase, similar emphasis should be placed on engaging
with the host States, including on status of mission and
status of forces arrangements, with a view to ensuring
the smooth deployment of troops and assets. In that
context, we welcome the proactive steps taken by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to
conclude so-called compacts with host States, including
the Central African Republic, that seek to enhance
understanding on those arrangements so as to facilitate
their full and effective implementation.
While we believe that troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) in any given peace operation maintain their
sovereign rights, including on prescribing caveats
regarding their troops and personnel, we are of the
view that to the extent possible, such caveats should
accommodate civilian protection mandates. We
therefore encourage and support DPKO’s ongoing
efforts to engage and sensitize TCCs on the need to
minimize or rescind caveats, particularly those that
may impair the protection of civilians mandate.

10/06/2016

with regional organizations, particularly the African
Union, on the early mobilization of a peacekeeping
presence could be further explored. The possibility of
inter-mission cooperation should also be left open.
I wish to stress that we have seen the alarming
plight of innocent civilians in conflict zones and why
we need to do more to help them. We have seen too
many deaths and the numbers presented to us represent
our fellow human beings — human faces that we must
not ignore. They include those suffering from sexual
abuse. The only way to conclude is to reaffirm our
commitment and resolve to help those who beg us to
intervene and save their lives.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by welcoming President Touadera to the Council and
thanking him and Mr. Maurer for their briefings. I also
want to thank the Secretary-General for his remarks
and for his report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2016/447).
My conclusion from this debate so far, sadly, is
that the protection of civilians in conflict is in crisis.
Whether in Syria or in South Sudan, we are failing the
most vulnerable when they need us the most — when
they are being targeted in their homes, when they are
being targeted in hospitals and even when they are
being targeted by the very peacekeepers sent to protect
them. The United Nations invented peacekeeping in
order to prevent war, so civilians benefit hugely when
peacekeeping works. But too often, peacekeeping is
failing to live up to the high standards that victims
rightly require.

In terms of prevention, the Secretary-General’s
Human Rights Up Front initiative is a concrete example
of the operationalization of the conflict prevention
imperative. That and other relevant recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
should enjoy our full support to ensure that United
Nations peacekeeping remains relevant and effective.

Yesterday I met with Nadia Murad — the Yazidi
woman whom I mentioned in my statement last week
(see S/PV.7704). She told me, very movingly, how
19 girls were burned alive this week in her community.
That is the barbarity that civilians now face. It is almost
unspeakable. And yet she told me that she still has hope
because she feels that justice is on her side. Our job
today is to show people like Nadia that there is cause
for hope — that we can and will protect civilians. I see
four steps that we need to take.

Effective partnerships are equally crucial if United
Nations peace operations are to effectively implement
the protection of civilians mandate. As mentioned
earlier, while cooperation at all stages is key, at the
same time collaboration and cooperation with the
United Nations system and other actors on the ground
are equally important. Additionally, cooperation

First, we need to prepare peacekeepers for this
seemingly impossible task. How can we best train,
equip and deploy them? How can we ensure that they
make a real difference to the communities that they
are sent to protect? To answer those questions, we
need to recognize that as threats to civilians change,
so peacekeeping must change too. This means that all

28/94

16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

of us must look into the future so that we can better
understand operating environments and the threats that
civilians and peacekeepers face. New technology and
better intelligence can help, but to maximize impact
and sustainability personnel need to be trained and
equipped to use those new tools.
President Obama’s summit on peacekeeping last
September successfully increased the quantity of
peacekeepers available to the United Nations. We
now need to improve the overall quality. The United
Nations needs a mechanism to choose only those troops
who can definitively protect civilians effectively, and
to replace those who are unable or unwilling to fulfil
their mandated tasks. In that way, we can create a new
generation of peacekeeping — one with the protection
of civilians at its heart.
Secondly, the tragedies of Syria, South Sudan and
Yemen show that there needs to be better compliance
with international humanitarian law. The SecretaryGeneral’s report makes clear that strengthening
compliance with international humanitarian law and
human rights law is a prerequisite for improving the
protection of civilians. Those laws are binding on all
sides of any conflict. They strike a balance between
military necessity and basic humanity. When those
laws are breached, everyone loses.
The primary responsibility for complying with
those laws lies with the parties to conflict, as the
Secretary-General and, indeed, my Russian colleague
reminded us today. When they starve and besiege,
when they attack schools and hospitals, or when they
impeded humanitarian access, we see unimagineable
suffering, populations fleeing, economies collapsing, a
whole country left staring into the abyss.
We recognized at the World Humanitarian Summit
that the humanitarian system needs reform. I am pleased
that the Summit included a renewed commitment to
international humanitarian law. However — and this is
my third point — to deter future breaches of international
humanitarian law, we need greater accountability for
when there is no compliance, or when the protection of
civilians is ignored or violated. The Secretary-General
talks of a pervasive lack of accountability. That must
be tackled. States must investigate crimes that occur
in their jurisdiction. When they cannot or will not,
international mechanisms such as the International
Criminal Court have an important role to play.

S/PV.7711

Accountability is crucial to improving the
protection of civilians in peacekeeping. Enhanced
reporting mechanisms are needed, including
independent mission observers. Commanders must
monitor for violations and missions should work
closely with local communities and non-governmental
organizations. They all must be able to report their
findings independently and regularly to us. There is no
greater need for accountability than for those sexually
exploited and abused by peacekeepers — those who
have been betrayed by the people sent to protect
them. Through resolution 2272 (2016), we pledged to
tackle the scourge, but to make progress we need a
commitment from the entire international community
to making zero tolerance a reality.
My final point is that the protection of civilians
is not confined to those under attack. It extends to
those who risk everything to flee across land and sea
to find refuge. So we welcome the Secretary-General’s
report on large movements of refugees and migrants
(A/70/59) and the planning under way for the high-level
events of the General Assembly. Together we need to
deliver a framework for better global management of
migration, one that places greater emphasis on global
responsibility-sharing to provide real protection for
refugees. I hope that we can build on the London-Syria
conference commitments and the compact of ideas, and
find comprehensive and sustainable solutions.
Let me close by stressing that the United Kingdom is
committed to playing our part to enhance the protection
of civilians. It is why we have deployed personnel to
United Nations peacekeeping missions in Somalia
and South Sudan in recent weeks, and it is why we are
hosting a peacekeeping defence ministerial meeting in
September. Because through those commitments, and
more — everything else that we are doing — I believe
that we can help Nadia and all civilians under threat,
across the world, so that they too can have hope; so that
they too can believe that justice is on their side.
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
issue a reminder about our work. Statements should last
for no more than four minutes, so that we can conclude
today’s discussion in a timely manner. Delegations that
wish to make longer statements are asked to make the
full statement available in writing and make a shorter
statement here in the Council. Delegations are also
requested to speak at a normal speed for purposes
of interpretation.

16-1667729/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

I wish also to inform all concerned that we will
continue with this open debate right through the lunch
hour, given the very large number of speakers.
I give the floor to the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for International Development Cooperation
and Climate of Sweden.
Ms. Lövin (Sweden): I have the honour of speaking
on behalf of the Nordic countries — Denmark, Finland,
Iceland and Norway — and my own country, Sweden.
These remarks are in addition to the statement that will
be delivered by the observer of the European Union
later today, with which we align ourselves.
To begin with, let me thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this important open debate. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General, Peter Maurer
and President Touadera for their contributions this
morning and the Council for its efforts to strengthen
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
As outlined in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2016/447), the protection of civilians is at the core
of our common purpose. The heroic efforts of United
Nations personnel and the commitment of troop- and
police-contributing countries are a testament to this.
They deserve our deepest respect, recognizing that
their mission may also entail sacrifice.
Let me highlight three ideas that we believe should
underpin the protection-of-civilians agenda of the
twenty-first century.
First, peacekeepers and peace operations must be
properly resourced to protect. Governments have the
primary responsibility to protect civilians. But while we
recommit to enhancing national efforts, United Nations
peace operations must be able to assist in fulfilling this
responsibility. All peacekeepers need to be properly
prepared, trained and equipped.
We must therefore ensure that all United Nations
personnel, at all levels and in all functions, receive
adequate training on the protection of civilians, child
protection and preventing conflict-related sexual
violence before deployment, and that continual training
is provided in the field.
The Nordic countries commit significant resources
to capacity-building, across the board, from military
to civilian personnel, from local authorities to civil
society, and States to regional organizations. We do so
in a wide variety of contexts, ranging from the coalition
30/94

10/06/2016

against Da’esh, to support for the Eastern African
Standby Force.
In addition, Sweden is supporting the development
of pre-deployment training standards for United
Nations corrections officers. Over the last 11 years,
the Swedish prison and probation service has provided
pre-deployment training to more than 400 corrections
officers from all over the world.
Secondly, prevention contributes to protection.
By increasing our efforts in the field of prevention
and peacebuilding, and addressing the root causes of
conflict, we foster sustainable peace. Important joint
steps towards this have been taken through the recent
resolutions on the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. We believe that a shift towards prevention,
underpinned by local perspectives, should be seen as an
antidote to atrocities.
Needless to say, the protection of civilians includes
the protection of women and children, in particular girls.
Furthermore, women and girls need to be considered
as powerful agents for prevention and protection. We
therefore need to ensure women’s and girls’ influence
and meaningful participation. One tool in support of
United Nations mediation activities is our Nordic
Women Mediators’ Network.
Our experiences in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) have taught us that the efficient
protection of civilians requires close cooperation
among military, police and civilian components within
the United Nations system, as well as successful
coordination with local authorities, humanitarian
organizations and civil society. MINUSMA has
also demonstrated the importance of strengthened
situational awareness to the effective protection of
civilians as well as peacekeepers. We welcome the
development of a policy framework for intelligence in
support of United Nations peace operations.
Seeking national and regional perspectives is
key, and enhanced and more dynamic partnerships
are critical, including with regional and subregional
organizations. More predictable, sustainable and longterm financing is also essential in this regard. The
Nordic countries provide long-term financing for peace
and development in a wide variety of ways, including
through significant non-earmarked contributions to
different parts of the United Nations system.
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Thirdly, and lastly, we need norms that
safeguard humanity. Humanitarian organizations and
humanitarian and medical personnel play a crucial
role in the protection of civilians, both through active
efforts and through their very presence. They must be
respected and given swift and unimpeded access to
those in need. Their facilities and transports must be
protected, and they must never be targeted, harmed
or prevented from saving lives in contravention of
international law.
The very purpose of international humanitarian
law is to protect civilians in armed conflict. These
norms, which safeguard humankind, must be upheld.
We therefore commend the Council for its adoption of
resolution 2286 (2016), which strongly condemns acts
of violence, attacks and threats against the wounded and
sick, medical and humanitarian personnel and hospitals
and medical facilities. We also need to increase our
humanitarian efforts to respond effectively to crises.
The first-ever World Humanitarian Summit, held in
May, provides an excellent point of departure for our
intensified efforts and the way forward. The Nordic
countries have long been among the top financial and
political supporters of the humanitarian agenda. We
intend to maintain our high level of support.
Let me conclude by honouring the legacy of an
individual who I believe embodied the courage that
defines the proud mission carried out by United Nations
peacekeepers all over the world, every day: the late
Captain Mbaye Diagne, who saved hundreds of lives,
perhaps as many as 1,000. His heroic deeds illustrate
the fact that the protection of civilians is within the
scope of our common action. Because the protection of
civilians needs to be pursued in partnership, we need to
listen to the voices of the vulnerable, we need to ensure
the dignity of the defenceless, and we need to keep
civilians safe — together.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Defence of Nepal.
Mr. Rawal (Nepal): On behalf of the Government
of Nepal, I wish to compliment the French presidency
of the Security Council this month for holding this
debate on the protection of civilians in the context of
peacekeeping operations. As a consistent and major
troop and police contributor for nearly six decades, my
country attaches particular significance to this debate.

S/PV.7711

In the interest of time, I will deliver an abridged
version of my statement; the full version will be
available in PaperSmart.
While the safety and security of civilians is
primarily the responsibility of national Governments,
it is also critical to the legitimacy and credibility of
United Nations peacekeeping missions, since civilians
account for the vast majority of casualties in armed
conflicts, often as soft targets.
There is now a greater need for a fine balance between
the realities of the field, the principles of peacekeeping
and the responsibility of protecting civilians.
Nepali peacekeepers are fully oriented towards
protecting civilians, particularly women and girls,
during and after conflict. The Nepal Army, Nepal Police
and the Armed Police Force Nepal have all integrated
United Nations policies regarding the protection of
civilians, sexual exploitation and abuse, and protection
of human rights into the predeployment training
of peacekeepers. Together, we have already started
placing investigation officers in every contingent to
investigate disciplinary issues, gender-based violence,
and sexual exploitation and abuse. In this connection,
it is my pleasure to reiterate that Nepal supports the
Kigali principles.
Nepal applauds the increasing triangular
cooperation between the Security Council, the
Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing
countries as a key to accomplishing civilian protection
mandates. We encourage further reinvigorated synergy
between these partners, with all due efforts to ensure
that peacekeeping operations are not politicized.
The provision of additional resources should be
considered a prerequisite — initially, at least at the
force-headquarters level — for missions with civilian
protection mandates.
Nepali peacekeepers have always believed in
building the best possible rapport with the civilian
population through community services and other
confidence-building measures. Based on our positive
experience, the practice may be worth emulating.
The safety and security of peacekeepers themselves
should be built into mission mandates and the
rules of engagement to complement the purpose of
civilian protection.
I wish to highlight two practical pitfalls that, in our
experience, should always be considered while crafting

16-1667731/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

civilian protection mandates. The first is how to guard
against unrealistic expectations that peacekeepers will
be able to protect all civilians at all times. This issue
comes to the fore particularly as expectations invariably
rise following each successful act of civilian protection.
The second pitfall is how far to go for protection and
what level to escalate to. There is a very fine line
where well-meaning but mismanaged intervention for
civilian protection suddenly results in United Nations
peacekeepers being perceived as no longer neutral.
The principles and purposes enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations constitute a fundamental
plank of Nepal’s foreign policy. The Constitution that
Nepal adopted last September by over four-fifths
majority — by far its most forward-looking, inclusive
and democratic ever — both inspires and provides for
a national commitment to the cause of international
peace, security and prosperity.
Since 1958, Nepal has consistently contributed
peacekeepers for the maintenance of international peace
and security under the aegis of the United Nations.
While Nepali peacekeepers are currently deployed
in 15 out of 16 missions, over 122,000 peacekeepers
have already completed tours of duty in 42 different
missions. Nepal does not hesitate to partake in the most
challenging of missions, often in response to urgent
requests and never, I might add, with national caveats.
With 72 Nepali peacekeepers having made the ultimate
sacrifice in the line of duty, my delegation cannot but
feel honoured to join forces with you, Mr. President,
and all our partners as we march ahead in this
noble endeavour.
I wish to conclude by expressing our gratitude to all
peacekeepers deployed in United Nations peacekeeping
missions, and by paying tribute to those who have
sacrificed their lives for the noble cause of maintaining
international peace and security around the world.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, African Integration
and International Cooperation of Chad,
Mr. Mahamat (Chad) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank you, Sir, for having organized this important open
debate on the protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations and for inviting me to participate in this
discussion. I also thank the Secretary-General; His
Excellency Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera, President
of the Central African Republic; and Mr. Peter Maurer,
32/94

10/06/2016

President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross.
Armed conflicts currently raging throughout the
world reveal the suffering of civilians, particularly
women, children and the vulnerable. Despite the
obligations arising under the Geneva Conventions
and the various relevant resolutions of the Security
Council on the protection of civilians, the gap between
the responsibilities outlined in those texts and realities
on the ground remains wide as civilians remain the
deliberate targets of violence and brutal attacks in all
theatres of war.
Since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999) 17 years
ago, the United Nations has engaged in massive efforts
to strengthen its role in the protection of civilians, as
evidenced by the resolutions and presidential statements
adopted thereafter to that end. Nonetheless, recent
crises around the world unfortunately demonstrate
that the strengthening of the normative framework for
protecting civilians does not often translate into specific
action on the ground. United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as their name indicates, are primarily
called on to help build peace and security. However,
we note that for over a decade now, these missions have
been deployed where there has been no peace to keep,
insecurity reigns and civilians are increasingly exposed
to violence.
Protecting civilians in such an environment
requires a more proactive commitment, ranging from
the mere presence of Blue Helmets to their involvement
in prevention, mobility and active intervention with
the option, in extreme cases, to use force to physically
protect civilians from imminent danger. In Mali, for
instance, the extremely difficult environment and the
asymmetric threat not only complicate the mission
to protect civilians, but expose the Blue Helmets
to daily attacks by improvised explosive device,
claiming numerous casualties among them. Seventyone Chadian soldiers have lost their lives in Mali. How
can peacekeepers who cannot even protect themselves
fulfil their mission to protect civilians? We must find
a solution to this paradoxical solution by providing
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali with all the means
necessary, including not only an appropriate mandate
but rules of engagement that are fully commensurate
with the situation on the ground.
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Despite the efforts of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur, and the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, violence against civilians in those countries
sometimes descends to unimaginable depths. The
entire world has borne witness to the atrocities carried
out in full impunity against civilians in the Central
African Republic and South Sudan, not to mention the
horrendous massacres carried out by Boko Haram in
northern Nigeria, the scope and cruelty of which have
transcended all bounds in the city of Damasak.
The presence of peacekeeping operations in some of
those countries has certainly helped prevent the worst,
but it has not prevented all violence against civilians,
who must sometimes band together to defending
themselves. In the face of the massacres committed by
Boko Haram and the terrorist threat, the armed forces of
the members of the Lake Chad Basin Commission have
begun protecting millions of civilians, even without a
United Nations mandate. Even as I speak here, some
2,000 Chadian soldiers have crossed our national border
to assist the Nigerian army in protecting thousands of
civilian victims of Boko Haram’s barbarity. Moreover,
Chad — surrounded by crises in every direction and
host to 750,000 refugees — has for a number of years
sacrificed and continues to sacrifice in order to protect
those refugees by deploying an integrated security
unit, whose work has been commended by the entire
international community.
With or without peacekeeping operations, the
protection of civilians must be an absolute priority
everywhere and at all times. Efforts to that end must be
supported by the international community as a whole.
Given the increasingly complex environments and the
asymmetrical threats faced by peacekeeping missions,
the Security Council ought to consider the limitations of
classical operations and carry out an ongoing review of
its peacekeeping to adapt them to the specific changing
scenarios and by a better integration of the protection
of civilians in its dimensions.
While bearing in mind the primary responsibility of
the parties to the conflict to protect civilians, we should
also emphasize the importance of the contributions of
regional and subregional organizations, local actors
and non-governmental organizations in strengthening
protection for civilians. In that regard, the effectiveness

S/PV.7711

of peacekeeping operations in protecting civilians also
includes developing closer interaction and coordination
of protection activities among those stakeholders, in
particular regional and subregional organizations,
which have a comparative advantage with regard to
proximity to a situation, knowledge of the terrain and
ease of communication with local populations. As
part of their interaction, we should also highlight the
need for missions to demonstrate independence and
impartiality, so as to safeguard their credibility in
all instances. In that connection, the United Nations
should avoid that the concept of the protection of
civilians serve as a pretext for justifying regime change,
military intervention or any other action contrary to the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
The effectiveness of protection-of-civilians mandates
also requires an exemplary partnership among the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the troop- and
police-contributing countries in order to arrive at a
common understanding of the challenges faced in
providing protection. Moreover, we must ensure that
the Blue Helmets who are deployed possess, among
other things, a high degree of ability, adequate training
and suitable equipment and a mastery of the language
of the host country, without which they will not be
able to effectively carry out their mandate to protect
civilians. Likewise, it is important to draw lessons
learned and best practices from mission experience in
order to identify areas where there are shortcomings
to overcome that may lend themselves to improvement.
Also, effectively prosecuting the perpetrators of
violations of human rights law and international
humanitarian law will serve as an element of deterrence
for parties to a conflict. Such an undertaking should not
exempt Blue Helmets who may be guilty of the same
types of violations.
Effectively ensuring the protection of civilians
in peacekeeping operations also involves taking into
account various elements of a mission’s mandate.
Mission mandates must therefore be systematically be
adapted to the changing circumstances, while there is
also a need for the necessary political and logistical
support and strong commitment on the part of troopand police-contributing countries on the ground.
Also of importance are the issues of training and
accountability, synergy of effort and the sharing of
information among all the relevant parties, including
local and regional actors.

16-1667733/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

In conclusion, we hope that today’s debate marks a
new phase in the commitment of the States Members of
the United Nations to fully assume their responsibilities
on the protection of civilians and to reiterate their
resolute determination no longer to tolerate unjustified
attacks against civilians under any pretext.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Canada.
Mr. Dion (Canada) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank France, in its capacity as President of the
Security Council, as well as you personally, Sir, for
affording me this opportunity to address the Council
on the subject of the protection of civilians in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. This initiative by
France is necessary given the alarming the situation
of civilians in situations of armed conflict. It has been
a little more than 15 years since the Council first did
pioneering work in placing the protection of civilians
as a central element of its mandate. Nevertheless,
the situation of civilians in armed conflicts has only
deteriorated since.
Here in the Council in 2015 (see S/PV.7374), the
Secretary-General told of a terrible toll. Humanitarian
organizations reported that the number of people in
urgent need of assistance and protection increased
from 52 million to 76 million in 2014 alone. That is
a huge increase. There is therefore urgency in finding
solutions and ensuring that the Council does more
pioneering work to concretely implement the principles
and existing declarations on the protection of civilians.
It is for that reason that Canada announced at the
General Assembly in May its adherence to the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians, which reflects
the explicit determination of Africans to protect
civilians. Today I wish to announce our support for two
important initiatives that directly target the need for
swift and decisive action by the Council in the event of
massive human rights violations. First, Canada joins the
political declaration, submitted by France and Mexico,
on suspending the use of the veto in the Security
Council in the event of mass atrocities. Secondly,
Canada endorses the code of conduct put forward by
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group
with regard to measures against genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes.
In its letter of invitation to this meeting, France
submitted to us four main issues on the protection
of civilians. In fact, this is about no fewer than four
34/94

10/06/2016

fundamental responsibilities with regard to which we
must respond.
Our first responsibility is to properly assess the
implementation of protection-of-civilians mandates in
peace operations. We must build on what has already
been done. The adoption by the United Nations
more rigorous mechanisms on performance and
accountability is therefore a step in the right direction.
The same goes for the commitment of the SecretaryGeneral to report to the Security Council failures in
protecting civilians. Those are measures that contribute
to the aim of the United Nations, among other things, to
combat the scourge of sexual exploitation and violence.
Our second responsibility is to ensure that Blue
Helmets fully understand their obligations to protect
civilians. Too often the instructions are ambiguous.
The protection-of-civilians mandates drafted by the
Council should clear. Depending on the experience of
peacekeepers in protecting civilians, the Council should
clarify the mandates so that they are understandable
and reflect the complexity of missions. Such a complete
understanding of mandates by peacekeepers is
necessary in all aspects of a missions, namely, the use
of innovative strategies to protect civilians, meeting
the need for all the resources required on the ground,
evaluating and classifying the threats facing civilians,
responding quickly when communities are threatened
and taking into account the special needs of the most
vulnerable groups, such as displaced persons, refugees,
women and children.
Our third responsibility is to promote the deepening
of cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and international organizations, such as the African
Union, to promote awareness of the need to protect
of civilians. To that end, we should compile lessons
learned from our experience in Mali and the Central
African Republic so as to ensure that the African Union
receives better support in protecting civilians.
(spoke in English)
Our fourth responsibility is to ensure that the
protection of civilians forms an integral part of the
training peacekeepers receive before their deployment
in the field. Each country that contributes troops
and police forces has an individual and essential
responsibility. More developed States must provide
assistance to less-developed ones by funding
peacekeeping training centres.
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Those are the improvements we need to make to
ensure that United Nations peacekeeping missions
can better protect civilians. We must adhere to the
Kigali Principles. We must support the policy initiative
launched by France and Mexico on the suspension of the
veto in the Security Council in cases of mass atrocities.
We must endorse the code of conduct put forward by the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group.
We must take on the four responsibilities raised by
France, that is, a fair assessment of the implementation
of mandates, a complete understanding by peacekeepers
of their mandates, better cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and international
organizations and, ultimately, protecting civilians as an
integral part of the training of peacekeepers.Those are
four improvements needed so that our peacekeepers can
endure as guardians of civilians. Without political will,
however, those improvements will have little effect.
Consider Syria in recent weeks. Flagrant violations
of international law, including attacks against medical
facilities and their staff, as well as the blocking of
humanitarian aid to besieged communities. Canada
reiterates its full support for the measures taken by the
Security Council to end such violations. Many of us
seek peace in that region. Canada is doing its part in
the coalition to help Syria and Iraq by responding to
humanitarian appeals and supporting United Nations
efforts to strengthen emergency measures to protect
civilians, in particular the most vulnerable populations,
and reduce food insecurity.
But Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and our
Government want to do more. Canada is back, including
in peacekeeping missions. We have committed to
increasing our support for United Nations peacekeeping
operations and support its mediation efforts in conflict
prevention and post-conflict reconstruction. Those
commitments reflect our deep desire to be a determined
peacebuilder and to make a real and valuable
contribution to building a more peaceful and prosperous
world. Canada believes that, if followed by concrete and
resolute action and inspired by responsible conviction,
the French initiative, which brings us together today,
can ensure that our peacekeeping missions will always
protect civilians. Let us unite so that those civilians
who need our protection may one day be less numerous.
The President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to His Excellency, Mr. Ibrahim Yacoubou,

S/PV.7711

Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation, African
Integration and Nigeriens abroad.
Mr. Yacoubou (Niger) (spoke in French) I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council on behalf of your country for the
month of June 2016. I also wish to welcome, once again,
the presence of the President of the Central African
Republic at this important meeting. I would also like
to congratulate you, Sir, for organizing this debate, a
particularly important one for our Organization and for
States such as mine, the Niger.
Indeed, as you know, the Niger is a country resolutely
committed to peacekeeping operations through our
significant contribution of civilian, military and
police components. To date, we have more than 1,820
men and women serving in those operations, making
our country, the Niger, the 17th global contributor
in that regard. The Niger has firmly adhered to the
principles of Kigali, which we consider to be relevant
and appropriate. With regard to the specific topic of our
meeting today, namely, the protection of civilians in the
context of peacekeeping operations, we believe that it is
essential to make a few observations.
The first is that the nature of conflict has evolved
considerably to the point that most conflicts are not
inter-State wars involving regular armies in which the
men and women involved are conventional soldiers
known and recognized as part of a regular army and
identifiable by their uniform or their units. Instead,
conventional armies are pitted against terrorist groups
that operate outside of laws and conventions, recruit
civilians to arms and make no distinction among those
they target.
Our challenge as democratic States is therefore
two-fold in seeking to protect civilians. First, we must
ensure that we do not victimize innocent civilians in
our armed conflicts; secondly, we must ensure that
all civilian populations affected by such conflicts
are protected and preserved in dignity as human
beings. Even if they are refugees, displaced persons
or returnees, civilian populations have the right to
protection. That must remain a priority and a constant
principle for States.
In addition, it seems appropriate to raise certain
considerations, which I consider important for us if
we are to succeed in our task of protecting civilians
in the context of current conflicts. First, the primary
protection of civilians is, first and foremost, their

16-1667735/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

security. Therefore, it is essential that all peacekeeping
operations are able, both in terms of their human and
material resources and of their mandates, to ensure
and defend the security and lives of citizens, both
civilian and military, living in areas of operations. It
is therefore up to us to question ourselves, above all,
about the relevance of mandates that we initiate. We
should get beyond the quasi-standard templates and
ensure that for every situation, for every context, there
is an appropriate peacekeeping mandate.
The example of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
right at our borders, demonstrates, if need be, that major
operations can be put in place and prove inadequate
or ineffective in the actual context. We must now
question the MINUSMA mandate as designed and as
MINUSMA has operated thus far. Today, a condition
for the security of Malian and border populations is to
change the force’s mandate or to put in place a force
modelled on the multinational joint task force that
we established in the Lake Chad Basin to confront
Boko Haram.
My second observation is derived from the first.
Only an appropriate offensive mandate specific to
each context can constitute the basis for the protection
of civilians. The third observation is that States have
the primary responsibility to protect their populations.
In that context, the United Nations must do more
to strengthen those States’ capacity to act, as well
as that of regional organizations in that regard. We
must strengthen and give priority to States in all
circumstances, subjecting them, of course, to the
obligations of international morality and universal
rights, but always considering States as the primary and
essential instruments for the protection of civilians.
Whenever States are weakened, the situation of
civilians in conflict becomes problematic.
The fourth element of our reflections concerns
the substance of the protection of civilians in conflict.
In our view, in addition to preserving the security
and lives of people, the protection of civilians must
be understood as including access to basic social
services, the protection of their human rights and the
strengthening of the resilience of populations in conflict
areas. Costs and arrangements for the protection of
civilians must include the costs and arrangements for
the minimum social services needed to ensure a decent
life for every citizen.
36/94

10/06/2016

The fifth observation is that, even if there is
reason to recognize the role that non-governmental
organizations can play in the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, in particular because of their capacity
for local communication, the fact remains that action
or interventions by the latter should not be undertaken
at the expense of the sovereignty of States and their
primary responsibility in that regard.
Sixthly, I would like for the United Nations to
regard assisting countries in conflict with the care of
refugees and internally displaced persons as a matter
of utmost urgency. As a result, with the actions of Boko
Haram in the east and the jihadists in Mali, the Niger,
while doing battle with terrorists on all fronts, must care
for and accommodate more than 300,000 refugees and
internally displaced persons. Therefore, prevention,
predictability and the need for a rapid response also
seem to us to be indispensable to ensuring the effective
protection of civilians. We have the obligation to prevail
on both fronts of our battle: defeating the terrorists
and protecting civilian populations. If today we are
discussing the protection of civilians, it is because there
are conflicts. There are wars that are taking place.
Today, on behalf of the Republic of the Niger,
I would like to thank all the countries that help and
support us in the struggle against terrorists, our
struggle for the security of our country, our region
and the world. Terrorists know no borders. I would
therefore like to express my appreciation in particular
to France, the United States, Chad, the European
Union, the countries of the G5-Sahel, the Lake Chad
Basin countries and all the many countries that I cannot
mention here. May they find here the expression of our
gratitude, which is an expression of our solidarity and
capacity for generosity aimed at ensuring the triumph
of a society of peace and freedom.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Cyprus.
Mr. Kasoulides (Cyprus): Cyprus aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union. I would like to make some additional
remarks in my national capacity.
The need to protect civilians in armed conflict
is obvious. However, despite the progress made, the
situation of civilians in armed conflict today remains
a major concern, as highlighted in the latest report of
the Secretary-General (S/2016/447). The lack of respect
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7711

for international humanitarian law and the persistent
impunity are among the reasons given for that situation.

to prevent conflict and has lent its full support to the
Secretary-General’s Human Rights Up Front initiative.

The protection of civilians is an inherent obligation
in all United Nations peacekeeping operations and
is currently part of the mandate of 10 such missions.
Nevertheless, the role played by the United Nations
should not allow us to lose sight of the fact that the
protection of civilians is primarily the responsibility
of States.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation
and Burkinabé Abroad of Burkina Faso.

Since 1964, my country has been home to
a peacekeeping operation, the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, whose mandate
includes provisions on humanitarian activities.
Cyprus is grateful to the United Nations and to troopcontributing countries for their support. Our experience
feeds into our understanding of the difficulties that the
implementation of a peacekeeping operation mandate
may be faced with.
Effectiveness is part of the mandate and must be
linked to political solutions and include viable exit
strategies and always be guided by the situation on the
ground. Mandates must be clear, consistent and concise,
with realistic provisions; they must be accompanied by
operational guidelines and include provisions on human
rights when relevant.
Furthermore, the need for training on the issues
related to the protection of civilians, including sexual
violence in conflict and the protection of children,
cannot be underestimated. Moreover, the staff of
a mission must also strictly abide by human rights
standards. In that context, we fully support the
Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy on sexual
abuse in peacekeeping operations.

Mr. Barry (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate your country,
France, for its accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of June and to thank you, Sir, for
the invitation to take part in this open debate.
The theme of this high-level discussion,
namely, the protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations, is of great importance for us, as it is for
the entire international community. Indeed, with
nearly 3,000 — 2,901 to be exact — soldiers and police
currently deployed in various theatres of operation,
Burkina Faso ranks sixteenth in the world as a troopand police-contributing country and is the fourth
largest contributor from the African continent. We
have a battalion in Darfur and two battalions in Mali
within the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. We also have police units,
one of which is deployed in the Economic Community
of West African States Mission in Guinea-Bissau,
where it is participating in the efforts aimed at political
stabilization in Guinea-Bissau, which is very difficult.

Relationships based on trust with local communities
and organizations can contribute to the prevention of
crimes against civilians and can enable us to address
the consequences of violations against civilians.
Peacekeeping operations can also help a host country
to implement its responsibility to protect and support
the work of the International Criminal Court when it is
involved in a host country.

Burkina Faso hosts on its soil 34,000 refugees from
Mali, and every time there is an upheaval in northern
Mali, civilians flee into our country, which shares over
1,000 kilometres of border with that neighbouring
State. As a former journalist, I have witnessed in person
the despair of civilian populations dealing with war in
Côte d’Ivoire and Mali, and I have witnessed people
seeking shelter, care and food; people fleeing and
crossing borders in search of peace and tranquillity. I
have also witnessed gestures of hope, soldiers releasing
people from oppression and reassuring them that they
would protect and help them — in short, doing what
peacekeepers do. Therefore, we must welcome the
role of the United Nations and all other organizations,
including the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States.

Finally, States Members of the United Nations and
regional and international organizations also have a key
role to play that complements peacekeeping operations
in the areas of conflict prevention, early warning and
reaction. In that context, Cyprus committed itself at
the World Humanitarian Summit to using diplomacy

The responsibilities for better protecting civilians
in peacekeeping operations are shared and spread across
various levels. First, in any conflict, it is important for
the parties to the conflict, whether States or not, to
fulfil their responsibilities vis-â-vis international law
and international humanitarian law. The four Geneva

16-1667737/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Conventions and the two Additional Protocols provide
us with a solid basis both for preventing massive human
rights violations and for holding parties to the conflict
accountable for war crimes and similar crimes. For us,
fulfilling those obligations is the best way to support
peacekeeping operations in theatres where a decision to
deploy them has been made.
On the ground, peacekeeping operations can indeed
be very useful in the protection of civilians, although
it should be remembered that the responsibility for
that lies first with host States. The contribution of
peacekeepers can take the form of support to existing
local and community-based security mechanisms.
It can take the form of military and police action,
such as patrols, or logistical support in the area of
communication or protecting a refugee camp. In a more
long-term perspective, the implementation of capacitybuilding programmes, with the aim of providing the
defence and security forces of host countries with the
skills they need to carry out their sovereign functions,
is the most sustainable approach.
Finally, with regard to the role of the United Nations
as a whole and that of the Security Council, I must also
mention the many initiatives that are being taken to
ensure that the protection of civilians is the cornerstone
of United Nations action in its peacekeeping operations.
The Secretary-General’s Rights Up Front initiative, the
zero-tolerance policy with regard to sexual violence, the
deployment of advisers on the protection of civilians in
some peacekeeping operations, and the initiatives of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to evaluate
progress in the implementation of the mandates are
welcome initiatives.
However, despite all those efforts, the picture is not
bright and calls on us to do more. The Security Council
must develop clear mandates for the protection of
civilians and ensure that missions are equipped not only
with sufficient resources to execute them, but also with
the provisions they need to put those resources in place.
I say that because our troops in Darfur, for example,
no longer have sufficient food rations. The American
representative mentioned that earlier, but unfortunately,
this is not the first time that has happened. When it
happened, we were obliged to send money to our soldiers
in Darfur to enable them to directly purchase what they
needed to eat. If we need to maintain a sufficient level
of morale for our troops as they protect civilians, they
must have the necessary means, including the means of
subsistence and nourishment.
38/94

10/06/2016

It is also important to be realistic and flexible and
to change a mission’s mandate whenever it is required
by the reality on the ground. We are pleased that those
elements were given due attention in the various reviews
conducted in 2015, which seek to present a different face
of United Nations peacekeeping operations, namely that
of human-centred operations on the ground. In the case
of Mali, which is of concern because it is very close to
my country, Burkina Faso, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to increase by 2,500 the
personnel of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
We call on the Economic Community of West African
States to strengthen MINUSMA so as to make it
more robust, more aggressive and better suited to
the situation in northern Mali. That request is all the
more immediate and important to us, since Burkina
Faso suffers collaterally from the ongoing crisis in
northern Mali.
In a single year, we have suffered a dozen terrorist
attacks on our borders, targeting civilians, police and
gendarmerie posts. The last one took place at night on
31 May. There were three victims, all police officers.
The most tragic attack, also related to the situation in
Mali, took place in Ouagadougou, an attack in January
on the Cappuccino Restaurant and Splendid Hotel, in
which 32 people died, all civilians.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the
readiness of my country, Burkina Faso, to continue to
support the actions of the international community in
the field of peacekeeping. I welcome the adoption of
the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians,
to which my country has acceded. I would also like to
acknowledge and thank our partners present here, whose
multifaceted support has always been crucial in the
predeployment training of troops and police deployed
to the peacekeeping theatres of operation. It is my
hope that this exchange will contributes significantly
to our thinking on ways to lessen the untold suffering
inflicted on humans, which cannot be justified under
any pretext.
The President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of the Republic of Benin.
Mr. Agbenonci (Benin) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Sir, for the invitation to participate
in this open debate on the protection of civilians in
periods of armed conflict. I would like to extend my
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

warm congratulations to you on behalf of the President
of the Republic of Benin, Mr. Patrice Talon, on your
assumption of the rotating presidency of the Security
Council. I also wish to acknowledge and welcome
the presence of His Excellency Mr. Faustin Archange
Touadera, President of the Central African Republic,
the Secretary-General, and Mr. Peter Maurer, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
The issue on the agenda today for this open debate is
of crucial importance, given the purposes and principles
of the United Nations, whose primary mission is to save
succeeding generations from armed conflicts, which
unfortunately continue to be a blight on humanity.
In view of the mass atrocities committed in hot spots
around our planet, it is not surprising that your country,
France, the birthplace of human rights, has decided to
make the issue of the protection of civilians a major
theme of its presidency of the Security Council.
The stakes are high, and no one can remain
indifferent in the light of the multiple serious violations
of international humanitarian law and of the principle
of the inviolability of United Nations troops. Such
violations have been effected by Government forces and
by extremist non-State groups, which, in the cross-fire
of attempting to destabilize States, also target peaceful
civilian populations.
The increasing efforts deployed by the United
Nations to strengthen the protection of civilians as part
of peacekeeping operations shows the willingness on
the part of the international community to strengthen
the capacity of countries to prevent gross violations of
human rights affecting civilian populations in conflict
situations. In that context, matching the real threats
with the Security Council’s mandates and the measures
deployed for implementing them are a problem to which
it is important to find appropriate solutions.
In addition to military means, the use of which
is bound by the rules of engagement, the issue of the
protection of civilians must be consistently addressed
on the agenda as a cross-cutting and multidimensional
concern. As such, it must be integrated into all
decision-making processes regarding the management
of conflict situations. It is up to those responsible
for the mission to be aware of and define the sources
of instability and the deep roots of the threats and
to neutralize them. That could entail carrying out
measures to anticipate threats and acting to mediate

S/PV.7711

and identify measures to contain or avoid the escalation
of violence.
Given the genuine limits on the use of force, softpower methods can be much more effective in certain
cases, as they make it possible, for example, to maintain
a dialogue between protagonists. The passive use of
military force could add to the deterrent function.
The value of mobilizing and engaging potential
trouble-making factions in income-generating activities
has been proven and demonstrated by the effectiveness
of rapid impact projects. That has worked, in my
experience, in the context of peacekeeping operations
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
a thought that came to mind when I was considering
the subject and related issues in the concept note
(S/2016/502, annex) prepared for this open debate.
On the second question, I must stress that
relationships with local actors and non-governmental
organizations, on the one hand, and with regional and
international organizations, on the other, are important
channels of influence, but must be used with caution,
so that they can become factors that can help anticipate,
manage and stabilize situations at risk. In that regard,
the contribution of non-governmental organizations
that deploy and manage early-warning mechanisms
is highly appreciated. They deserve to be duly taken
into account as full partners on the ground. Support for
those mechanisms could be a powerful lever to ensure
the protection of civilians.
Furthermore, it is also important to understand
that humanitarian actors can play a key role in the joint
implementation of quick-impact projects, which can
help to strengthen a constructive partnership between
them and the missions. Precautionary measures are
necessary so as to ensure that humanitarian actors can
maintain their separate identity on the ground as well
as their own rules of operation. I also think that more
importance should be attached to awareness-raising
and information-sharing measures among local and
international stakeholders in potential areas of tension
where there might be risks to the civilian population.
The latest generation of integrated missions has
received explicit mandates to ensure the protection
of civilians, but it is necessary that those mandates
be regularly assessed so as to ensure that they are
adapted to the actual situations. In order to increase
the suitability of Council resolutions, their elaboration

16-1667739/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

ought to include a meticulous assessment of the
situation at issue with the involvement of regional and
subregional organizations, which have the advantage
of being closer to the reality on the ground, of having
a better understanding of the intangibles and of being
able to weigh the local significance.
Affected troops assigned to protect civilians must
receive appropriate training as well, particularly in
order to ensure the proportionality of their responses
to anticipated threats. It is important that those troops
be well equipped and psychologically well prepared
to assume their responsibilities. In that regard, the
Government of Benin would like to express its support
for the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians,
which underscore the good practices of troopcontributing countries in efforts to protect civilians.
Those are my thoughts on the theme of this open
debate. I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to speak, to
contribute to finding a solution to the serious challenges
facing the international community, which is currently
confronted with various trouble spots. I would like to
conclude by stressing the importance of the issue of
the protection of civilians, which should remain on
the Security Council agenda, so that there can be more
in-depth thinking on it and regular exchanges on the
topic, given its importance for the credibility of the
United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Trade and Development
Cooperation of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
Ms. Plowmen (Netherlands): I thank France for
putting the protection of civilians on the agenda of the
Security Council. This extremely important topic is
at the heart of the work of the United Nations. While
the Netherlands aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
with the statement by the representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection of
Civilians, I would like to make some remarks in my
national capacity.
In his report (S/2016/447) on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, the Secretary-General
presents us with a shocking truth, that is, more than
ever before, warring parties are targeting civilians, and
too many perpetrators are still getting away with it.
The international community cannot let such crimes go
unpunished. It must provide justice to the victims, and
it must issue a credible warning to those considering
40/94

10/06/2016

violence against civilians: war crimes will be punished.
That is why the recent conviction of Hissène Habré for
crimes against humanity, war crimes and torture by
the Special Tribunal in Senegal is such an important
step. That is also why the Netherlands fully supports
the legal institutions in The Hague and elsewhere that
help achieve justice.
The report confirms our worst fears about
conflict-related sexual violence. Women and girls
are particularly vulnerable, especially when they are
displaced and seek refuge in another country. They
can fall victim to human trafficking, abuse and forced
prostitution. That includes women and girls in Europe.
I fully support the Secretary-General’s call to redouble
our efforts to prevent conflict-related sexual violence
and take action to stop it.
That is no easy task. In South Sudan, for instance,
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
is fulfilling an almost impossible duty. A small number
of troops and police are having to protect around
200,000 displaced persons at designated sites near
UNMISS bases. During a visit to Malakal less than two
years ago, I had an opportunity to witness at first hand
the challenges that peacekeepers were up against. I saw
that people faced the greatest dangers, including sexual
violence, when they had to move around — when
searching for water, food and firewood, for example.
But UNMISS was already struggling to secure the
designated site, mainly due to limited capacity. The
mandate to protect civilians was translated into
physically securing the area, even though the biggst
threats to people’s safety were just outside that area.
The tragic incident at Malakal in February 2016
proves once again the need for proactive actions by
peacekeepers, based on prudent intelligence. We look
forward to the outcomes of the special investigation by
the United Nations. Those responsible for making fatal
mistakes should be held accountable.
United Nations missions around the world face
similar dilemmas, namely, how to give civilians
sufficient freedom of movement while at the same
time offering sufficient protection. Although the
protection of civilians is part and parcel of mandates,
peacekeepers often have to make do with very limited
resources. Partly as a result of that, the protection of
civilians risks becoming merely protection of sites — a
necessary but clearly insufficient condition for keeping
people safe and secure.
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7711

The gap between principle and practice is still too
wide. I want to suggest four ways of closing that gap.

General’s zero-tolerance policy when it comes to such
horrendous practices.

First, we have to be realistic. Blanket mandates
to protect civilians are often neither credible nor
achievable. All too often, expectations fail to match
a mission’s capabilities. A protection-of-civilians
strategy and a specific plan of action should be in
place after a mandate is adopted and before the mission
is deployed. Furthermore, they should be updated
regularly. The strategy should include close cooperation
with actors on the ground, because that is the only
way to protect civilians, both inside designated areas
and beyond. It means working with partners — often
non-governmental partners — that provide basic
services. And it means joining forces with organizations
that promote reconciliation and dialogue.

As a partner for peace, justice and development,
the Kingdom of the Netherlands wants to contribute
to further improving peacekeeping missions. That
is a major reason for which we are a candidate for a
non-permanent seat on the Security Council for the
2017-2018 term.

Secondly, implementation is key. The Security
Council’s Informal Expert Group on the Protection
of Civilians should meet on a more regular basis to
discuss specific missions. It should proactively advise
the Council and offer proposals to improve protection.
The Expert Group needs to be regularly briefed by
protection-of-civilians advisers working on missions.
Thirdly, we also need a stronger link between
the actors on the ground and the actors in New York.
The Security Council should adopt a new system
for more regular and more transparent briefings by
troop-contributing countries and non-governmental
organizations. Those briefings should take place well
in advance of mandate renewals.
Fourthly, the Kigali Principles on the Protection of
Civilians deserve our full support. They constitute a
political commitment by troop- and police-contributing
countries to better train and equip their peacekeepers,
to avoid caveats on protection-of-civilians mandates
and to hold accountable those who do not carry
out their mandate as they should. On 11 May the
Netherlands held a high-level event, which resulted
in 20 countries joining the original 9 countries that
had endorsed the Kigali Principles. I am pleased that
today several countries expressed their support for the
Kigali Principles.
Along with Rwanda and United States Africa
Command, the Netherlands is going to organize a
training centred on the protection of civilians, with
special attention to preventing and addressing sexual
abuse and exploitation. We support the Secretary-

Let us not forget that, in the end, peacekeeping
missions are about all those vulnerable men, women
and children in conflict situations who depend on us,
the United Nations, for their protection. Their concern
should be the Council’s main concern.
The President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs
of Nigeria.
Ms. Ibrahim (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this very important open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and for the concept note
(S/2016/503, annex) provided to guide our discussion.
We also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing. We acknowledge the important role of France,
among others, on this issue, including our region, with
the Multinational Joint Task Force. We appreciate the
perspectives brought to the debate by His Excellency
the President of the Central African Republic and the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Peter Maurer.
United Nations peace operations are a vital part
of the global security architecture. They have been
a source of hope for victims of conflict. Vulnerable
people living in conflict zones across the world count
on the United Nations to protect them. With the growing
number of people affected by conflict, that has become
a challenge for the United Nations. To its credit, the
Organization has taken bold steps to meet the challenge.
Nigeria is pleased to note the progress made,
particularly at the normative level, since the Council
took the historic step in 1999 to recognize the
protection of civilians as central to the mandate of
peacekeeping missions. Ten of the 16 current United
Nations peacekeeping missions, involving more than
97 per cent of all United Nations peacekeepers, have
the protection of civilians in their mandates. Resolution
1894 (2009), which calls for allocation of resources for
the protection of civilians, is emblematic of the effort

16-1667741/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

to translate normative commitments into concrete
measures that enhance the protection of civilians in
theatres of conflict.
The international community expects the United
Nations to perform flawlessly when offering protection
to civilians in conflict areas. However, the challenges
faced by peacekeeping missions are often overlooked or
not adequately appreciated. Indeed, challenges remain
in the implementation of protection mandates in conflict
areas. We support the continued engagement of the
Security Council on the issue, and we see merit in the
pragmatic and effective efforts to achieve constructive
results to that end.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a task
that involves multiple issues and requires the collective
efforts of various stakeholders. At the strategic level,
close collaboration among the Security Council,
the United Nations Department for Peacekeeping
Operations, troop- and police-contributing countries
and individual United Nations peacekeeping missions
is vital for the success of a protection-of-civilians
mandate. Similarly, at the tactical level, close
coordination among the various components of a peace
mission is crucial to achieving success in the protection
of civilians in conflict areas. It should be underscored
that a clear and common understanding of protection
mandates is fundamental to the effectiveness of
strategic coordination among mission components.
While emphasizing the imperative for peacekeepers
to act when civilians are under threat, we urge troopand police-contributing countries to ensure that their
personnel have the requisite predeployment training in
protection issues. It is also important that peacekeepers
not be restricted by additional caveats beyond those
explicitly accepted by the Secretariat before deployment.
Nigeria strongly supports community engagement
in promoting the protection of civilians. Communityalert networks and community-liaison assistants are
vital to understanding perceptions of threat at the
community level, including how communities seek to
reduce risks and how peace operations can address
them. We would like to see the international community
recognize those imperatives.
Nigeria is firmly committed to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and recognizes the primary
responsibility of States to protect civilians within their
national jurisdictions. That conviction underlies our
Government’s resolve to take all measures necessary to
42/94

10/06/2016

protect civilians in the battle against the terrorist group
Boko Haram and its likes. Indeed, the Government of
Nigeria has no higher priority than to rescue all of the
persons held hostage by that group.
Since the establishment of the Multinational Joint
Task Force, considerable success has been recorded
in the battle against Boko Haram. Over a thousand
kidnapped women and children have been rescued, and
all territories once controlled by the group have been
recovered. Despite the enormous efforts made by the
Nigerian Government and the member States of the
Lake Chad Basin Commission as well as by the Republic
of Benin, we believe that more still needs to be done.
We recognize the imperative for internally displaced
persons and other vulnerable groups to be provided
with adequate protection, as anything short of that could
expose them to further abuse. We therefore call on the
international community to continue to support the
efforts of the Multinational Joint Task Force to protect
civilians in the course of their intricate assignment.
In conclusion, Nigeria salutes the courage of
peacekeepers, who work tirelessly, usually under very
challenging circumstances, to keep civilians safe. We
pay tribute to the men and women who have lost their
lives while serving in United Nations peacekeeping
missions, and we offer our deep condolences to their
families, their friends and their Governments.
The President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to the State Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Bangladesh.
Mr. Alam: (Bangladesh) I thank the President
for inviting us to this high-level open debate in the
Security Council. We look forward to a successful
French presidency of the Council under his leadership
this month. I also thank the briefers for their thoughtprovoking observations today. We look forward to the
Secretary-General’s report on the organization-wide
response to the Agenda for Humanity, including on the
protection of civilians.
Only a few days back, as we do every year in our
capital, we observed the International Day of United
Nations Peacekeepers in a fitting manner. It was a
sobering occasion for recalling the invaluable role
played by our peacekeepers, often in difficult situations
where there is no peace to keep.
I had the opportunity last year to attend the
International Conference on the Protection of
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Civilians in Kigali, Rwanda. Earlier in the year, we
had the chance to interact with the members of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,
as we hosted them in Dhaka for their Asia-Pacific
regional consultations.
It has been personally quite rewarding to follow the
developments concerning the protection of civilians in
the context of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
In Bangladesh, we have embraced the notion of
protecting civilians in terms of our contribution to
United Nations peacekeeping operations as a matter
of principle and pragmatism. We have the haunting
memory of 3 million of our people killed during our
War of Liberation in 1971, which we do not wish to see
repeated anywhere else in the world. It is unacceptable
to think that civilians come under armed attack in a
situation where our peacekeepers remain deployed. Our
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina therefore never thought
twice when, at the peacekeeping summits that she has
co-chaired over the last two years, she committed to the
mainstreaming of the protection-of-civilians mandate
in peacekeeping training for our troops and police. As
a lead troop-contributing country, we consider it our
responsibility to lead by example and, at times, venture
into untested territories. Our endorsement of the Kigali
Principles on Protection of Civilians was largely
guided by that perspective. Our initiative to take steps
forward with our personnel- and capability-readiness
arrangements has been prompted by our continued
efforts to strive for the better.
In line with our value-driven engagement in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, Bangladesh wishes to
remain one of the first responders to the United Nations
call for troops, police and capabilities. We commit
ourselves to discharging the tasks mandated by the
Council without any caveats. We remain aware of the
growing and complex challenges in the environments
in which we operate. Yet we make it a point to stand our
ground, as we continue to do in Mali and in the Central
African Republic.
We see the real need for intelligence and
technologies to serve our troops’ vital interests on the
ground, particularly so as to enhance their capacity for
protecting civilians and ensure their own safety and
security. We stand ready to constructively support the
work of developing an enabling policy and operational
frameworks on those issues in a transparent and
consultative manner.

S/PV.7711

As has been noted, much work has already been
done on developing a set of norms and guidelines for
protecting civilians in peacekeeping operations. But
there remain certain gaps between policies and practice.
It has often been a challenge to get the mandates
spelled out in clear terms, which leaves them open to
interpretation in the field. It is therefore important for
the Council to occasionally review the mandates in
close consultation with host Governments, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the United Nations
Secretariat. In that context, we wish to thank the
French delegation for holding informal consultations
with the troop-contributing countries concerned in its
capacity as the penholder for resolution 2227 (2015)
on the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali.
It is crucial that mandate design and review be
guided by the strategic analysis and assessment of
the threats to civilians, based on real-time feedback
from the field. On the other hand, there must be
sufficient leverage for field missions to develop their
respective strategies and targets within the broader
framework of the mandates set by the Council.
Mission leaderships need to be empowered enough
to ensure coherent mission-wide approaches to
protecting civilians. The protection mandate demands
a corresponding investment in building the capacity of
missions, including for situational awareness, threat
assessment, strategic planning, timely information
and communication, and needs-based training. It is
important that the necessary resources and capabilities
be made available to missions to enable them to fulfil
their mandated tasks.
It would be quite impractical, however, to expect
that United Nations peacekeeping operations would
be the only answer to protecting civilians. That would
hardly be fair, since peacekeeping missions must operate
within certain principles, parameters and limitations.
It may be justified to hold peacekeepers responsible if
they fail to deliver in a given circumstance, but it is
neither feasible nor perhaps desirable for peacekeepers
to bear the burden of protecting civilians when that is
essentially the responsibility of national Governments.
It is important that peacekeepers be made aware of
whom to protect, where to protect and in partnership
with whom. The Council and mission leaderships
have a shared responsibility to manage expectations
and disseminate the right information so as to avoid
confusion, especially among local populations.

16-1667743/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

There is often room for peacekeeping missions
to contribute to building the capacity of national
authorities and other local actors in protecting
civilians. There may also be potential for working in
collaboration with relevant regional or international
actors deployed on the front lines. Such scenarios need
to be carefully mapped out and worked through in the
course of mandate design and implementation.
It is critical for peacekeepers and humanitarian
actors to work in tandem in a protection crisis so as
to be able to respond to the particular needs of those
affected, especially women, children and the elderly. We
resolutely condemn any disruption of or barriers against
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to civilian
populations under any pretext. The commitments
made in that regard at the World Humanitarian
Summit last month must be followed through in a
coherent, coordinated and inclusive manner among all
concerned actors.
That also brings us to the bigger question of
considering the role of peacekeepers in protecting
civilians within a focused and far-reaching political
approach to sustaining peace. Peacekeepers can be tasked
with firefighting in the case of an emergency, but the
threat of such protection crises will continue to remain
as long as the underlying political drivers of conflict or
breaching of peace are not effectively addressed.
The Council must remain seized with such broader
political issues in order to prevent a recurrence of
protection challenges and to lend credibility to ission
mandates on a sustained basis.
For us, protecting civilians in the peacekeeping
context is something much more fundamental and
serious than mere mandate implementation. I recall
my visit to the Genocide Museum in Kigali and the
harrowing tales and reminiscent of the international
community’s failure to protect innocent civilians from
mass atrocity crimes. We must continue to use such
powerful memorial tools to renew our commitment to
protecting civilians, and doing it right:
Bangladesh pledges to do its part as best it can.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister of State for Cooperation of Rwanda.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Let me begin by commending
your country, Sir, for convening this important debate,
which provides us with an opportunity to exchange
views on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I
44/94

10/06/2016

believe that in the past months we have come closer to
wholeheartedly embracing a progressive protection-ofcivilians agenda.
The Council may recall that, on 14 May, 20 new
troop- and police-contributing countries pledged their
unwavering commitment to protecting civilians by
supporting the Kigali Principles on the Protection of
Civilians. Their affirmation validates the prioritization
of protection of civilian mandates. As we tread forward,
we will continue to seek the support of countries, like
France, that bear witness to the important role the
Kigali Principles can play in the field. When lives are
at stake, we must act.
The plight of civilians is increasing, which means
that our actions must not simply match but exceed
the needs on the ground for long-term changes to
materialize. It is not the armed actors or rebels, or even
factions that most suffer in today’s conflicts, bur rather
civilians. It is not the towns that have been plummeted
or the waterlines that have been shut off that most
devastate a community; rather, it is the loss of innocent
lives, of neighbours, of loved ones who could have been
you, or me, or anyone here in the Chamber.
The violence facing civilians is growing in
magnitude, intensity and frequency, while the majority
of our actions in response remain the same. I believe
that in adhering to the Kigali Principles we can
implement the changes needed to see a real impact.
That, in turn, will prove to civilians that their needs
can be met and surpassed with sound, effective and
consistent peacekeeping.
On a strategic level, there are necessary
improvements to our peacekeeping missions that can
produce clear and achievable mandates.
First, we should produce clear and achievable
mandates. That requires thoroughly assessing the needs
on the ground and then pairing them appropriately
with the roles and responsibilities of peacekeepers.
Embedding phased and sequenced mandates into the
process will ensure that the protection of civilians
remains a top priority and is not constrained by other
tasks or a lack of adequate resources.
Secondly, the Security Council must oversee that
all phases of the mandate include political solutions that
will allow the country to move forward, guaranteeing
that a relapse is not imminent. If prevention work is
coupled with a substantial and consistent investment
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

in understanding the root causes of conflicts, we can
stop history from repeating itself and once and for all
eliminate the reopening of historic wounds.
Thirdly, peacekeepers have a right to clear and
intelligible tasks that ensure the effective and thorough
protection of civilians. That will also aid peacekeepers
in comprehending how and why perpetrators may
attack civilians, so that their responses can be
intelligent and tailored. We can all attest to hearing
stories of peacekeepers who have been spread too thin
or who are ill-equipped to protect civilians. Although
their intentions are selfless and courageous, we are not
doing our jobs correctly if they are on the ground with
only those two values to shield them from threats and
other dangers.
Fourthly, we fully subscribe to applicable and
contemporary training during predeployment and
in-mission that includes the protection of civilians
and sexual exploitation and abuse. If peacekeepers
are properly trained on sexual exploitation and abuse,
a culture will develop among peacekeepers that seek
for them to exercise good judgment and holds them
completely accountable for any misconduct.
Fifthly, mission leadership must also be
strengthened so that an effective chain of command can
develop and respond to any threat or danger to civilians.
That undeniably empowers uniformed peacekeepers to
take the necessary measures to save lives rather than
fearing the consequences of misjudged actions.
That leads me to one of the most important points
of the debate, namely, the unimpeded use of force. A
pattern of not intervening when civilians are under
attack must not and cannot become the norm. As one of
the Kigali Principles denotes, troops should be
“prepared to use force to protect civilians, as
necessary and consistent with the mandate.”
That includes a show of deterrence to the
inter-positioning of forces between armed actors
and civilians. Clarity behind that principle will
allow peacekeepers to discern and respond to
armed violence. We owe it to peacekeepers and the
civilians whose lives are at stake to have a clear and
synchronized understanding of the use of force by
the Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries.
Civilians expect peacekeepers to use force when
their lives are threatened. When armed violence

S/PV.7711

escalates, we must act. That proactive stance to
peacekeeping will reap many benefits, including
preventing future conflicts or further escalation of
current ones.
Lastly, we must become more centred if we are to
undertake missions with mandates that seek to protect
people. We must dispose of the old ways that hindered our
thinking and halted decision-making or decision-taking
that could have saved lives. Let us also inspire our
peacekeepers to continue engaging with civilians to
fortify their relationship with and trust in us. This will
result in the collection of data and other intelligence
that is invaluable to any peacekeeping mission.
Rwanda, as a top troop- and police-contributing
country, and as a nation that witnessed first-hand
the grave shortcomings of the United Nations, let me
caution against not taking action. Remaining silent is
a response. It conveys either complete disinterest or
complete apathy. We have gathered here today to take
stock of what is needed to succeed. Under the auspices
of the recommendations of the High-Level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations, the Secretary-General’s
subsequent report and the best practices embedded in
the Kigali Principles, the way forward has been paved
for us.
Now is the time to act and respond strategically and
swiftly. We welcome all those gathered here today that
have yet to endorse the Kigali Principles to join us in
subscribing to them. The way forward may be filled
with uncertainties and new challenges that attempt to
rob us of our faith and values. Let us not allow for either.
Let us move in a manner that speaks to our strengths.
Today, let us choose a way forward that most effectively
protects the lives of all civilians, for, as His Excellency
President Paul Kagame has said, “The central purpose
of peace operations is the protection of civilians. This
cannot be said often enough”.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Worship of Argentina.
Mr. Foradori (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International development of France, His Excellency
Mr. Jean-Marc Ayrault, for having convened this
high-level open debate on an issue to which Argentina
attaches a great deal of importance in its capacity as a
country contributing troops and police to peacekeeping
operations, which we have done for almost 60 years now.

16-1667745/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We have also been a consistent promoter of full respect
for human rights and for international humanitarian law.
Likewise, we welcome the statements delivered
by his Excellency the President of the Central African
Republic, the Secretary-General and the President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross.
The protection-related tasks of the United Nations
have a central role to play in the context of the new
emphasis placed by the Organization on conflict
prevention and the achievement of sustainable peace
and development, on the basis of the three reviews
that took place focusing on peacekeeping operations,
peacebuilding and the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. There
can be no doubt that such protection tasks, particularly
those carried out by peacekeeping operations of the
United Nations, are vital when it comes to sustaining
peace before, during and after conflict.
In this task, for which host States themselves have
the primary responsibility, it is crucial that we have the
participation of all relevant national actors, in particular
civil society, bearing in mind the key role of women
and youth in conflict prevention and in the maintenance
and building of peace.
The protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations has a different focus than does the
protection of civilians in the framework of international
humanitarian law. This has become a hot topic of
discussion over the past few years, particularly given
its link to the use of armed force.
Against that backdrop and in line with the
recommendation contained in the report (S/2015/446) of
the High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,
which is also acknowledged in this latest report, it is
clear that the protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations constitutes an integrated effort on the part
of a mission as a whole, requiring primarily close
cooperation between the military, police and civilian
components, in coordination with Governments, local
communities and the humanitarian organizations on
the ground.
My country therefore understands that this issue
cannot be considered from a purely military perspective
but has to be understood from a broader and more
integrated political and humanitarian perspective that is
focused on the fostering of a more secure environment
for protection. In such an environment, the use of
46/94

10/06/2016

force, which is sometimes necessary in order to avert
tragedies such as those in Srebrenica and in Rwanda,
where peacekeeping operations failed the people they
were supposed to defend, constitutes a measure of last
resort when other, non-military alternatives fail.
Also on the basis of other recommendations
contained in the Panel’s report, we underscore the
importance of non-armed strategies for the protection
of civilians in order to move peace processes forward,
as well as the creation of the aforementioned climate
of protection.
We believe that there can be an improvement in
many aspects of the implementation of protection-ofcivilians mandates in peacekeeping operations, among
which we would underscore the specific training of troop
and police contingents. We acknowledge the efforts of
the Secretariat in devising guidelines and doctrinal
frameworks for such training. We reiterate the need for
broad-based consultations thereon with Member States,
particularly police- and troop-contributing countries,
because they will have to use them.
The effective protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations also requires unwavering political will,
effective cooperation at the regional level, the better
equipping of contingents, more specific and central
planning tailored to the challenges on the ground,
and the use of new technologies, in keeping with the
principles of the Charter and of peacekeeping. All of
this is of course closely linked to the adequate financing
of such missions.
What happens regarding the protection of civilians
anywhere in the world is not a matter of indifference
for the Argentine delegation, because it affects all of
us directly. That is why Argentina supports, in this
area and in others, the principle of non-indifference
among States. We cannot continue to lead from behind;
we must roll out a solid, collective policy that ensures
accurate diagnoses in order to promote specific
therapeutic actions.
When civilians in desperate situations approach
Blue Helmets, the basic minimum they expect from
them is protection. Our responsibility as Member
States is to create effective tools so that peacekeeping
operations do not fail to live up to that expectation and
serve to create a sustainable protection environment.
We must be equal to the circumstances and know how
to respond to those who require the protection of the
United Nations. We in the United Nations must be smart
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

enough to prevent, strong enough to implement and
secure enough to lead. This is our collective obligation.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Deputy Foreign Minister for Multilateral
and Global Affairs of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Choi Jong-moon (Republic of Korea): The
Republic of Korea appreciates the timely initiative of
France to convene today’s high-level open debate on
protecting civilians in the context of peacekeeping
operations. I thank His Excellency Minister Jean-Marc
Ayrault for having come to New York to preside over
today’s debate. It is a testimony to France’s enduring
commitment to effective United Nations peacekeeping
operations and the universal promotion of human rights
and international humanitarian law.
Korea also appreciates the thorough briefing by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. We commend his
leadership in guiding the three landmark reviews
on peace operations, the peacebuilding architecture
and resolution 1325 (2000). In particular, we strongly
support his initiative to place high priority on the
protection-of-civilians mandate in United Nations
peace operations.
I also thank President Touadera of the Central
African Republic and International Committee of
the Red Cross President Maurer for their invaluable
remarks on this very important issue today.
The Republic of Korea is deeply concerned about
the unprecedented scale of civilian casualties from
armed conflicts around the world. In fact, under the
Korean presidency in February 2013, the Council
adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2013/2, on
protection of civilians. It focused on fighting impunity,
implementing peacekeeping protection mandates, and
establishing a regular reporting cycle for the SecretaryGeneral’s reports. Despite the growing emphasis on the
importance of the protection of civilians, the reality
on the ground is quite troublesome. Peacekeepers
in South Sudan, the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan still
face great difficulties in carrying out their protection of
civilians mandate.
Korea, as a long-standing troop-contributing
country and major financial contributor, makes firm
commitments to finding ways that will allow the United
Nations to carry out its mandate successfully. Korea
organized a series of meetings in New York and Seoul

S/PV.7711

last year to this effect. Findings from those meetings
provided inputs for the high-level thematic debate on
peace and security organized by the President of the
General Assembly last month. Allow me to briefly
introduce some of the findings, which are also in line
with the concept note for today’s debate.
First, peacekeeping protection of civilians mandates
should reflect the context on the ground instead of
following pre-existing templates. Related to this
point, deeper engagements with relevant stakeholders,
including local communities, were emphasized in
order to avoid a one-size-fits-all approach. Secondly,
analytical function needs to be strengthened during
the pre-mandate planning stage. Thirdly, there is
a need for the Security Council to prioritize and
consider sequenced mandates that can make Security
Council resolutions more realistic and implementable.
Fourthly, the training, capacities and responsibility of
troops were identified as an area that must be explored
further, especially in light of the recent cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse. Indeed, this is a grave concern
for all of us. Korea concurs with all of these findings and
urges Security Council members to seriously consider
these and other similar recommendations that emerged
from various processes that followed the 2015 review.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/447) laments the fact that humanitarian needs
are at a record high and more than 80 per cent of United
Nations humanitarian funding is directed at conflict
response. Faced with such a daunting challenge, Korea
joined other Member States to build up the momentum
generated by the World Humanitarian Summit held
in Istanbul, Turkey in May. During the summit, we
pledged to expand our support for conflict prevention
and humanitarian assistance.
Furthermore, Korea, along with the co-host, Timor
Leste, is pleased to announce that the sixth annual
meeting of the Global Network of Responsibility to
Protect Focal Points will be held in Seoul on June 20 to
22. It will be the first of its kind to take place in Asia,
and will bring together senior officials responsible
for facilitating national mechanisms for atrocity
prevention, with much of the discussion to be focused
on the protection of civilians.
In closing, Korea is deeply concerned by the lack
of protection of civilians caused by the devastating
conditions inside Syria’s besieged and hard-to-reach
areas. We support the French and Mexican initiative on

16-1667747/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

10/06/2016

veto restraint, as well as the code of conduct regarding
Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes, and urge the members
of the Security Council to take timely and decisive
action to protect civilians in conflict-affected regions.

welcomes the formulation of the Kigali Principles on
the Protection of Civilians. Yesterday, my Mission
forwarded a note verbale regarding our support for the
Kigali Principles to the Permanent Mission of Rwanda
here in New York.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.

Fourthly, police activities must be strengthened.
The police play a crucial role in peacekeeping
operations, particularly with regard to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. Germany therefore
welcomes the current evaluation report on the United
Nations Police Division. The report contains extensive
recommendations on the strengthening of that police
force. We are confident that the Secretariat will
not delay in implementing them. In conclusion, Sir,
Germany shares your view that it is necessary to assign
greater responsibility to the United Nations and the
international community in the protection of civilian
persons. Doing so requires conceptual work, in which
Germany will continue to participate fully.

Mr. Braun (Germany) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank France for organizing this important
debate. I also thank all the eminent experts for their
valuable and informative briefings.
Germany aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the European Union and Switzerland on behalf of
the Group of Friends.
It is imperative that we significantly strengthen
our commitment to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, as summed up perfectly by the SecretaryGeneral in his current report. The protection of civilians
is among the most urgent tasks of peacekeeping. In
order to carry out the task, four pillars are required, in
Germany’s view.
First, there is the central role of the Security
Council. It is the responsibility of the Council to deeply
entrench the protection of civilians in the mandates
of peacekeeping operations and to support these
operations at the political and operational levels when a
heightened threat to civilians is obvious. Furthermore,
where national criminal prosecution mechanisms fail,
it must also ensure the application of international law
in the event of war crimes and crimes against humanity.
The aim is to send a clear message: attacks targeting
civilians will not go unpunished.
Secondly, there is a need to ensure the safety of
members of peacekeeping forces. The mission in Mali
is a perfect illustration of this growing threat. This
year alone, terrorists have killed 12 Blue Helmets and
countless civilians in targeted attacks. By adding 400
soldiers with state-of-the-art equipment to the German
contingent of the United Mission Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
we underscore the determination of our commitment to
this mission and to the civilian population.
Thirdly, peacekeeping operations must adopt good
practices. Germany shares the concerns expressed by
the Secretary-General in his latest report and supports
his call to undertake more effective measures to
improve the protection of civilians. Germany therefore
48/94

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Ms. Kuspan (Kazakhstan) (spoke in French): I
thank the French presidency for convening this open
debate on the issue of the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping operations. Today, armed conflicts are
marked by systematic violence and mass atrocities
against civilian populations. Therefore, the protection
of civilian populations constitutes a major challenge
to the ability of the United Nations and of its
peacekeeping operations.
My delegation would like to share a few thoughts
in response to the four issues identified in the concept
note of the French presidency. Kazakhstan already
supports the effective implementation of three United
Nations reviews, namely, on peacekeeping operations,
on the peacebuilding architecture in 2000 and on
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security.
In order to improve the effectiveness of peacekeeping
missions in the protection of civilians, it is necessary
to ensure a close synergy of the Security Council with
those missions well before preparing their mandates.
In particular, it is important to define the nature of
the threats that a mission will have to deal with on the
ground, the duration of the operation and the goals that
must be achieved to clearly plan a multidimensional or
hybrid mission.
The Security Council should adopt a strategy
focused on crisis management planning, which
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

involves military personnel and is then supported later
by the Department of Political Affairs. The special
representatives of the Secretary-General must have a
clear and strong mandate to protect civilians. This will
allow the host countries to become involved and firmly
commit themselves. The local teams on the ground,
together with the intergovernmental organizations;
donor countries; and humanitarian, human rights and
civil society organizations should reach an agreement
as stakeholders.
The Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral, their deputies and mission personnel at
all levels, the force commanders and the countries
deploying their personnel should know what their
respective capacities are and ensure that their
personnel receive special training courses through
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, as
well as by Member States.
It is essential to focus on capacity-building in host
countries, while adopting a road map for the protection
of civilians at national and local levels. This requires a
greater awareness among community leaders, women,
young people and local communities to mobilize them
to participate in peacekeeping operations. It also
requires adequate resources and competent trainers.
The training modules developed by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, together with United
Nations agencies and international non-governmental
organizations, such as the International Committee of
the Red Cross, Oxfam and Save the Children, can be
effectively used in this regard.
Kazakhstan proposes a broader use of the French
language through an appeal for more of French
speakers in peacekeeping operations. That will enable
us to better communicate with the local population in
certain countries.
The protection of civilians cannot be limited to
physical defence; it must also protect the human dignity
of women and children. The behaviour of peacekeepers
must be impeccable with zero tolerance with regard to
sexual exploitation and abuse, in accordance with the
guidelines issued by the Secretary-General.
A conflict environment is almost always
asymmetrical and dynamic. Peacekeeping operations
are frequently called upon to protect civilians under
very difficult and changing conditions. They are often
faced with new threats which can only be addressed

S/PV.7711

with the appropriate equipment — be it airborne, healthrelated or logistical. Their capacity to react should not
be impeded by a low technical level.
The use of advanced technologies, such as
unmanned aerial vehicles or digital satellite imagery,
together with good media coverage, is fundamental to
the success of such interventions. The recommendations
of the Expert Panel on Technology and Innovation in
United Nations Peacekeeping show that clearly.
Inspired by the strong involvement of France,
Kazakhstan joined the code of conduct proposed
by the ACT group. As an observer country of the
African Union, Kazakhstan is contributing to the
protection of civilians by providing its highly trained
military observers to the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara and to the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire. Before deploying
on the ground, our military complete an appropriate
United Nations training programme. We think that our
presence will increase in the future.
In the context of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) and
Agenda 2063, Kazakhstan believes in a broader concept
of peace and stability aimed at non-military and
people-oriented security. It includes food, water and
energy security, which together with nuclear safety, are
the major pillars of our candidacy for a non-permanent
seat on the Security Council for the period 2017-2018.
On 31 March, the President of Kazakhstan published
a manifesto, entitled “The World in the Twenty-first
Century”, in which he called on world leaders to put an
end to all wars by creating fair global structures. This
document is important in the context of the protection
of civilians.
I would like to conclude by assuring the Council
that Kazakhstan is committed to working together with
the United Nations make the protection of civilians a top
priority, in line with the Charter of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Chutikul (Thailand): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the members of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), comprising
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar,
the Philippines, Singapore, Viet Nam and my own
country, Thailand.

16-1667749/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

I wish to express ASEAN’s appreciation to the
French presidency for organizing today’s open debate
on the topic of the protection of civilians in the context
of peacekeeping operations and to all the briefers for
their informative presentations.
As stated in your concept note (S/2016/503, annex),
Mr. President, civilians remain the target of unacceptable
violence in situations of armed conflict. The report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(S/2015/446) describes the protection of civilians in
armed conflict as a core principle of international
humanitarian law and a moral responsibility for the
United Nations. In carrying out this responsibility, the
majority of United Nations peacekeeping operations
are now rightly mandated to protect civilians in their
areas of deployment and within their capabilities.
Before responding to some of the questions raised in
your concept note, ASEAN believes it is important to set
the context and parameters. First, the host country has
the primary responsibility to protect its own civilians.
Secondly, United Nations peacekeepers’ mandate to
protect civilians is derived from resolutions of the
Security Council. Finally, the three basic principles of
United Nations peacekeeping constitute the framework
within which the protection of civilians in the context
of peacekeeping operations is carried out.
How can we achieve better protection of civilians?
One of the key findings of the High-level Panel’s report
on the protection of civilians is that expectation and
capability must converge. In this regard, ASEAN wishes
to offer the following observations and suggestions.
First, as stressed by the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, we need to strengthen the
triangular cooperation among the Security Council,
troop- and police-contributing countries and the
Secretariat. Each has a distinct and crucial, yet
complementary and mutually reinforcing role. The
Security Council has the responsibility to ensure that
the protection mandate is well defined, achievable and
backed with adequate resources. It should be prepared
to review and adjust the mandate, taking into account
the evolving situation and the views of the troop- and
police-contributing countries.
Given the realities on the ground and the
complexities of the issue, it is difficult for peacekeepers
to fully understand the extent of their protection of
civilians obligations and the required actions they need
to take to implement it. Clear policy and implementation
50/94

10/06/2016

guidelines developed by the Secretariat are therefore
instrumental in dispelling such uncertainties. In
addition, the protection of civilians is not only the task
of uniformed personnel. Mission leadership is also
responsible for ensuring coherence and coordination
among military, police and civilian components of the
mission, in order to deliver a comprehensive approach
to the protection of civilians.
Troop- and police-contributing countries, for
their part, must undertake to train and prepare their
peacekeepers to meet the standards of readiness,
integrity and conduct required by the United Nations.
ASEAN troop- and police-contributing countries
reaffirm their commitment to properly train and
equip their peacekeepers to effectively discharge the
protection of civilians mandate.
Secondly, the protection of civilians does not
necessarily mean the use of force. ASEAN underlines
the relevance of unarmed strategies to protect civilians
in the context of peacekeeping operations. We wish to
highlight two aspects, namely, the early warning of
potential risks to civilians and capacity-building for
host State security institutions.
Having relevant, accurate and timely information,
such as on incidents of human rights violations, allows
peacekeeping operations to address imminent threats
to civilians before they can actually harm them.
Effective early warning can be achieved through
human intelligence gathering and the appropriate use of
technology. We emphasize the importance of interacting
and developing positive relationships with the local
population. The presence of female peacekeepers has
proven time and again to be crucial to operational
effectiveness in that regard.
Building a legitimate and effective State security
sector, in particular the armed forces and police, is
fundamental to the long-term prospects of creating a
safe and secure environment for civilians. Therefore,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities and
capacity-building should be an integral part of the
approach to the protection of civilians in the context
of peacekeeping operations. The Security Council,
in mandating such tasks, should give due regard to
national priorities and conditions, in order to instil a
sense of genuine ownership of the process.
In conclusion, ASEAN pays tribute to the men and
women who have admirably dedicated their lives to
protecting the lives of others. We honour their sacrifices
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and pledge to continue to work to strengthen United
Nations peacekeeping, to better protect civilians and to
ensure that peace will be secured and sustained.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Montenegro.
Mr. Šćepanović (Montenegro): I would like to
thank the French presidency for organizing this open
debate and for preparing the concept note (S/2016/503,
annex) before us. I also thank the briefers for their
valuable contribution to this debate.
My country fully associates itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union. I would
like, however, to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.
As stated in last year’s report of the SecretaryGeneral’s report,
“Despite some progress at the normative level,
the general state of the protection of civilians on
the ground remains bleak” (S/2015453, para. 9).
Civilians, unfortunately, account for the vast majority
of victims of armed conflicts. We live in an era in which
the extensive harm civilians endure and the widespread
violations of international law during armed conflicts
are almost accepted as a given, which is unacceptable.
In trying to remedy that fact, allow me to single out the
following two areas.
First is prevention and the peaceful resolution of
conflicts. These are obviously the most effective way to
protect civilians. Placing primacy on political solutions,
as well as strengthening preventive measures, is
therefore essential. That will, inter alia, require greater
utilization of mediation and closer collaboration of the
United Nations with regional arrangements.
When an end to violence is not possible, respect
for international law is crucial to ensuring that human
suffering is minimized. States and non-State armed
groups have the duty to protect, not target, civilians
and civilian objects, and to facilitate, not hinder, the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. In that sense,
the use of explosive weapons in populated areas is
especially concerning. All those who violate the law
must be held accountable for their actions. Otherwise,
violations will continue unabated. The Security Council
should consider applying targeted measures against
parties and individuals who systematically violate their
obligations to protect civilians.

S/PV.7711

The second area I would like to focus on is the design
and implementation of protection of civilian mandates.
If we want to ensure that peacekeeping missions
provide safety for civilians, protection of civilians
mandates must be tailored to the conditions on the
ground, rather than following a pre-established pattern.
Missions operate in ever more complex environments,
with peacekeepers being deployed in different types of
dangerous situations. That calls for improved conflict
analysis in the pre-mandate assessment phase, with
particular emphasis on how United Nations missions
can better respond to threats posed to civilians on
the ground.
Peacekeepers must be given the resources and
capabilities necessary to act more effectively through
improved mobility, proper equipment and medical
evacuation. New technologies can significantly help to
improve the security and safety of peacekeepers and
assets, as well as the United Nations capacity to protect
civilians and implement mandates more effectively.
I would like to highlight the fact that Montenegro
endorsed and fully supports Kigali Principles on the
Protection of Civilians. We hope that more countries
will recognize the merits of the Principles in our
common quest to further improve the implementation
of protection of civilians mandates. We also expect
that the entry into force of the Arms Trade Treaty
will contribute to alleviating the suffering of civilians
by preventing irresponsible flows of weapons and
ammunition to conflict-affected areas.
In conclusion, allow me to refer to cases of sexual
exploitation in United Nations peacekeeping operations
in the Central African Republic and other countries,
which Montenegro strongly condemns. Such criminal
activity and abuse has no place in United Nations
flagship activities in any circumstances. It is our
collective duty to ensure thorough investigations into
those cases, accountability and justice for victims.
Zero tolerance and zero impunity have to prevail as our
only option in order not to tarnish the United Nations
credibility again.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Lal (India): In the interest of brevity, I will
limit my remarks. Our full statement will be available
for circulation.

16-1667751/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The protection of civilians is an integral part of the
duties of all professional militaries that are raised in
defence of peace and security for their people. In fact,
military professionals are trained to save lives even in
peacetime, in the event natural disasters or other manmade crises. We therefore believe that all peacekeeping
operations are undertaken inherently to help protect
civilians from being harmed.
While the protection of civilians has always been an
important objective of all United Nations peacekeeping
operations, the issue has raised increasing concern
in recent times. That is due to the changing nature of
conflict, which is moving away from inter-State armed
conflicts to civil wars and the involvement of non-State
actors, which have led to large-scale devastation in the
lives of civilian populations. It is a matter of concern
that most of those situations are proving too difficult to
be resolved completely, often due to the breakdown of
national governance structures within the country, as
well as the inability of the international community and
the Security Council to facilitate sustainable political
solutions to such conflict situations.
The responsibility for the protection of civilians
lies with the national Governments. However, in
situations involving the complete breakdown of
national governance structures, it is important to see
how to prevent such uncontrolled conflicts.
The implementation of robust mandates is a
complex task with serious inherent risks and less than
certain outcomes. The clarity of mandates required
for a more offensive operation is difficult to achieve.
The inherent subjectivity involved in the timing of an
offensive operation, in anticipation of imminent danger,
can impact the perceived impartiality of the United
Nations. Such operations would have to be based on
unimpeachable information, which is hard to ensure.
The adequacy of military assets and other resources is
another crucial aspect.
Any direct offensive action against a particular
group is fraught with the possibility of retaliatory
attacks, a trend that is being witnessed increasingly.
Protecing civilians in camps for internally displaced
persons and refugees is even more complex and
requires careful attention. In that context, the need for
regular consultations between the Council, the troopcontributing nations and the Secretariat for improved
mandate-designing and implementation has been well
52/94

10/06/2016

recognized. It needs to be pursued with the seriousness
it deserves.
Conflicts are about struggle for political power.
Conflict resolution and peacekeeping therefore have
to be primarily a political activity. Increasingly, the
focus of peacekeeping is on a robust approach and
technological aspects, and often it appears to lose focus
on the ultimate goal of seeking a political solution to the
conflict. Therefore, not only the deployment of armed
forces but other efforts of a robust political nature also
need to be given due attention. Political interventions
need diligence, skill and sustained diplomacy.
Peace and security issues today are vastly different
from seven decades ago, when the primary concern
of the Council was to prevent a recurrence of conflict
between former colonial Powers. Today, the issues of
peace and security cannot be seen in isolation from the
wider development-related issues that are dealt with
outside the Council. A more holistic approach towards
gender equality and empowerment, access to health
care, education, employment, and the strengthening of
democratic institutions and processes are all important
aspects of a holistic approach to prevent conflict.
While there seems to be general agreement about
the need for greater focus on peacebuilding to prevent
conflicts, as was witnessed in the identical resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly and the Security
Council recently (resolution 70/262 and resolution
2282 (2016), respectively) , the budget allocation for
peacebuilding does not even reach 1 per cent of that for
peacekeeping operations.
The long-standing and ongoing contribution by
India to United Nations peacekeeping, dating back
six decades, is a testimony to the dedication and
professionalism brought by the Indian peacekeepers
to their peacekeeping duties. Half a century ago,
when there was no distinct concept of the protection
of civilians, an Indian army captain in the Congo was
awarded India’s highest award for paying the ultimate
sacrifice in defence of civilians. India lost a large
number of peacekeepers in a mission in 1962, the
largest such loss for one country in any mission.
As the largest cumulative troop-contributor,
and having participated in nearly 50 of the almost
70 peacekeeping missions mandated by the Council,
India is deeply conscious of the complexities involved in
the response of the international community to conflict
situations. Our recent agreement to participate in the
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

United Nations Force Intervention Brigade in Congo
has assisted in more flexible and timely interventions
for the protection of civilians.
India stands ready to contribute in all possible ways
to secure sustained peace and security that leads to the
protection of civilians.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico would like to thank France for having
convened this open debate. We would also like to thank
to the Secretary-General, the President of the Central
African Republic and the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their briefings.
My country acknowledges that peacekeeping
operations constitute an invaluable tool for international
security, and we firmly support the role of the Security
Council in assigning priority on an ongoing basis to
the protection of civilians in peacekeeping operation
mandates. Nonetheless, we would like to reiterate the
point that the efficiency of the Security Council and
the United Nations in terms of protecting civilians
to date presents us with mixed results. Some actions
taken by the Council have been successful, but in other
instances a lack of consensus among Council members
have blocked early action that could have saved lives
and to preserve the human dignity of civilians.
Member States are asking more and more from
peacekeeping operations. For that reason, we bear
a collective responsibility to equip peacekeeping
operations with the tools that they require to be able
to fulfil the mandates conferred upon them by the
Security Council to protect civilians in armed conflict.
As the Secretary-General mentions in his most
recent report (S/2016/477) on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, the obligation to act with strict
adherence to international law, international human
rights law, international humanitarian law and refugee
law is a requirement for strengthening the protection of
the civilian population.
It is also vitally important that the perspective of
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and local
actors be taken into account in any strategic assessment
of peacekeeping operations pertaining to the protection
of civilians. Working in a coordinated way with
peacekeeping operations, such actors can enhance
the ability of peacekeeping operations to strengthen

S/PV.7711

and uphold early-warning systems, mechanisms of
oversight and intelligence, as well as foster a climate
of trust among the most affected communities and
the United Nations. In that context, we believe that an
important step that has been taken is the deployment
of civilian protection advisers to missions with
explicit protection-of-civilian mandates, which will
contribute to the drafting of protection strategies and
the coordination of their implementation.
As far as Mexico is concerned, the work of
women Blue Helmets fosters trust and contributes to
an enhanced understanding of the essential needs of
protection of local populations, thereby paving the way
for more effective responses. For that reason, we would
like to reiterate to encourage greater participation by
women in peacekeeping operations.
We also believe it is indispensable that we uphold
the zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse by members of peacekeeping operations, be
they civilian or military, and indeed by any authorized
force authorized by the Security Council. Anyone
who commits such crimes must be brought to justice.
It the joint responsibility of the Secretariat and of
police- and troop-contributing countries to improve
predeployment training, including for staff focused
on protecting civilians and on the matter of prevening
sexual exploitation and abuse.
In order for there to be more precise and better
implemented mandates, we reiterate the need for
consultations among the Security Council, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the Secretariat at
every stage of a peacekeeping operation.
As pointed out by the Secretary-General, I would
like to emphasize that humanitarian action and
peacekeeping are important instruments to protect
civilians, Nonetheless, such efforts cannot, and
should not, replace political efforts to prevent and
resolve conflicts.
The key role given by the High-level Independent
Panel on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations
and the Secretary-General to prevention, mediation
and, above all, the primacy of political solutions over
military ones, have given rise to a new dimension in
the peace and security pillar of the United Nations,
namely, the matter of sustaining peace. That is an
issue on which the Security Council adopted a historic
resolution (resolution 2282 (2016)), as did the General
Assembly (resolution 70/262).

16-1667753/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The three review processes, along with the
adoption of 2030 Agenda on Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1) and the outcome
of the World Humanitarian Summit, afford us an
opportunity to redefine the United Nations architecture
for the protection of civilians and to comprehensively
address the underlying causes of conflict, which have
a great deal to do with ensuring inclusive societies
that allow for the full development of the potential of
every individual.
Civilians continue to make up the majority of victims
in armed conflicts. It is therefore vital to translate the
commitment of the Security Council into updated and
strengthened protection mechanisms, as that will give
rise to a palpable shift in the situation on the ground. We
must seize this moment to institutionalize a paradigm
shift in our protection approach with the overall goal
of forging short and medium-term responses and
measures into sustainable solutions to guarantee longterm security for civilians.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Mr. President, for having organized the
open debate.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his leadership on this important issue, as well as
President Faustin Archange Touadera and Peter Maurer
of the International Committee of the Red Cross for
their briefings.
Enhancing the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is a topic of justifiable interest for the Security
Council. Although the individual responsibility of
Governments cannot be minimized, the protection of
civilians is also a collective responsibility and a core
obligation of the United Nations.
After our collective failure in avoiding the
tragedies of Srebrenica and Rwanda, it has been often
repeated that doing nothing is not an option. While
sharing the moral frustration behind that notion, it is
equally important to be wary of attempts to translate
that legitimate perception into an inaccurate — and
sometimes irresponsible — assumption that military
action would be a panacea for the protection of civilians.
54/94

10/06/2016

As stated by the Secretary-General in his latest
report on the responsibility to protect, our choice
does not lie “between inaction and the use of force”
(S/2015/500, para. 38). The first 15 years of the twentyfirst century have taught us that resort to military
action more often than not increases the vulnerability
of the very individuals whose protection is supposedly
being sought.
The situation in Libya, for example, is a reminder
of the consequences of ill-conceived strategies.
A military intervention allegedly undertaken to
implement resolution 1973 (2011) and a post-conflict
scenario in which genuine peacebuilding efforts were
absent resulted in the erosion of local institutions and
widespread violence — both in the country and in the
region — paving the way for the spread of Da’esh and
forcing millions to seek refuge elsewhere.
This is not an argument against resorting to robust
mandates under any circumstances. It is a statement in
recognition of the importance of developing an adequate
understanding of what the use of force can and cannot
accomplish. Because of its unintended consequences,
in particular to the civilian population, military action
cannot be a first option.
Allow me to stress that this observation is not only
demanded by international law, with the Charter of the
United Nations at its centre; it is also evidence-based
and in line with the fundamental principle of “first, do
no harm”. The 2000 Brahimi report (see S/2000/809)
stressed how peacekeepers — troops and police — who
witness violence against civilians should be presumed
to be authorized to stop it, within their means, in support
of basic United Nations principles. However, the report
also questioned the credibility and achievability of a
blanket mandate to protect civilians, acknowledging
that United Nations operations can protect only a
small fraction of the civilian population exposed to the
potential risk of violence. Sixteen years later, the gap
between expectations and resources available remains
one of the key issues echoed by the United Nations
peace operations review. In the same vein, former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, in his report entitled
“In larger freedom: towards development, security
and human rights for all” (A/59/2005), suggested that
a list of proposed criteria, including the seriousness of
the threat, proportionality and the chance of success,
be applied for the authorization of the use of force
in general.
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

It is clear that United Nations peacekeeping
operations are not designed or equipped to impose
political solutions through the sustained use of force.
When the use of force is contemplated and duly
authorized, action must be judicious, proportionate and
strictly limited to the objectives of the agreed mandate.
Furthermore, the international community has a right to
expect full accountability from those to whom authority
is granted by the United Nations to resort to force. These
are all notions for which Brazil has been consistently
advocating. At the same time, there are numerous
non-military tools available for the protection of
civilians, including strong political advocacy, credible
reporting and liaison with communities. There are also
several modalities of support for national authorities.
When it comes to protecting civilians in situations
of conflict, Brazil fully supports a people-centred
approach, including through engagement with local
actors and those affected by conflict, as underlined by
the High-level Panel on Peace Operations and by the
Secretary-General. That is essential for peace to be
sustainable, as those on the receiving end need to lead
the way to recovery and peace.
It can also improve proper conflict monitoring and
local ownership of protection mechanisms, thereby
building a protective environment through the important
role
of
unarmed-civilian-protection
strategies.
Protecting 200,000 civilians for several months and
providing adequate humanitarian assistance to avert
disease has been a significant achievement of the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
and humanitarian actors in South Sudan, for example.
Nonetheless, compliance with international
humanitarian law and human rights law has to be
further enhanced, as recently stressed by many
during the World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul.
The spectrum of concrete measures could include
the training of States’ armed forces, ratifying core
international treaties, advocating their universalization,
and education and awareness-raising. It is also crucial
to enhance the protection of women and girls against
sexual violence and improve monitoring and reporting
of violations.
The denial of humanitarian access deprives people
of human dignity. Unfettered humanitarian access
is imperative, and more systematic approaches to
responding to access constraints are essential. Brazil
welcomes the Secretary-General’s decision to deploy

S/PV.7711

senior protection-of-civilians advisers in all missions
with explicit protection mandates, with a direct reporting
line to the Head of Mission, to advise on the development
of strategies and coordinate implementation.
The principles of peacekeeping operations did not
come into existence by chance; they aim to preserve
space for dialogue and diplomatic activity. We wish to
express a word of caution regarding certain flexible
understandings of the use of force by peacekeeping
operations, as defended by a few. Rather than pointing
towards more effective protection for civilians, such
flexibility can be counterproductive and compromise
the credibility of the United Nations. It is conceivable
that, in very specific circumstances, a preparedness to
use force to protect civilians will enhance the standing
of the United Nations. But such understandings
must be the outcome of careful, inclusive and
multilateral deliberation.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight the fact
that the Brazilian troops and police officers currently
deployed in 10 United Nations peacekeeping operations
and special political missions have been, and will
continue to be, trained and equipped to be able to
deliver on their responsibility to protect civilians.
Since 2004, Brazilian troops and force commanders
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
have played a decisive role in reducing violence and
building a safer environment in critical areas of Portau-Prince, such as Cité Soleil. In September 2015, the
Brazilian vessel en route to lead the Maritime Task
Force of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
rescued 220 refugees adrift in the Mediterranean Sea.
These examples demonstrate that Brazil stands ready
to continue to contribute to alleviating the suffering
of civilians affected by conflict, according to the
relevant peacekeeping mandates, in full respect of
the Charter of the United Nations and established
peacekeeping principles.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Sandoval Cojulún (Guatemala) (spoke
in Spanish): Guatemala welcomes the convening
of today’s open debate and aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
Guatemala thanks France for the concept note
that was circulated in preparation for this open debate

16-1667755/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

(S/2016/503, annex) and agrees with its contents,
namely, that 2016 should be a year of opportunity for
Member States to evaluate United Nations efforts and
the contribution of peacekeeping operations towards
protecting civilians, while identifying ways forward
and improving its work in this area.
We recognize that the protection of civilians is
an integral part of several peacekeeping operations
mandates. However, it is important to understand that
such protection remains primarily the responsibility
of the receiving State. In that regard, peacekeeping
operations with a mandate to protect civilians should
not assume the role and responsibilities of the host
Government, but act in support of its efforts, that is,
work together with the country concerned.
From our perspective as a troop-contributing
country, the use of force must always be the last
resort, especially when acting on behalf of the United
Nations. While we fully understand the reasons for
which mandates calling for more robust peacekeeping
operations have been developed, especially when the
protection of civilians is at stake, it is our opinion
that forceful action undertaken under the banner of
the United Nations should be carefully considered by
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
which is the forum to negotiate everything related to
peacekeeping operations.
It is of grave concern to Guatemala that there
are persistent problems in peacekeeping operations
in terms of sexual exploitation and abuse committed
against the civilian population. Such acts tarnish the
reputation of all staff of the Organization and should not
be tolerated. Guatemala reiterates its call, which it has
made at various times, for improving the effectiveness
with which the Secretariat follows up with Member
States on the disciplinary or legal measures adopted for
these purposes, be it for civilian or military personnel.
In that regard, we believe that timely, comprehensive
investigations are essential in responding to any incident
that might constitute criminal conduct. It is important
to strengthen the rapid response capacity in order to
respond quickly and effectively to all complaints with
impartiality. We understand that this should apply
throughout the United Nations system.
Guatemala highlights the Council’s need to
strengthen implementation of the zero-tolerance policy
regarding sexual abuse or exploitation in the context
of the various mandates of peacekeeping missions. We
56/94

10/06/2016

emphasize the importance of integrating such missions
with the United Nations system as a whole, with full
respect for the human rights of civilians as a priority. At
the same time, we urge improved communication with
regard to the situation on the ground and administrative
decision-making, in order to prevent the recurrence
of any incidents such as those that took place in the
Central African Republic.
We emphasize the need to improve and strengthen
triangular cooperation among the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the troop- and police-contributing
countries in the decision-making process and
implementation of mandates, with a view to
strengthening the protection of civilians on the ground.
Finally, Guatemala has carefully studied the
various initiatives that have been developed aimed
at the protection of civilians and mandated under
peacekeeping operations, such as the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians. While the latter is a
positive initiative, we believe it is important that they
be discussed in the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations in order to promote transparency, and
included in discussions among all the States Member
of the Organization, especially the troop-contributing
countries.
While States have the primary responsibility to
protect their civilians, the international community
and the Council have an obligation to prevent atrocities
committed in the context of peacekeeping operations.
In that regard, we welcome initiatives such as the
Security Council code of conduct on limiting the use of
the veto, proposed jointy by Mexico and France.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Morales López (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the French delegation for organizing this
important debate and the guiding concept note
(S/2016/503, annex). We also welcome the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of France in the
debate, as well as the briefings to the Security Council
by the Secretary-General, the President of the Central
African Republic and the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross.
Colombia recognizes the importance of this forum
for discussion, which facilitates assessment of the
efforts of peacekeeping operations in the protection of
civilians in situations of armed conflict.
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

While it may seem paradoxical, peacekeeping
operations are successful precisely when they are no longer
necessary, as they lay the foundation for lasting peace
and empower national authorities, while coordinating
efforts to fulfil protection-of-civilians mandates.
We share the concern about the situation facing
civilians in armed conflict in some parts of the world,
and the ongoing violations by the parties to conflict
of their obligations to respect and protect civilians in
accordance with international law, and beyond that, as
a natural obligation of humankind.
We agree that respect for international law on the
part of all parties to a conflict is a condition without
which protecting civilians and guaranteeing access to
humanitarian assistance will not be possible. Likewise,
the application of due and timely justice to the crimes
committed is also crucial. Colombia supports the role
of peacekeeping operations in that task and believes
that their effectiveness requires coordinated efforts
by the United Nations with national authorities, based
on strategic policies, commitment and adherence to
international law by the parties to the conflict, as well
as clear mandates and the Organization’s exemplary
work in the field.
Effectively carrying out protection-of-civilians
mandates must be strengthened by way of States’
political will and fulfilment of their obligations under the
Charter of the United Nations and international law. We
emphasize that protecting civilians is the responsibility
of the State, which is something that should be clear
when implementing peacekeeping mandates, that
include such tasks. In that regard, the United Nations
must continue efforts in support of national authorities’
implementation of the responsibility to protect civilians
and in promoting compliance on the part of non-State
armed groups, with international humanitarian law.
My Government highlights the role of various
accountability mechanisms in strengthening the
protection of civilians during armed conflict. Likewise,
we emphasize the importance of negotiations between
the conflicting parties to encourage the demobilization
and reintegration of armed non-State actors into
civilian life, as a strategy in the long-term rebuilding
of the country.
Colombia seeks peace and reconciliation through
justice, victim compensation, the restoration of trust
and guarantees of non-recurrence.

S/PV.7711

My country has taken note of the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2016/447) on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and of its recommendations.
My delegation would also like to reiterate the importance
of United Nations entities being fully familiar with the
work of national Governments in the area of protection
of civilians when prioritizing their efforts and informing
the Organization on the respective situations. Verified,
objective, balanced and impartial information includes
identifying gaps and challenges, as well as recognition
of the progress in each country.
My Government shares the concern about the
difficulties impeding humanitarian access and believes
that international assistance in that area should adhere
to the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence, as enshrined in resolution 46/182 of
the General Assembly.
Finally, I recall that three recent reports on United
Nations peace operations (see S/2015/446), the review
of the peacebuilding architecture (see S/2015/490) and
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, emphasize the importance of
seeking solutions to prevent conflicts. That is why my
country reiterates the need to protect civilians before
the start of a crisis and meet the needs of the population.
A prevention perspective is the best way to protect and
prevent peoples’ suffering.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): I am pleased to take the
floor on behalf of members of the Group of Friends of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, namely,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, the
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, the United Kingdom,
Uruguay and my own country, Switzerland. The Group
of Friends thanks the French presidency of the Security
Council for organizing today’s open debate and for
keeping protection of civilians high on the agenda. We
also thank today’s briefers for their statements.
It is right that the protection of civilians be
discussed by the Security Council on a regular
basis, to reaffirm the necessity for full respect and
implementation of the norms and principles related to
the protection of civilians as enshrined in international
human rights law, human rights and refugee law and
in international criminal law. Parties to armed conflict

16-1667757/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

must be reminded time and again that even wars have
rules, and that those rules apply to all.
We continue to call on the Security Council to
systematically uphold core protection-of-civilians
standards. The latest report (S/2016/447) of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians clearly
indicates that the situation is worsening in a number
of areas. Indiscriminate attacks on civilians are
widespread in many contemporary conflicts. Schools
and medical personnel and facilities are regularly
and increasingly targeted. Access restrictions on
humanitarian workers impede the delivery of assistance.
A growing number of parties to armed conflict openly
disregard long-established rules of international
humanitarian law, especially with regard to the conduct
of hostilities or of persons no longer participating in
hostilities. In that context, the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2286 (2016) by the Council, on health
care in armed conflict and the protection of medical
personnel and facilities — an adoption with a large
number of sponsors — sends an important signal.
Despite the numerous violations observed in recent
years, international law is clear: the wounded and the
sick, medical personnel and humanitarian personnel
exclusively engaged in medical duties, their means of
transport and equipment, as well as hospitals and other
medical facilities, must be respected and protected.
At the World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul,
States, civil society and humanitarian leaders
consistently asserted that international humanitarian
law, human rights law and refugee law are more
relevant than ever. Global leaders announced
significant commitments to enhance compliance with
international humanitarian law and human rights law
through a spectrum of concrete measures.
Turning to peacekeeping operations, we want to
stress that protecting the civilian population and persons
who are no longer taking part in hostilities is not just
another task of the United Nations; it is seen by many as
the essence of the United Nations. The implementation
of the recommendations emanating from the peace
operations review presents a key opportunity; the review
highlights the tools we need to enable United Nations
peacekeeping missions to leverage all their components
to effectively protect civilians. Such a mission-wide
task requires a solid foundation in the form of clear and
pragmatic mandates that reflect what is feasible on the
ground. A whole-of-mission approach to the protection
of civilians is essential. Mission leadership can play an
58/94

10/06/2016

essential role, and the civilian and police components
of missions can contribute to protecting civilians just
as much as the military components, depending on
the situation.
Political engagement and support for political
settlements should be seen as an integral part of this
effort. The best way to protect civilians is by preventing
armed conflict in the first instance and, if this fails,
by ending armed conflicts through a negotiated and
inclusive settlement. We also believe that establishing
accountability is essential to making progress on
protection issues and in this regard welcome the fact that
missions such as the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic are tasked with
supporting the fight against impunity and the work of
the International Criminal Court.
We further believe that tailored mission planning
is crucial for the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations. In this context, we see great potential
for a phased mandating process that ensures a sound
alignment between the needs on the ground and
available resources. We also need a systematic review
of mandates after an initial period, in close consultation
with troop- and police-contributing countries.
We see benefits in mandates that give clear
guidelines on the distribution of tasks. In this context,
we welcome the establishment of senior protection-ofcivilians advisers and comprehensive protection-ofcivilians strategies in all missions with such a mandate.
Such approaches pave the way for close cooperation
with all actors involved and for the further development
of best practices and approaches that are tailor-made
to specific contexts. Enhanced conflict analysis is
also necessary for mission planning, and we welcome
the decision of the Secretary-General to revise
existing conflict-analysis methodologies and to set
up a centralized analysis and planning capacity in the
Secretary-General’s Office. Furthermore, protection of
civilians must be an integral part of the pre-deployment
training for both uniformed and civilian personnel.
A coherent approach across the United Nations
system is fundamental for efficient cooperation between
the United Nations and local actors, non-governmental
organizations and regional and other international
organizations. Let us also not forget that there are
pressing protection challenges in several conflicts,
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

including situations on the Council’s agenda, where
there are currently no peacekeeping operations, and that
these also have to be addressed. A gender perspective
is a key component of effective protection. Field-based
United Nations missions must reach out to women and
girls not only to ensure that their specific needs are
taken into account but also to realize their full potential
and engage them as protectors.
The Group of Friends also takes note of the Kigali
Principles on the protection of civilians currently
endorsed by 30 countries aiming at reinforcing the
protection of civilians by troop- and police-contributing
countries in the framework of peacekeeping operations.
Finally, missions can succeed only if both uniformed
and civilian personnel act in the spirit of the mandate as
well as of the overarching goals of the United Nations.
Repeated incidents of sexual exploitation and abuse
by United Nations representatives in peacekeeping
missions have painfully reminded us how devastating
the actions of a few individuals can be for an entire
organization and in particular for the lives of those
whom they should be protecting.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for your initiative to convene this timely
debate on such an important issue.
The protection of civilians has over the years
justifiably assumed more importance in the mandates
of United Nations peacekeeping operations because of
increasingly challenging environments. Sustainable
peace is hardly possible when local populations are
at risk of violence. When civilians are vulnerable,
governance, security and the rule of law all flounder,
and the United Nations is unable to fulfil a fundamental
precept of its Charter, “to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war”.

S/PV.7711

in carrying out this responsibility. The creation of the
Force Intervention Brigade in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, for example, was designed as a short-term
measure to allow local forces to fully develop their
capabilities and assume their responsibilities.
The protection-of-civilian mandates have traditionally
been implemented by our peacekeepers while adhering
to the principles of peacekeeping. It is a mistaken
notion that these principles are somehow incompatible
with protecting civilians. The edifice of peacekeeping
is based on these principles, and they continue to be
the bedrock on which it rests. The Security Council
establishes protection-of-civilians mandates, and the
use of force in defence of the mandate is an integral and
ineluctable part of those principles.
While robust mandates are at times necessitated
by the situation on the ground, they also pose practical
implementation challenges. Questions raised 15 years
ago by the Brahimi report about the credibility and
achievability of a blanket mandate to protect civilians
still await convincing answers. Consultations with
troop-contributing countries at the time of formulation
of such mandates are certainly necessary for
better implementation.
The conduct of peacekeeping operations needs to
be driven by the unique requirements of each mission,
not by any political or financial consideration. We need
to collectively ensure that any given peacekeeping
mission is provided adequate financial and other
necessary resources along with political support to
accomplish its assigned tasks.
My delegation also believes that the participation of
women in peacekeeping operations helps to make them
not just more people-centred but also more effective in
implementing protection-of-civilians mandates.

United Nations peacekeeping mandates have evolved
over the past two decades. From the traditional role of
monitoring the implementation of peace agreements,
modern peacekeeping has become multidimensional,
addressing the full spectrum of activities, from
providing secure environments to protecting civilians
and rebuilding the capacities of States.

An issue that needs greater attention is the fact
that protection of civilians is primarily interpreted in
military terms: the provision of tangible protection
under imminent threat. Its scope should include
protection through political action as well as institutionand capacity-building. The use of non-military tools
such as advocacy, liaison with local communities and
building the capacity of national authorities also help to
achieve the same objective.

The primary responsibility for the protection of
all civilians, without discrimination, lies with the host
country. Peacekeepers support the host Governments

Pakistan, as one of the world’s top troopcontributing countries, has proudly and conscientiously
undertaken the task of proactively protecting civilians

16-1667759/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

when mandated by the Council, including in current
missions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Darfur, Côte d’Ivoire, the Central African Republic and
Liberia. We have demonstrated that this can be done
by a robust deterrence posture and without resorting to
the actual use of force, as in the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur recently.
In similar situations in the past, the decisive action of
our peacekeepers in Cambodia, for example, helped the
consolidation of peace in the early 1990s. In Bosnia in
the mid-1990s, our troops defended the United Nations
safe area and its ethnically mixed civilian population
against repeated onslaughts of ethnic-cleansing
militias. Then, in 2003 and 2004 in Sierra Leone, an
unsteady United Nations presence was transformed
into a major United Nations success story, primarily as
a result of the participation of Pakistani peacekeepers.
In one district of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Pakistani troops provided security to thousands
of civilians exposed to brutal ethnic violence.
The protection of civilians is a system-wide
responsibility, with the host country in the lead. But
it is best promoted by preventing the outbreak of
armed conflicts in the first place, addressing the root
causes of conflicts, finding inclusive political solutions
to disputes and seeking peaceful the settlement of
conflicts. Political solutions must be placed front and
centre of peacekeeping operations, for that is the only
viable path to achieving sustainable and enduring peace
and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank France for having organized this important open
debate under its presidency of the Security Council.
The presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Development of France and other
Ministers reflects the importance of the subject we are
discussing today. We listened with great interest to the
introductory briefings of the Secretary-General and the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, as well as to the statement made by the President
of the Central African Republic.
Luxembourg fully supports the European Union
statement, as well as that made by the representative
of Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends of the
Protection of Civilians. Let me point out some matters
of particular importance to us at the national level.
60/94

10/06/2016

It is glaringly obvious to us that civilians are the
main victims of armed conflicts. They are paying the
heaviest price in human lives, be it in Syria, Yemen,
South Sudan or the Central African Republic. Civilians
are increasingly targeted and tortured in order to
terrorize, force mass displacements or inflict a moral
defeat on an enemy that cannot be overcome on the
battlefield. One corollary to this fact is the absolute need
for the Security Council to demonstrate determination
and consistency when it comes to ensuring respect
for international humanitarian law and the protection
of civilians.
The protection of civilians must not be just a
rhetorical priority confined to debates and thematic
resolutions. Since the early 2000s, the Council has
endowed itself with a normative framework and
ambitious mandates in particular with respect to the
most vulnerable groups — children and women — by
developing its children and armed conflict agenda and
its women and peace and security agenda. It is important
to implement these with rigour and without exceptions
or restrictions.
To that end, the majority of the peacekeeping
operations deploy specialist advisers — women’s
protection advisers and child protection advisers. We
are convinced that these advisers, whose usefulness
has been tried and tested, should continue to exercise
the specific role for which they are mandated by
the Security Council. Their essential tasks include
gathering trustworthy information on the situation of
civilians and the risks they face.
In the area of peacekeeping
​​
operations, trust
and credibility are essential. For that reason, United
Nations personnel, whether civilian or military, must
be irreproachable. We support the policy of zero
tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse, and we
welcome the Secretary-General’s decision to exclude
from peacekeeping operations national forces listed in
the annexes of his reports.
To show our commitment, Luxembourg has
decided to make a voluntary contribution of €135,000,
or about $150,000, to support the work of the Special
Coordinator on Improving United Nations Response
to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse, Ms. Jane Holl Lute,
and her team. We hope that this support will bear fruit
and help to prevent these heinous crimes and assist the
victims Among the priorities for action, we consider
it essential to ensure that peacekeepers and United
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Nations personnel in general receive adequate training
before deployment.
Finally, I would like to conclude my statement by
focusing on prevention. No conflict erupts without
warning signs. These signs can be manifold, but they
generally include the intensification of violations
of human rights. We therefore fully support the
initiative of the Secretary-General’s Human Rights Up
Front initiative, and we encourage him to pursue its
implementation.
Our organization was created to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. The protection of
civilians must be at the heart of our action. We cannot
afford to fail.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): The Secretary-General’s May
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2016/447)is a grim illustration of the huge number of
civilians whose lives are being devastated by conflict.
Protecting civilians is the primary responsibility of
Governments, a fundamental principle of international
humanitarian law, and a core obligation of United
Nations peace operations.
The credibility and legitimacy of United Nations
peacekeepers largely depend on their willingness and
capability to act when civilians are under threat. Despite
significant growth in norms and frameworks for the
protection of civilians, performance across United
Nations peacekeeping operations remains mixed. The
implementation of the recommendations of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations provide
an important opportunity to embed the protection
of civilians at the centre of peacekeeping. The Panel
highlights that protection mandates are a mission-wide
task involving military, police and civilian personnel
and utilizing every tool at their disposal.
First, significant progress is being made in delivering
this critical objective. Australia welcomes the renewed
efforts of States to support the unprecedented demands
facing United Nations peacekeeping. Implementing
the substantial pledges made at the 2014 and 2015
peacekeeping summits will be vital to ensuring that
capabilities and resources match mandates. Australia,
for its part, has pledged strategic airlift support,
training for regional peacekeepers and funding to build
capacity to counter improvised explosive devices.

S/PV.7711

Secondly, we support implementing whole-ofmission protection of civilians strategies and best
practices. For example, we welcome the deployment of
senior protection of civilian advisers in all missions,
and we encourage the creation of community alert
networks to deepen our understanding of threats and
how to reduce risk. We also recognize that the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians provide a useful
set of principles to guide troop- and police-contributing
countries. The principles emphasize the importance of
personnel being appropriately trained, equipped and
tasked to protect civilians.
Thirdly, accountability is crucial to improving the
protection of civilians by peacekeeping operations.
We therefore welcome the trial of a new compact
between the United Nations and the Central African
Republic, strengthening accountability for civilian
protection. We also support the implementation of
new indicators to assess the effectiveness of protection
mandates and evaluate performance. Central to that is
mission reporting on obstacles to fulfilling protection
mandates, including the failure of peacekeepers to act
or follow orders.
Finally, it is hard to imagine a more shocking
contradiction to the intent of protecting civilians than
sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers of the
very people they have been sent to protect. We therefore
commend the Security Council for taking strong action
to ensure accountability foe sexual exploitation and
abuse through resolution 2272 (2016), in particular the
authorization to repatriate military or police units that
fail to hold perpetrators to account.
In conclusion, there can be no doubt that protecting
civilians is a challenging and complex endeavour, but it
is the measure by which United Nations peacekeeping
is judged, and it demands our sustained attention
and commitment.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): As
you requested, Mr. President, I will deliver a condensed
version of my statement.
Belgium fully associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by the observer of the European
Union, as well as with the statement delivered by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Protection of Civilians. The situation of

16-1667761/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

civilians in armed conflict has deteriorated seriously.
Indiscriminate attacks and attacks directly targeting
civilians are on the rise. Schools and hospitals are
being bombed, and access to food and water is being
deliberately restricted.
A growing number of parties to armed conflicts
choose to ignore the most basic rules of international
humanitarian law. That trend is particularly visible in
Syria, where parties to the conflict continue to hinder
the delivery of humanitarian assistance. We call on the
parties to the conflict in Syria to ensure humanitarian
access to the civilian population. In that connection,
we recall the recent adoption of resolution 2286 (2016),
co-sponsored by Belgium. We reiterate our call on the
Security Council to refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court, and, of course, we must,
at the same time, continue efforts to find a political
solution to the crisis.
With regard to the protection of civilians in the
context of peacekeeping operations, I would like to
touch on three points: the mandates of peacekeeping
operations, the fight against impunity and political
preparation.
Regarding the mandate of peacekeeping operations,
many challenges persist in terms of the effective
implementation of protection-of-civilians mandates in
peacekeeping operations. Such a large and complex
task requires the full engagement of the troop- and
police-contributing countries, as well as careful
planning. Missions should be able to rely on precise,
clear, coherent and realistic mandates that are adapted
to the needs of the field.
The protection of civilians cannot be treated as
a static given; rather, it requires a tailored approach.
Priority must be given to the protection of civilians
in the mandates of peacekeeping operations; a phased
approach should be used, accompanied by greater
coherence across the United Nations system on the
ground. We welcome the decision of the SecretaryGeneral with regard to the deployment in peacekeeping
operations of senior advisers responsible for developing
a comprehensive strategy for the protection of civilians.
The effective implementation of protection-of-civilians
mandates rests on the establishment of strategies that
take advantage of all available tools and that take into
account the fact that, ultimately, the protection of
civilians can be guaranteed in a sustainable manner
only by political solutions.
62/94

10/06/2016

I take this opportunity to touch upon the
revised mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), in which the protection of
civilians is a central priority. Action by MONUSCO
must be extend not only to areas in the east of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where violence is
rampant, but also to cover the security risks that may
accompany the electoral process. We look forward
to taking note of the measures taken or proposed by
MONUSCO in that context in the next report of the
Secretary-General.
Secondly, there is the fight against impunity.
Those responsible for the most serious crimes cannot
remain unpunished. Peacekeeping operations should be
equipped with the capacity and expertise to provide,
in a professional manner, the desired support for the
procedures initiated by national or international
jurisdictions. Here, we welcome the efforts of the
Government of the Central African Republic to
establish a special criminal court, supported by
a joint arrangement between the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (МINUSCA) and the
United Nations Development Programme.
The fact that the Security Council has, at the
request of the Central African authorities, mandated
МINUSCA to support the operation of the special
criminal court, particularly in its operational activities,
seems to us to be a very positive element. Similarly, we
welcome the fact that the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (МINUSМA) includes support for the efforts of
the Malian authorities, which, in 2012, referred the
violations there to the International Criminal Court.
The United Nations and Member States must also act
decisively against crimes committed by peacekeepers or
mission staff against civilians, for whose protection they
are responsible. In that regard, we welcome the policy
of zero tolerance with regard to sexual exploitation and
abuse, which was set by the Secretary-General.
Thirdly, there is political preparation. I would
like to make three brief comments in that connection.
First, the Kigali Principles on the Protection of
Civilians, which Belgium has recently endorsed and
pursuant to which Member States undertake to fully
implement protection-of-civilians mandates, represent
an important step in the right direction. Secondly,
we must do more to ensure that all staff members of
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

peacekeeping operations are better prepared to protect
civilians. Belgium will shortly assume leadership of the
European mission in Mali for the training of Malian
troops, starting this summer, in close cooperation with
MINUSMA, in order for those troops to also be able to
assume, in a sustainable manner, their responsibility to
protect civilians.
Finally, the best protection for civilians is, of course,
prevention. The Secretary-General’s Human Rights Up
Front initiative makes a significant contribution in that
regard. Here, we also wish to acknowledge the positive
role played by the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on the Prevention of Genocide, who, from the
beginning of the crisis in the Central African Republic,
has alerted the Security Council to the grave violations
of human rights and the cycle of violence that has been
unleashed. In the context of prevention and the Security
Council’s response, we thank France for the efforts it
has made and for the leadership demonstrated through
its initiative on restraining the use of the veto.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): Poland aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered soon by the observer of
the European Union. I would like, however, to present a
few remarks from our national perspective.
I would first like to thank the French presidency
for giving us the opportunity to discuss the recent
developments in the field of the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts. Poland greatly values the contribution
of France to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
as well as France’s engagement in the field of conflict
prevention. I would also like to reiterate my country’s
support of the French initiative to limit the use of the
veto in cases involving mass atrocities. We perceive
that initiative as an important contribution to efforts to
protect civilians worldwide. We call upon all permanent
members of the Council to support that initiative.
As underlined in the excellent concept paper prepared
for this debate by France (S/2016/503, annex), the role
of the Security Council in the protection of civilians is
crucial and second only to the responsibility to protect
borne by States. We welcome the Council’s recognition
of that obligation, confirmed by the introduction of a
protection of civilians clause in the mandates of ten out
of sixteen current peacekeeping missions. That is a first
step towards ensuring that the missions are equipped

S/PV.7711

with the tools needed to effectively protect the innocent
victims of armed conflicts.
The second step requires that more attention be
given to the protection of civilians in the process of the
drafting of Security Council resolutions. Peacekeeping
missions’ mandates should be tailor-made, and the
resources allocated should match the challenges in the
field. Mandates should be reviewed whenever the need
arises, based on an assessment of the situation on the
ground. That requires close cooperation with the troopand police-contributing countries and the Secretariat,
as well as with the Special Committee of Peacekeeping
Operations in the phase of mandate implementation.
Another area that requires greater attention is the
peacekeepers’ training process, which has to equip
the Blue Helmets with a clear vision of the mission’s
priorities and the general aim of protecting the most
vulnerable. This is why Poland decided to sign the
Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians. We call
upon all troop- and police-contributing countries to
endorse it. We also call for strict implementation of the
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse
committed by peacekeeping personnel.
We should also bear in mind that United Nations
peacekeepers do not act in a vacuum. On the contrary,
they are deployed within living communities and
troubled societies. To even stand a chance at protecting
endangered civilians, they need strong partnerships
with local and regional actors present in the field. Those
partnerships are in many cases the key to effective
implementation of the mission’s mandate.
As many of us argued during the high-level
thematic debate of the General Assembly on the United
Nations, peace and security in May, the time has
come to take a more people-centred approach in our
efforts undertaken in the areas of conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We hope that our
conclusions from the major reviews in the field of peace
and security will be implemented shortly and we call
on the Security Council to actively join this collective
effort of the United Nations community.
In closing, let me recall the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations, which rightly
pointed out that the principles of peacekeeping “should
never be an excuse for failure to protect civilians or to
defend the mission proactively” (S/2015/446, p. 12). As
an international community, we have heard too many
excuses for non-action. To change it, we need to start

16-1667763/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

here — in the Security Council — and make sure that
peacekeepers are well prepared to bring safety and
protection to civilians who need it most.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): Italy thanks
France for organizing this open debate, which, together
with the report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/447),
leads us to reflect on the role of peacekeeping
operations from the perspective of the protection of
civilians. I thank the Secretary-General, the President
of the Central African Republic and the President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross for
their presentations.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union, and that
delivered by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Group of Friends of the Protection of Civilians. I
would like to make the following additional comments
in my national capacity.
(spoke in English)
Significant progress has already been achieved,
including the Safe School Declaration, endorsed by Italy;
the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2015/23,
reaffirming the Council’s commitment to this cause; the
commitments agreed at the recent World Humanitarian
Summit in Istanbul; and the unanimous adoption with
a large number of co-sponsors, including Italy, of
resolution 2286 (2016) on health care in armed conflict
and the protection of medical personnel and facilities.
But more, of course, can be done, while recognizing
the importance of traditional principles: the primary
responsibility of the State, impartiality, consent and the
non-use of force.
Italy is among the inaugural subscribers of the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians, establishing
that effective protection of civilians requires properly
trained troops, adequate equipment and strong political
commitment. We are confident that a greater number
of troop- and police-contributing countries will
subscribe to these principles and, especially, implement
them. Their mention in the final report of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations is a significant
first step. Italy also supports the ACT code of conduct
and the French/Mexican initiative on veto restraint.
As the top troop-contributing country of the Group
of Western European and Other States, Italy believes
64/94

10/06/2016

that the effective protection of civilians requires clear,
sequenced and prioritized mandates, properly trained
troops, adequate equipment and a reinforced role of
regional organizations. I would like to underline six
concrete points of action.
The first is that appropriate training is key and
Italy will continue to do its part, redoubling efforts in
training and capacity-building for peace and justice
operators. Since 2005, through the Centre of Excellence
for the Stability of Police Units in Vicenza, we have
trained more than 9,000 units for police personnel,
many of whom are deployed in operations in Africa.
The protection of civilian lies at the very heart of
our training.
Secondly, our training includes courses on
the protection and promotion of human rights and
international humanitarian law and on sexual and
gender-based violence and includes individual
programmes on appropriate conduct and local customs,
while ensuring the firmest stance against abuses. We
believe that the zero-tolerance policy must be met with
tailored training to reach a zero-case reality and protect
the credibility and trust of the missions. In this area,
accountability should be strengthened, appropriate
domestic prosecution must take place and the United
Nations should encourage States to cooperate.
Thirdly, due consideration must be given to the need
to properly equip missions, also by adopting available
technological solutions, such as the use of unmanned
aerial vehicles, which have proved on many occasions
to be key in saving civilian lives.
Fourthly, strengthening the gender perspective
of peace operations is key to effective protection and
can be achieved both by increasing the overall number
of women serving in peace operations and — during
the mission — by reaching out to women and girls in
local communities, engaging them as actors of peace
and prevention.
Fifthly, in line with our overall view that regional
and subregional organizations are ideally placed to
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security, we will continue to work to strengthen
the relation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, especially the African Union, to
reinforce their capability in dealing with crises.
My sixth and final point is on prevention. It is the
right choice and the smart choice and the best way to
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

guarantee an effective protection of civilians. I stress
the importance of early warning mechanisms, such as
the framework of analyses for atrocity crimes and the
Human Rights Up Front initiative.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, in the corridors of the United Nations,
we often hear about the “Italian path to peace”. This
path brings together tradition, innovation and training,
and above all, always places people and communities at
the centre of the mission’s action. This is the path we
are committed to supporting.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas (spoke in French): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States. The candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro
and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
I would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon; the President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, Peter Maurer; the Executive Director
of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake; and the President of the
Central African Republic, Faustin Archange Touadera,
for their briefings.
(spoke in English)
The protection of civilians in armed conflicts
remains an acute and urgent concern for the EU and
its member States. We concur with the SecretaryGeneral, as expressed in his report of June 2015 (see
S/2015/453), that prevailing disrespect for international
humanitarian law by some States and non-State
armed groups and pervasive impunity for violations
have become one of the most critical challenges for
the protection of civilians. Upholding the norms that
safeguard humankind was at the heart of the recent
World Humanitarian Summit and we must take forward
the commitments that were made there to enhance the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The specific protection needs of women and
children require special attention. Similar attention
should also be paid to the phenomenon of sexual
violence and the use of rape as tactics of warfare,

S/PV.7711

affecting women, children, but also men. Children
are disproportionately affected by armed conflict, and
grave violations against children continue to increase.
The situation of children in many places, such as Syria,
the Central African Republic and Mali, among others,
is of most urgent concern.
National authorities have the primary responsibility
to provide protection for their citizens. However,
the protection of civilians is also a main task of
peacekeeping and is often decisive for the success and
legitimacy of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Today, 10 out of 16 peacekeeping missions have
mandates encompassing the protection of civilians.
However, many challenges remain in terms of the
effective implementation of protection mandates, and
we need to continue to address them. For example,
effective implementation requires better planning
support to missions, capturing lessons learned
effectively and improving the understanding of how
to support host States in protecting civilians. Missions
need to be equipped with the tools to address both the
root causes of crises and their most visible consequences.
Peacekeepers must protect civilians under threat of
physical violence consistent with the requirements of
their mandates. Different levels of threat must be met
with the appropriate and commensurate use of force,
as necessary.
Clearly, local actors and non-governmental
organizations, as well as regional and international
organizations, have a key role to play in supporting
national authorities in their protection-of-civilians
responsibilities. Key areas to advance in the protection
of civilians, such as a political process, conflict
prevention, early warning and partnerships, which were
all emphasized in the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and the SecretaryGeneral’s reports, would require the active involvement
of all those actors. The EU and its members States are
providing support and capacity-building to partners
in all those areas. Local ownership is an important
factor in protecting civilians. Regional and subregional
organizations play an increasingly important role in
international peace and security. Better coordination
of efforts between the United Nations and such
organizations should be pursued to ensure that the
distribution of objectives and tasks among organizations
maximizes the impact on the ground.

16-1667765/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Peacekeeping operations need to be equipped
with clear, coherent, concise and achievable mandates
that include a strong human rights component when
relevant, and protection mandates must be translated
into solid concepts of operations and operational
guidelines. We call on all peacekeeping operations
with a protection-of-civilians mandate to put in place
protection-of-civilians strategies by the end of this
year. Transition arrangements between different
operations or distinct organizations and exit strategies
should be explored early on. From an early stage
onwards, transition arrangements should take into
account elements that will contribute to the assessment
of the overall efficiency of the missions once they
are terminated.
We agree that, in many ways, training is the
cornerstone of improving the carrying out the protection
of civilians by missions. We need to improve cooperation
in the area of training in order to better implement
relevant United Nations standards, ideally by offering
United Nations-certified training on the protection of
civilians, as some EU member States have been doing.
Such training should also include predeployment and
in-mission training on child protection, as well as issues
on sexual exploitation and abuse. The EU supports the
United Nations zero-tolerance policy in that regard.
There is nothing more damning for the legitimacy of
international peacekeeping and for efforts to regain the
trust of local populations than peacekeepers abusing
those they are mandated to protect. The EU has, for its
part, provided training on the protection of civilians,
atrocity prevention, gender, child protection, human
rights law and international humanitarian law as an
integral part of the training curricula to its missions in
Somalia, Mali and the Niger.
United Nations peace operations should also
play a critical role in assisting the host States in the
implementation of the responsibility to protect, as they
are often in the front line when a State is unable or
unwilling to protect civilians from the risk of atrocity
crimes. In that context, United Nations peace operations
need to be staffed and equipped in a way that allows
United Nations personnel to better interact with the local
population and civil society organizations, including
women’s rights-based groups, with the overarching aim
of responding to warning signals and reducing the risk
of atrocity crimes. The implementation of the Human
Rights Up Front Initiative should make a positive
contribution in that regard.
66/94

10/06/2016

In cases where international efforts fail and atrocity
crimes are committed, accountability is crucial. Where
mandated or when the host State has consented thereto,
United Nations peace operations should be equipped
and staffed with the capability and expertise to assist
in transparent investigations and support the collection
of evidence in a professional manner. The EU is
committed to assisting States in strengthening their
national judicial and correctional systems in order to
enable them to investigate and prosecute perpetrators
of atrocity crimes. Furthermore, closer cooperation
between the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
missions in the field is of vital importance. When a
peace operation is to be deployed in an ICC-situation
country, its mandate should authorize it to facilitate or
assist the ICC, including by assisting authorities in the
protection of witnesses and the arrest and surrender
of individuals subject to arrest warrants issued by
the Court.
The EU finds it deeply disturbing that civilians
continue to account for the vast majority of casualties
in today’s armed conflicts. The Council can count
on our support for reinforcing the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, including through support
to United Nations peace operations and through
our own missions. We will continue our support
for the promotion of compliance with international
humanitarian law and strengthened accountability for
serious violations thereof.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Georgia aligns itself with
the statement just made by the observer of the European
Union delegation. In my national capacity, I would like
to add the following.
First, let me express my gratitude to the French
presidency, in particular to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Development, for convening
this debate and presiding over it at the beginning. I
also thank the Secretary-General and the President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross for their
valuable contributions. I would like to extend our special
thanks to the President of the Central African Republic
for his insightful comments and to congratulate him
and the people of the Central African Republic on their
remarkable progress towards achieving sustaining
peace and functioning State institutions.
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Unfortunately, the most flagrant violations of
human rights occur in the circumstances surrounding
armed conflict, wherein innocent civilian populations,
especially women and children, constitute the
overwhelming majority of victims. Today the urgency
of the situation is further exacerbated by unabated
international terrorism and violent extremism, tragic
developments in the Middle East and unresolved
conflicts in many other regions throughout the globe,
including my own. We believe in the centrality of
the protection of civilians in all United Nations
peacekeeping mandates. The safety of the population
must be viewed as a critical component for stability,
security and sustainable peace.
Throughout the decades, the Security Council has
been addressing the issue of the protection of civilians
through its statements, resolutions and various
peacekeeping operations. As peacekeeping missions
have grown in numbers, size and scope, the United
Nations has made increasingly concerted efforts to
put civilian protection at the heart of those operations.
Nevertheless, with rapidly changing circumstances
throughout the world, renewed efforts are urgently
needed for peacekeeping to become more efficient in
terms of its humanitarian and human rights dimensions,
which means protecting civilians first.

S/PV.7711

efforts to seek an independent, neutral and effective
international presence on the ground for the purpose
of peacekeeping has proved to be unsuccessful so far.
Against that background, the civilian population
residing in the occupied Georgian territories are
deprived of minimal safeguards for their safety and are
stripped of their fundamental rights and freedom. The
recent brutal murder of Giga Otkhozoria, a Georgian
internally displaced person from the occupied Abkhazia
region, who was shot dead while crossing the occupation
line, is a sobering reminder of the seriousness of the
situation. It also underlines the necessity of establishing
international security and human rights monitoring
mechanisms on the ground. A permanent fear for one’s
life, the installation of barbed-wire fences in the middle
of yards and farmland, illegal detentions, restrictions
on the freedom of movement and the prohibition
of education in one’s native language — all of those
illegal, illegitimate and arbitrary actions constitute the
dire reality of life in the occupied Georgian territories.

While the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security, including through the establishment
of peacekeeping operations, in recent years we have
experienced several unfortunate cases when the Council
has failed to exercise its mandate to ensure the effective
and efficient protection of the civilian population. In
that regard, we once again welcome and fully support
the French proposal on the suspension of the veto power
in cases of mass atrocities. In 2014 Georgia also joined
the supporters of the code of conduct regarding Security
Council action against genocide, crimes against
humanity or war crimes, initiated by Liechtenstein.

Based on our own experience, we believe that
peacekeeping operations should not be staffed
predominantly by representatives of any one single
State, and never by the military of a State that is a party
to the conflict, or is heavily involved in the particular
conflict. The Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS) Peacekeeping Force, which served as the security
component for the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia on the ground, clearly lacked the trust and
confidence of Georgians in the area, as it was staffed
exclusively by Russian military personnel. On many
occasions, they triggered, or were directly involved in,
grave violations of the peace arrangements, including
severe human rights abuses against the local Georgian
population and other incidents. Eventually, the CIS
Peacekeeping Force was turned into an occupation
force by the Russian Federation in violation of Georgia’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

Georgia experienced the unfortunate termination of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia, which
played a crucial role in maintaining peace and stability
in Abkhazia, Georgia by the single-handed veto of a
Security Council member in the spring of 2009. That
irresponsible action created a dangerous precedent in
United Nations peacekeeping. Since then, no adequate
replacement for the dismantled international presence
has been created in Georgia. While the European Union
Monitoring Mission continues its duties, the tireless

Georgia is fully committed to a zero-tolerance
policy against sexual exploitation and abuse by
peacekeeping personnel. On 5 June, an inter-agency
investigative team, set up at the initiative of the Defence
Minister of Georgia, left for the Central African
Republic to carry out investigative activities on the
ground. Also, in response to a Secretariat request, the
Government of Georgia presented the candidature of an
officer, on a gratis basis, to serve with the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, whose focus would be on

16-1667767/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the legal issues surrounding the sexual exploitation and
abuse perpetrated by international peacekeeping forces.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Georgia’s full support
for efforts to make peacekeeping more effective and
more human-centred, with its primary focus on the
responsibility to protect the civilian population.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the French presidency
of the Security Council for having convened today’s
high-level open debate on the protection of civilians
in the context of peacekeeping operations. That is
an extremely important topic that touches upon the
responsibility of the United Nations in international
security. Today, the protection of civilians is a major
challenge because 93 per cent of victims of armed
conflicts are civilians. That is a horrific figure. The
need to find the best ways to ensure such protection
has been addressed in several debates and backed by a
series of reforms launched in 2015.
Romania associates itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I would, however, like to make some remarks in my
national capacity.
Given the many ongoing conflicts in the world, we
must reiterate that the responsibility to protect civilians
in conflict situations devolves upon States. States
must prosecute the perpetrators or those responsible
for violations of international norms, in particular
international humanitarian law. In situations where
States do not have the will or capacity to fulfil their
responsibilities, the international community is called
upon to intervene. That is why Romania will join the
French-Mexican initiative for limiting the use of the
veto by the five permanent members of the Security
Council in cases involving mass atrocities. We
recently also supported the code of conduct regarding
Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes, proposed by the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group.
Peacekeeping missions must play a key role through
the support they provide to host States in carrying
out the responsibility to protect. In that regard, it is
absolutely key that United Nations personnel be trained
and equipped to interact with local communities
and civil-society organizations. Nothing is more
68/94

10/06/2016

detrimental to the legitimacy of peacekeeping missions
and the re-establishment of confidence among local
populations than Blue Helmets who abuse those whom
they should protect.
We think that mixed teams can be quite useful.
Women in peacekeeping operations can facilitate
contact with women and with the most vulnerable
members of local communities. Training courses
should be well grounded in respect for human rights.
There should be complementarity at the national and
international levels with a view to providing personnel
in peacekeeping operations with the necessary tools
to detect early-warning indicators in cases involving
mass atrocities. In that regard, the Secretary-General’s
Human Rights Up Front initiative is already part and
parcel of the Organization’s efforts along those lines.
Romanians who participate in missions under
the United Nations flag are given very strict training
prior to deployment, including with regard to respect
for civil and human rights, with particular attention to
the protection of women and children. Over the past
25 years, more than 10,000 Romanian Blue Helmets
have contributed to peace and security everywhere
in the world and have never been implicated in
incidents reflecting non-respect for the local civilian
populations, because we apply a zero-tolerance policy
for all violations.
The deliberate targeting of civilian schools and
hospitals is increasingly common in conflicts. That
must cease immediately. Humanitarian access remains
a major challenge in many armed conflicts. The recently
held first World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul was
an opportunity to reaffirm our support for the principles
of independence, neutrality and the impartiality of
humanitarian action. Romania supported the statement
proposed by the United States of America on the
protection of civilians, which reaffirms the importance
of upholding international humanitarian law.
At the same time, conflict prevention is crucial. It
requires additional efforts to reach negotiated political
solutions in order to ensure the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) and deal with the root causes
of conflict. That also requires the strengthening of the
preventive role of justice and early-warning mechanisms.
Romania has always felt that the effective
protection of civilians in armed conflicts was
strengthened through cooperation with regional and
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

subregional organizations. Last month, the open
debate of the Security Council on that topic showed
the importance of enhanced cooperation on the part
of the United Nations with the African Union (see
S/PV.7694). This past Monday the Council focused on
cooperation with the European Union (see S/PV.7705).
Both organizations are strategic partners of the United
Nations in peacekeeping efforts.
In conclusion, the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping operations is extremely important for
the reputation and credibility of the United Nations.
Upholding the Kigali Principles on the Protection of
Civilians is essential. They should form the core of
all peacekeeping mandates. Romania has endorsed the
Kigali Principles, and that decision bears witness to the
commitment of my country to global efforts to bring
peace and security to countries affected by conflicts,
while recognizing the primordial importance of the
human dimension of protection.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the African Union.
Mr. António (spoke in French): At the outset, allow
me, Sir, to warmly congratulate your country on its
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, for
their very informative briefings this morning.
I would also like to welcome many dignitaries
who are present here today, particularly Mr. Faustin
Archange Touadera, President of the Central African
Republic, who gave us the views of his country and
its priorities, which we believe all partners must listen
to carefully, bearing in mind the principle of national
ownership, if we want our efforts to succeed in the
Central African Republic.
We do not need long speeches or learned references
in order to emphasize the importance of the protection
of civilians, which plays an ever more central role in
United Nations peacekeeping operations and regional
peacekeeping operations.
For the African Union, the protection of civilians
is a problem that is integrated into the perception of
security, and it is a major challenge for peace. That
concept, which the African Union renders as the
principle of non-indifference to human suffering, is one
of the most remarkable developments accompanying

S/PV.7711

the passage of the Organization of African Unity to the
African Union.
In this context, the entire nomenclature of the
founding and regulatory acts of the AU is in line with
this philosophy, which aims primarily to preserve the
peace and security of populations in all circumstances,
the latter being seen as a key factor in social and
economic development. In this regard, for the African
Union, peace and security is a fundamental prerequisite
for any development policy as well as for integration of
the continent. The protection of civilians is understood
within this overall philosophy and is an integral part
of it.
While it is true that the context of peacekeeping
has changed dramatically over the last decade, the same
cannot be said of the concept and practice of United
Nations peacekeeping which, setting aside some notable
exceptions, continues to be underpinned by the formal
principles of impartiality, neutrality and the limited use
of force. In contrast, the practice of the African Union
in this area is based on the principle of non-indifference
to human suffering, which in practice often leads to
the deployment of robust missions to protect civilians.
Accordingly, since 2003, the AU has mandated the
deployment of more than 70,000 uniformed personnel
and about 1,500 civilians in the framework of nine
deployed operations with robust mandates, which,
most often, have as their main tasks the protection
of civilians, the neutralization of armed or terrorist
groups, and the promotion of State authority.
Alongside the deployment of peacekeeping
operations on the ground, the African Union is striving
to strengthen its long-term capacity through the
operationalization of the African Standby Force, which
provides the capacity for rapid deployment in the event
of genocide, war crimes or crimes against humanity. It
is a matter of the African Union intervening without
delay to save lives. These interventions can be
performed with or without the consent of any member
State whose peoples’ lives are threatened.
This approach, which is in tension with United
Nations practice, requires us to think about the model
of cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union with a view to achieving effective and
modern peacekeeping in the service of the protection of
civilians. From our perspective, this approach involves,
on the one hand, the search for the right balance
between preserving important aspects of traditional

16-1667769/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

principles of peacekeeping and, on the other, the need
for increased use of force. It also requires a thorough
review of the limits of peacekeeping, including when it
comes to the fight against terrorist groups.
Instituting a more consolidated model of
cooperation between the United Nations and African
Union could offer appropriate answers to some of these
existential challenges. In this regard, it is essential to
consolidate the shared responsibility that begins to
emerge when the African Union acts as first responder
to stabilize the situation in countries experiencing
conflict, creating conditions for the United Nations to
deploy peacekeeping operations at a later stage.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the Permanent Representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I will start by thanking
the French presidency for convening this important
debate on an issue that should be at the very core of our
efforts in the Organization.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union. I will now make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.
A quarter of a century ago, the United Nations and
the international community were unable to protect
civilians in my own country in an effective manner and
failed to stop genocide in Srebrenica and in Rwanda.
The reasons for those tragic failures, which brought
so much suffering and which will keep haunting
many people for years to come, were not only due to
the insufficient presence of the Blue Helmets on the
ground, but also because the United Nations troops
lacked a clear, precise mandate for what would seem
their foremost duty — the protection of civilians from
military and paramilitary attacks.
A point that was valid then is equally valid today. We
are faced with the frightening reality of unprecedented
suffering caused by conflicts in many parts of the world,
and the credibility of United Nations peacekeeping
operations depends largely on their ability to act when
civilians are threatened. In peacekeeping operations,
there can be no higher duty than that.
Although significant progress, in particular at the
normative level, has been made in the past two decades
since this Council recognized the protection of civilians
as central to its mandate, it has not yet been sufficiently
translated into a systematic and consistent protection
70/94

10/06/2016

of civilians on the ground. Protection of civilians is
currently mandated in the majority of peacekeeping
missions, which represents a step forward, but what
really matters is the final action on the ground. For
us, strengthening the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts should be centred in the following points.
First, all parties should comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law
and, when atrocities do occur, accountability must
be ensured. The International Criminal Court plays a
particularly important role in this regard.
Secondly, the Human Rights Up Front initiative
and the responsibility to protect are pivotal prevention
tools at hand, and we must use them to the best of our
ability in order to strengthen national capacities to
detect and respond to early signs of violations and risks
of atrocious crimes.
Thirdly, the concept of sustaining peace must lie at
the core of our efforts to ensure protection of civilians.
This involves the effective elimination of the root causes
of conflict, starting with the lack of development,
justice and respect for human rights. The Sustainable
Development Goals and all the related achievements in
2015 provide us with the tools required; there can be no
excuse for not using them.
Fourthly, the peacekeeping and peacebuilding
reviews under way are bringing prevention to the
centre of international peace and security discussions.
We need to ensure that it remains there and that it is
transformed into concrete action.
We have stated on multiple occasions that the
protection of civilians is first and foremost the
responsibility of national authorities. However, the
international community has to assume its part of the
responsibility for protection and take collective action
through the Security Council if and when national
authorities manifestly fail to protect their populations.
Croatia fully supports the code of conduct
regarding Security Council action against genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes, as well as
the French-Mexican initiative on the suspension of the
veto power in cases of mass atrocities. We believe that
efforts must be undertaken with a view to improving the
performance of all actors that share a stake in protecting
innocent civilians from violence. It is therefore crucial
to develop comprehensive protection strategies in close
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

consultation with host Governments, local authorities,
contributing countries and other relevant actors.
Additionally, Member States must ensure that their
military and police personnel uphold the highest values
of human rights and receive predeployment training
in line with United Nations standards. In that vein, we
should strengthen our responses to sexual exploitation
and abuse in United Nations missions and demand full
accountability at all levels. It is absolutely impossible
for us to tolerate that some who come to protect become
perpetrators themselves.
Adequate representation of female personnel
is another crucial element in our efforts to combat
sexual violence, promote gender awareness among the
host nations’ populations, and improve relationships
between peacekeepers and local citizens. To contribute
to this goal, Croatia has organized two United Nations
training courses — in May 2015 and another in April
2016 — for female police officers from several countries
of Asia and Africa as predeployment preparation for
peacekeeping operations.
In conclusion, we must translate our normative
and policy progress into concrete action to protect
human life, reaffirm the principle of humanity, and
save millions of people in far too many conflicts and
crisis areas around the world. And we must learn from
our previous failures; unfortunately, we cannot correct
some of the tragic mistakes, but at least we can avoid
repeating them.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): I would like to
express my delegation’s appreciation for the convening
of this important debate, where we are considering
what has become a central component of every United
Nations peacekeeping mission.
South Africa aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
We wish to begin by commending the SecretaryGeneral for his latest report on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/2016/447) and the recommendations
contained therein. The report is crucial in monitoring
and reporting on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. The report paints a gloomy picture as it once
again highlights the fact that civilians continue to
suffer the most as a consequence or armed conflict. Not

S/PV.7711

only are civilians indiscriminately killed or injured, but
they face such severe hardships as violations of their
basic human rights, including sexual violence and mass
displacement. We stress that the Secretary-General
should remain resolute regarding the identification of
perpetrators. The protection of civilians must remain
one of the core issues on the agenda of the Security
Council if we are to save succeeding generations form
the scourge of war.
We all recognize that States have the primary
responsibility to put an end to impunity and to
prosecute perpetrators responsible for crimes against
humanity and war crimes, including those relating to
sexual violence against women and girls. However,
the international community today is increasingly
being challenged by the changing nature of conflicts,
which requires us to adopt new, more holistic strategies
in protecting civilians. I wish to focus my remarks
today on three aspects in addressing our protection of
civilians imperative.
First, our action has to go beyond traditional
peacekeeping and the use of force. It must begin with
steps to prevent conflicts rather than respond to them
after the fact. Addressing the social and economic
development challenges facing civilians, as reflected in
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) is also crucial in that regard.
The link between economic development and peace
requires that the United Nations principle organs
and development agencies, within their respective
mandates, address the root causes of conflict and
contribute towards the realization of the sustainable
development goals.
Furthermore, strengthening and investing greater
efforts in prevention and finding all-inclusive political
solutions to conflicts is necessary. Settling conflict
through pacific means should remain our priority,
including by ensuring that our efforts in this regard
are impartial and not selective. In this connection,
the failure of the Council to address long-standing
challenges in Palestine and Western Sahara will
continue to undermine its credibility.
Secondly, steps have to be taken to strengthen
accountability for crimes committed against civilians.
Ensuring accountability is vital to the credibility of
the protection of civilians and is key to delivering
global justice.

16-1667771/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Thirdly, and coming to the key aspects of today’s
debate, is ensuring that the peacekeeping operations
deployed by the Council are adequately equipped
and resourced to address their protection of civilians
mandates. The High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations and the report of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture (S/2015/490) stress that all United Nations
peace operations have an obligation to protect civilians.
We welcome steps taken by the Secretariat to ensure
that peacekeeping operations develop strategies to
protect civilians. That includes the appointment of
protection of civilians advisers and the cooperation and
use of military, police and civilian elements in carrying
out this task. As the Secretary-General has noted,
“the credibility of United Nations peacekeepers
depends largely on their willingness and capability
to act when civilians are threatened” (S/2016/447,
para. 58).
In order for the United Nations to be effective in
its peacekeeping operations when carrying out its
mandate to protect civilians, it should also, through
the use of Chapter VIII of the Charter, make use of
the comparative advantages of regional arrangements
in advancing the protection of civilians in conflict
situations, as demonstrated in Darfur and Somalia.
The African Union (AU) has shown itself to be willing
and able to take concrete steps to ensure peace and
stability on the African continent. However, the lack
of predictable, flexible and, increasingly, sustainable
financing for AU operations can undermine the AU’s
efforts in this regard. The challenges faced by the
African Union Mission in Somalia are a case in point.
South Africa condemns sexual exploitation and
abuses committed during armed conflict. We believe
that protecting the most vulnerable populations — that
is, women, girls and children — is central to any
protection of civilians mandate. It is for that reason
that any acts of sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations peacekeepers are particularly deplorable.
When the very people charged with protecting civilians
become the violators, the trust established between these
communities and United Nations missions is betrayed
and the credibility of the United Nations compromised.
In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that it is
important for the Council to periodically evaluate its
response to the protection of civilians, as the protection
72/94

10/06/2016

of civilians from the scourge of conflict is at the core of
maintaining international peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Austria.
Mr. Charwath (Austria): I would like to thank
France for convening this timely open debate. We
welcome the opportunity to discuss the protection of
civilians in the context of peacekeeping operations.
Of course, Austria fully aligns itself with the
statements delivered by the observer of the European
Union and the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Group of Friends of the Protection of Civilians,
respectively. In our national capacity, we would like
to highlight a few additional points. I have three
remarks to make on the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping operations.
Firtst, it is clear to us that peacekeeping operations
have an important role to play when it comes to
the protection of civilians. Even where the United
Nations has deployed troops, we are convinced that
the sustainable protection of civilians can be achieved
only through durable peace and political solutions.
As such, it is paramount that peacekeeping missions
follow a whole-of-mission approach to the protection
of civilians.
Secondly, we cannot overemphasize the need to
provide adequate training and equipment to military
and police personnel deployed in United Nations peace
operations. To strengthen this aspect, all troop- and
police-contributing countries need to improve the
cooperation and transparency of their national training
efforts and bring them in line with the relevant United
Nations standards. The certification of such training
courses is an excellent opportunity to do so, and Austria
is proud to be among the first countries to obtain such
certification for our national protection of civilians
training course. We are very happy to be able to host
the United Nations workshop for the development
of protection of civilians training material, in close
cooperation with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, this fall.
Thirdly, another key aspect for a more effective
protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations is
the timely availability of threat and risk assessments. It
is therefore important to further develop an integrated
intelligence-gathering and analysis capacity to improve
situational awareness. Because we believe in the
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

importance of effective peacekeeping operations to
the protection of civilians, Austria gladly endorsed the
Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians in the
margins of the General Assembly debate on peace and
security last month, and we are very encouraged to see
the number of supporters grow.
I have just a few remarks to make on the protection
of civilians where there is no United Nations mission.
While peacekeeping operations play an important role
in the protection of civilians, there are many conflicts
where civilians are under attack, yet there is no mission
in place to protect them. We welcome the findings
and recommendations of the Secretary-General in his
latest report (S/2016/447). We continue to call for full
compliance with international humanitarian and human
rights law, as well as for accountability, including
through the International Criminal Court.
One of the most severe current challenges in this
field is the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas. We strongly welcome the Secretary-General’s
focus on this issue in his report, and were pleased to
see it feature prominently at the World Humanitarian
Summit. Together with a number of other countries,
Austria used this opportunity to subscribe to one of the
Summit’s core commitments related to the use of these
weapons, pledged an additional commitment and hosted
a side event on this issue. Austria continues to support
the objective of an international political commitment
dedicated to the protection of civilians from the use
of explosive weapons in populated areas and joins the
Secretary-General in his call on all States to engage in
this initiative.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
the most efficient way of protecting civilians is by
preventing and ending armed conflicts. Hence we fully
support the work of the United Nations to find political
settlements to conflicts and to strengthen its mediation
and conflict-prevention capacity, including the
Secretary-General’s Human Rights Up Front initiative.
In this context, it goes without saying that we support
further implementation of the women and peace and
security and the children and armed conflict agendas.
I would like to assure the Council that Austria will
continue to work closely with all interested stakeholders
to further strengthen the protection of civilians.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.

S/PV.7711

Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia) (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset to thank the French presidency for having
convened this debate.
(spoke in English)
The protection of civilians in armed conflict
remains a deep concern for Estonia, as do the particular
needs of women and children. As was expressed by my
delegation in this Chamber last week (see S/PV.7704),
sexual violence in conflict is also a continuing concern.
Children are among the most vulnerable in armed
conflicts and pay a high price; they are recruited,
injured, deliberately killed, suffer sexual abuse and are
abducted and maimed. Their schools and homes are
destroyed, and they are denied food, water and health
care. We are outraged that such suffering continues.
As President of the UNICEF Executive Board this
year, Estonia is doing its utmost to draw attention to
the need for all of us to work together to put an end
to these violations and protect children from violence,
exploitation and abuse in all its forms.
Mr. President, while I align myself fully with the
statement delivered here today by the Deputy Head of
the European Union delegation, I should like now to
touch upon the areas presented in your concept note for
today’s discussion (S/2016/503, annex).
It is clear that States themselves have the primary
responsibility to protect their citizens. At the same time,
it is also the main task of peacekeeping operations. We
believe that such operations, in order to be effective,
need to be equipped with a clear set of goals, strong
mandates and exit strategies.
For protection of civilians, relations with local
actors and non-governmental organizations as well
as cooperation with regional and international
organizations is crucial. Local governments and
civil-society organizations have an important role to
play in providing United Nations peacekeepers with
information that could help prevent and stop violations.
Furthermore, a strategy for engaging the local
community is important, since this will increase trust
in peacekeeping. However, closer cooperation should
be tied to an increase in transparency on the part of
local and regional actors.
We are greatly concerned that the protection of
civilians is challenged by disrespect for international
humanitarian law by some States and non-State armed
groups, as well as a sense of impunity for violations.

16-1667773/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

It is of the utmost importance that humanitarian aid
organizations such as the International Red Cross and
Red Crescent Movement and Médecins Sans Frontières
be able to help people affected by conflict without
being targets themselves.
Estonia strongly supports the training of all troops
to improve peacekeeping missions’ understanding
of the need to protect civilians, as well as the idea of
having gender advisers in all peacekeeping operations.
Better implementation of the relevant United Nations
standards and United Nations-certified training
materials on the protection of civilians is needed.
Pre-deployment and in-mission training should also
include issues such as sexual exploitation and abuse as
well as child protection.
In this context, let me once again express serious
concern over the significant increase in the number of
allegations of sexual exploitation by United Nations
peacekeepers. In this regard, Estonia fully supports the
Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy.
In concluding, I would like to reiterate the
important role of the International Criminal Court
and the necessary cooperation between the Court and
peacekeeping missions. Estonia believes that when a
peace operation is to be deployed in an International
Criminal Court situation country, its mandate should
authorize it to facilitate or assist the Court.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).
I would like to thank the French presidency for
holding this open debate and preparing the concept
note (S/2016/503, annex). I also thank briefers for their
inputs to this debate, which provides an opportunity for
all Member States to evaluate the contribution of United
Nations peacekeeping operations to the protection
of civilians.
The international community is deeply concerned,
because civilians are under attack as never before.
Despite all of the efforts made at the international level
and by the relevant humanitarian institutions, it is most
unfortunate that civilians still account for the vast
majority of casualties in armed conflicts. According to
last year’s report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/453),
74/94

10/06/2016

approximately 42 per cent of the world’s poor now live
in conflict-affected States, and that figure is expected
to rise to 62 per cent by 2030. Direct attacks on schools
and hospitals have become common features of many
armed conflicts. Humanitarian and health-care workers
are being deliberately targeted. Humanitarian action is
at the core of the United Nations Charter, and civilians
caught up in armed conflict have a right to be protected
by their respective States.
In this regard, NAM believes that due priority
should continue to be given to the promotion of States’
knowledge of, respect for and observance of the
obligations they assumed under the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, including international
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
in particular the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
their 1977 Protocols.
We call upon all parties to armed conflict to
redouble their efforts to comply with their legal
obligations by, inter alia, prohibiting the targeting of
civilian populations and civilian property and stressing
their responsibility to ensure general protection against
the dangers arising from military operations to civilian
installations, hospitals and relief materials and the
means to transport and distribute such relief materials.
The Movement reiterates its condemnation of
the increasing number of attacks on the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel and urges the
Governments of States Members of the United Nations
to ensure respect for the protection of the personnel
of humanitarian organizations, in conformity with the
relevant provisions of international law.
Furthermore, the Non-Aligned Movement emphasizes
that the principles of the sovereign equality, political
independence and territorial integrity of all States
and of non-intervention must be upheld. The consent
of the country is also imperative in granting access
to humanitarian assistance to its territory and for its
continued operation at all times.
United Nations peacekeeping missions constitute
one of the means at the disposal of the United Nations to
protect civilians in situations of armed conflict. Since
1999, the Security Council has tasked United Nations
peacekeeping missions with protection mandates. Such
protection mandates include establishing effective
early-warning mechanisms; ensuring the provision of
adequate resources to monitor, prevent, and respond to
incidents; and supporting the efforts of host-country
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7711

authorities to implement their responsibilities in
protecting civilians.

this high-level open debate of the Security Council on
the protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations.

NAM acknowledges that the protection of civilians
is currently mandated in a number of United Nations
peacekeeping missions, and within this context
stresses that United Nations peacekeeping operations,
in particular with protection of civilian mandates,
should be guided by the principles of the Charter and
not be used as a means for Government change and
military intervention. The Movement underlines that
the protection of civilians is the primary responsibility
of the host country, and accordingly emphasizes that
relevant United Nations peacekeeping missions with
such mandates should conduct their tasks without
prejudice to the primary responsibility of the host
Government to protect civilians. Efforts of the United
Nations must be in support of and not in substitution for
those of national authorities.

Djibouti endorses the statement made on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

We stress that the successful conduct of tasks
related to the protection of civilians requires the
integration of efforts at all levels and a holistic approach
that encompasses the timely provision of adequate
resources, logistical support and required training, as
well as clearly defined and achievable mandates. In
this regard, we acknowledge again the importance for
United Nations peacekeeping operations to support
and build synergies, and to coordinate with host
Governments, including at the local level, in protecting
the civilian population.
The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms the
importance of protecting civilians in conflict
situations, establishing accountability for violations
of international humanitarian law, and putting an end
to impunity. In this context, NAM supports the call
made by Palestine regarding the protection of the
Palestinian people.
Let me conclude by expressing the hope that this
open debate will provide an opportunity to assess
the ways and means of providing better protection to
civilians in armed conflict. We need to identify not
only the positive developments achieved so far, but the
challenges ahead.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Djibouti.
Miss Hassan (Djibouti) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank the French presidency for having organized

At the outset, I express the gratitude of my
delegation to the Secretary-General and the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross for
their contribution to this important open debate. We
also wish to thank you, Sir, for the concept note written
in anticipation of this meeting (S/2016/503, annex).
The Security Council has already had the opportunity
to discuss this issue in depth. The successive reports of
the Secretary-General and the many recommendations
therein have helped shed light not only on the progress
made but also on the major challenges remaining. Given
the importance of the issue, my delegation is convinced
of the need to increase the opportunities to identify
together a common analysis of the challenges and the
ever-more precise operational guidelines to assist the
forces of peace in their activities to protect civilians.
The Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians
are useful in that they draw lessons from past failures.
Djibouti adheres to the Principles because they
represent a significant step towards better protection for
civilians in peacekeeping operations. We also believe
that the lessons learned from the public discussion of
strengthening the cooperative relationship between the
United Nations and regional organizations could help to
better meet the challenges posed to the forces of peace
in the protection of civilians.
(spoke in English)
In 1999, the Security Council took the historic step
of adopting resolution 1265 (1999), which recognizes
the protection of civilians as the raison d’étre of the
Security Council. Significant progress has been made
since then with regard to the development of institutional
and operational tools by the General Assembly and the
Secretariat in order to strengthen United Nations action.
As States have the primary responsibility to protect
their citizens, the United Nations should support the
building of relevant national capacities and enhance
synergy among various national actors.
Last Friday, the United Nations Police Division,
organized a high-level meeting on United Nations
concepts of operations, aimed at raising various issues,
such as the mandate of peacekeepers in protecting
civilians. Most missions are already mandated to protect

16-1667775/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

civilians, but mandate implementation by peacekeepers
often fails. Threats on the ground must inform mission
mandates, strategies and structures. Training and early
warning capacity must be improved for that purpose.
Gender-sensitive training should be a central part of
security sector reform and concrete efforts must be
made to increase women’s engagement in that sector.
(spoke in French)
Djibouti has participated in the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
since 2012. The proximity of our troops through civil
engineering projects, such as building roads, and
donations of medicine and medical supplies is aimed
at establishing a unique and special relationship that
helps to reassure the local population while promoting
mission sustainability.
Moreover, in December 2011 Djibouti joined the
African Union Mission in Somalia. The Mission is
mandated to support the process of reconciliation and
peace in that country and has allowed Djiboutian troops
to secure areas recovered from Al-Shabaab while
establishing parallel relationships of trust with the
local population. Indeed, we consider the link between
the protection of civilians and peacekeeping mandates
to be critical. The safety of civilians is crucial to the
legitimacy and credibility of peacekeeping missions.
Djibouti does not yet have structures dedicated to
international humanitarian law, but has begun to build
the relevant capacities of its troops deployed abroad.
Djibouti, as a State party to the Geneva Convention,
participated in the consultations initiated by the
Swiss Government and the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) between 2012 and 2015 to
identify ways to enhance respect for international and
humanitarian law. This is a crucial issue, and we share
the main motivation behind this initiative to prevent
the credibility of international humanitarian law from
gradually being eroded and impunity from being subtly
established as the norm.
We take this opportunity to express our profound
gratitude to Switzerland and the ICRC for the
various options and recommendations submitted
for consideration by members of the thirty-second
International Conference, which met in December
2015, and express the hope that the intergovernmental
process that has been launched to reach agreement on
the functions and modalities of a governmental forum
76/94

10/06/2016

for international humanitarian law will produce the
desired results.
We will all benefit from contributing to creating a
world that respects the dignity of human beings, even
in wartime. Let us protect civilians and champion the
rights of the undocumented. This slogan drafted by
Hannah Arendt is somewhat contradictory, it is true,
but used deliberately to emphasize the difficulty of
exercising fundamental rights in the context of armed
conflicts that are often cruel and violent.
(spoke in English)
In conclusion, the challenges to peace operations
should be resolved by implementing effective strategies
on the ground. Impunity must end, and all violators must
be held accountable. Tools should be strengthened to
bring criminals to justice, and peacekeeping operations
should pay particular attention to the protection of
civilians. All relevant departments of the United
Nations should be coordinated in their efforts to protect
civilians in armed conflict. Follow-up and sharper and
more organized focus on resolutions are required.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): It has been a very
long day, so rather than reading out my statement I will
try to summarize its most important points.
There have been important appeals by parties to
conflict for the norms that safeguard humankind to
be upheld, most recently at the World Humanitarian
Summit, but we believe that such appeals must be
supported by concrete action, especially by the
Security Council. We support the Secretary-General’s
recommendations in that regard, especially that the
Council should systematically condemn violations of
international humanitarian law by any party to conflict,
take action on the most serious violations, to apply
targeted sanctions and to mandate commissions of
inquiry and fact-finding missions. Most important, the
Council should refer situations of large-scale impunity,
such as those in Syria, to the International Criminal
Court and ensure the necessary follow-up.
The potential for United Nations peacekeeping
operations to enhance accountability efforts is still
largely untapped, but there are also encouraging signs
of progress, such as the example of the direct support
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

for the special criminal court of the Central African
Republic and the International Criminal Court. We
believe that the Council should consistently task
peacekeeping missions to support the Court’s work on
the ground. Missions should effectively implement that
policy and, in particular, consistently apply the policy
of avoiding non-essential contact with fugitives.
Of course, peacekeeping missions can also play a
larger role in preventing and ending atrocity crimes.
They have unique access to information on the ground
that should be put before the Security Council, in
accordance with the Human Rights Up Front initiative.
Acting on such information is then the responsibility of
Council members.
As of this morning, with the addition of Canada, 112
States have joined the code of conduct against atrocity
crimes. That includes a majority of the current members
of the Council. Those States have committed to making
the Council more responsive in cases of mass atrocities.
We call on them, as well as on all Council members, to
do their utmost to live up to that responsibility.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
first like to congratulate you, Sir, for convening this
open debate on an issue that requires all of us to ensure
the protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations.
We are especially pleased that France took the initiative
in calling this debate. France continues to lend its
support to the African continent at a critical moment
when this issue is particularly relevant. Thanks to
France’s intervention in two brotherly countries — Mali
and the Central African Republic — we were able to
avoid a new cycle of massacre and suffering.
As we discuss the issue of the protection of civilians,
we note that significant progress has been made on the
normative front, thanks in particular to the continued
attention and commitment of the Council, supported
by all States Members of the United Nations, but also
by non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and civil
society. Many resolutions and presidential statements,
along with the establishment of specific mandates to
protect civilians in some missions, have enabled the
establishment of a robust legal framework. However, it
is clear that, despite those advances, the state of civilian
populations continues to deteriorate, with a continued
increase in the number of victims and displaced
persons and refugees, as well as widespread violations

S/PV.7711

of international humanitarian law. This bitter fact is all
the more distressing when a multidimensional mission
is deployed in the field. We hope that the call of the
Istanbul Humanitarian Summit will lead to increased
respect for international humanitarian law.
Although today’s debate is part of the regular
review of the protection of civilians, this time from the
perspective of peacekeeping operations, we must keep
in mind that it was just a few years ago that there were
strong misgivings and suspicions concerning this issue.
It is in that regard that it is important to reiterate certain
key principles.
First, protecting civilians is primarily the
responsibility of States. However, it is clear that in times
of conflict the capacity of States is either inadequate
or nonexistent. In such cases the international
community has a responsibility to support them, either
through capacity-building and by giving them the
means to meet their responsibilities or by deploying a
peacekeeping operation.
Secondly, in accordance with the principles of
peacekeeping, any intervention by the international
community should respect the principles of equality,
independence, sovereignty and respect for the territorial
integrity of States.
Moreover, the troop-contributing countries have
a responsibility to protect civilians. But that is a
responsibility shared both with the Security Council
and with the Secretariat. Again, the principles are
clear— non-use of force except in self-defence and
defence of the mandate. To enable troops to carry out
their mission successfully, the Council must consider
the realities on the ground and devote adequate means.
The Secretariat must also strengthen cooperation
with troop contributors and involve them more in the
planning stages.
Allow me now to express the views of my delegation
on the avenues for discussion proposed by the concept
note (S/2016/503, annex).
First, we consider it desirable to support a preventive
approach, that is to say, missions should deploy
protection measures so that civilians are not targeted
by armed groups. That can be done, for example, by
strengthening protection for camps. To achieve that,
cooperation with local communities, authorities and
NGOs is essential.

16-1667777/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Secondly, we must adapt the composition of the
force for the different protection stages. Mixed units
composed of military and police forces would allow
for a better response to the various situations that
peacekeeping forces may face. For example, it is agreed
that police forces are better suited and equipped for
dealing with crowd control.
Thirdly, humanitarian assistance is an important
element in the protection of civilians during armed
conflict. Support for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to those in need must remain a priority
for missions.
Fourthly, the presence of a peacekeeping operation
should facilitate the establishment of an environment
conducive to the protection of civilians, in particular by
contributing to strengthening the rule of law.
The protection of civilians was thoroughly
discussed during the recently concluded reviews of
the peacebuilding and peacekeeping architecture
of the United Nations. Morocco fully supports the
recommendations of the High-level Panel on the Review
of Peacekeeping Operations, especially with regard to
troop-contributing countries.
Moreover, the conduct of Blue Helmets charged
with protecting civilians must be irreproachable. In
that regard, Morocco reiterates its full commitment
to fully implementing the zero-tolerance policy put
forward by the Secretary-General. Concrete steps
have been taken in that regard by Morocco, including
deploying national investigators in its contingents. The
cases brought to their attention are treated with with the
utmost diligence and firmness.
Again, better cooperation with the Secretariat is
necessary, as this is ultimately a shared responsibility.
We welcome the efforts made so far in that regard by
the Secretariat, and we reiterate our full readiness to
continue to cooperate constructively with Special
Coordinator Ms. Lute and with unity of conduct
and discipline.
It is now time that the concept of civilian protection
go beyond mere physical protection to ensure that it can
alleviate the suffering of vulnerable populations, which
is the true purpose of protecting civilians.
Moroccan troops deployed for more than
60 years as part of peacekeeping operations have always
considered the protection of civilians as a key part of
their mission. That aspect is properly supported during
78/94

10/06/2016

the predeployment training provided to Moroccan
contingents destined to serve under the United Nations
banner. In addition to the tasks they are mandated to
do, Moroccan contingents have continued to provide
support to local communities, particularly in Somalia,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire
and, more recently, in the Central African Republic.
These efforts generally involve either in-kind or
financial resources and medical campaigns. Moroccan
troops are also involved in the implementation of quickimpact projects.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Morocco’s
commitment to the imperative of protecting civilians
in armed conflict, whether by troops under the United
Nations banner or by supporting capacity-building
for States.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the Observer State
of the Holy See.
Archbishop Auza: The Holy See commends
the presidency of France for bringing this extremely
important topic to the attention of the Security Council
and to the international community. The long history
of peacekeeping operations, with their successes and
shortcomings, offers a rich reservoir of lessons learned
with which to develop parameters for more effective
strategy in conflict prevention and conflict resolution,
as well as in defining mandates and rules of engagement.
The same history tells us about the evolution in the
mandates that peacekeeping missions have been
receiving from the Council. For instance, one might
presume that an essential mandate of peacekeeping
operations has always been the protection of civilians.
Yet this is a relatively recent development. In fact, the
first peacekeeping operation to receive the explicit
mandate to protect civilians was the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Sierra Leone, only in 1999.
While my delegation considers the protection
of civilians a positive evolution of United Nations
peacekeeping mandates, paradoxically it also points
to the disturbing fact that more and more civilians
are being targeted during armed conflict, and indeed
used as weapons of war. This is one of the saddest
developments in the evolution of armed conflict. In
the early 1900s, around 5 per cent of fatalities were
civilians, while in the 1990s, over 90 per cent of
the fatalities were non-combatants. Recent reports
and studies unanimously confirm that deliberate
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

targeting of, and indiscriminate attacks on, civilians
are increasing. Untold violence willfully inflicted
upon civilian populations and the defiant violations
of international humanitarian law in many current
conflicts are all too flagrant.
My delegation therefore believes that, in all cases
where mass atrocities and other forms of attacks against
defenseless civilian populations are being perpetrated
or are most likely to happen, the protection of civilians
in armed conflict must be a critical component of
peacekeeping mission mandates. It would be one of
the primary yardsticks with which to measure the
success or failure of a peacekeeping mission. Every
peacekeeping operation should be, at the end of the day,
all about saving lives. The evolution in United Nations
mandates also tells us that peacekeeping missions have
become much more than instruments for restoring peace
after conflicts have erupted. Considering the decisive
importance of both prevention and post-conflict peace
consolidation, peacekeeping missions must also be
deployed to prevent latent conflicts from exploding into
open violence and to prevent post-conflict situations
from descending again into violence.
While conflict prevention is primarily a function
of diplomatic negotiations and mediations and postconflict reconstruction and peacebuilding are often
seen as the work of development experts and social
scientists, particularly grave cases warrant a preventive
peacekeeping mission to realistically stop latent
conflicts from exploding, thereby sparing populations
from the scourges of death and destruction. In the
same manner, lessons learned suggest that pulling
out peacekeeping missions too early can be extremely
costly in every way.
A sure way to protect civilians during armed
conflict is the preventive strategy of arms control. The
Holy See renews its call upon arms producers and States
to limit the manufacture, sale and gifting of horrendous
weapons that are later used to terrorize the civilian
population or destroy civilian infrastructure.
In the name of Pope Francis, my delegation wishes
to express deep appreciation in particular for the work
of the peacekeeping mission in the Central African
Republic. Without ignoring the disturbing allegations
of crimes committed by some peacekeepers, and
without underestimating the danger that the country
could still fall back to violence, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission

S/PV.7711

in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) has
contributed substantially to calming down the situation,
to assisting the displaced and those victimized, and to
maintaining an atmosphere that is conducive to the
pacification of the population, the regular functioning
of the institutions and the return to normal life. The
multidimensional mandate of MINUSCA overall
augurs well for the reconstruction and institutional
capacity-building efforts that underpin durable peace
and sustainable development in the country.
Moreover, the Holy See would like to express its
profound gratitude to MINUSCA for all the help it
rendered to make the visit of Pope Francis in Bangui
safe and fruitful, together with the French forces, of
course. The President of the Central African Republic
spoke about the fruit of the Pope’s visit at the recent
World Humanitarian Summit, saying,
“with the visit of the Holy Father to my country
the humanitarian situation has significantly calmed
down, characterized by a disarming of the heart,
along with a return to the spirit of social cohesion
and living together”.
The Holy See follows with interest the activities of
the United Nations peacekeeping missions in different
hotspots in the world and reiterates its commitment
to collaborate, where possible, in the work of
conflict prevention, conflict resolution, post-conflict
stabilization and peace consolidation.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Paraguay.
Mr. Scappini Ricciardi (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): First, we welcome the initiative of the French
presidency of the Security Council to convene this
open debate, particularly in the context of the current
humanitarian crisis. We also welcome the report
(S/2016/447) of the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict.
The purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations are our criteria for the
foundations on which peacekeeping operations must
function. In that context, we believe it is imperative
that both the Security Council and the States Members
of the Organization, their capacity as parties to conflict
aside, contribute or should contribute to establishing
an effective system for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

16-1667779/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

With regard to the Security Council, the protection
of civilians in armed conflict should be clearly and
explicitly included in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. Such protection, as we understand it,
must take priority in situations where civilians are
at a high risk of violence, and must be explicit with
regard to both protection against sexual violence, in a
broad sense, and on the special protection of children
and adolescents in armed conflicts. For their part, the
existing mandates of peacekeeping missions must also
be adapted in that regard. The system for the protection
of civilians must be improved and, in that connection,
the role that can be played by education and training in
the area of international humanitarian law and human
rights law to halt and prevent acts of violence, attacks
and threats against civilians, we believe, is also critical.
Paraguay is currently contributing military
personnel to six peacekeeping missions. Paraguayan
military personnel receive general training on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, prior to their
deployment in peacekeeping missions, and starting this
year, also receive specialized and specific training on the
subject in Paraguay’s training centre for peacekeeping
operations.
Paraguayan
military
peacekeeping
personnel also receive training on civilian-military
coordination and on violence and gender inequality.
In response to the Secretary-General’s reports on
children and armed conflict and on conflict-related
sexual violence, our delegation urges the troopcontributing and police-contributing countries on the
lists in those reports to uphold specific commitments
and concrete plans to address such violations. Likewise,
we believe the contribution of universal political and
legal frameworks for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is also relevant. In that regard, Paraguay urges
Member States to adhere to the Oslo declaration on
safe schools adopted in 2015. We also call upon States
to reaffirm their commitment to the Rome Statute,
to ratify it and to cooperate with the International
Criminal Court in a comprehensive manner.
We cannot fail to mention the link between
the topic of this debate and the illicit trade in light
weapons and ammunition. In that context, Paraguay
calls for the explicit inclusion of ammunition in
the regulatory frameworks of small arms and light
weapons and in their implementation, and calls upon
Member States that have not yet done so to ratify the
Arms Trade Treaty. Lastly, we support the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal to Member States to constructively
80/94

10/06/2016

participate in formulating a political statement on the
use of explosive weapons in populated areas.
With regard to the current humanitarian crisis, the
delegation of Paraguay supports a comprehensive and
holistic response by all stakeholders focusing on the
protection of civilians in the framework of the principles
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1).
Finally, the Republic of Paraguay deplores the
disregard of the basic standards of international
humanitarian law and human rights by parties to
conflict, in particular through practices, such as the use
of the starvation of civilians as a weapon of war and
subjugation, restrictions on humanitarian access and on
the protection of civilians, and attacks on the institution
of asylum and the principle of non-refoulement.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me first thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this very important debate
on protecting civilians in the context of peacekeeping
operations. We also thank the briefers for their
respective statements.
Indonesia aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and of Thailand
on behalf of Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
The role of United Nations peacekeeping operations
in protecting civilians cannot be overemphasized, and
as peacekeepers are increasingly mandated to carry
out complex responsibilities in dangerous situations,
protecting civilians is indeed one of the most challenging
tasks for United Nations peacekeeping missions.
As rightly mentioned in the concept note
(S/2016/503, annex), various progress has been made
over the past two decades in strengthening international
protection frameworks, in particular by the Council.
However, the progress and related guidance, concepts
and advocacy have not yet been translated into effective
action in the field, where the actual improvement is
need. It is important that all peacekeeping stakeholders
be aware of the gap between the mandate of protecting
civilians given by the Council and what the missions
can actually deliver with their existing resources. An
enhanced role of the Security Council in this regard,
along with its regular and meaningful consultation with
other peacekeeping actors, are indeed critical. Positive
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7711

results will be attained when common directions,
cooperation and collaboration are well established
among the Council, the troop- and police-contributing
countries, the Secretariat and host countries.

defence and defence of the mandate continue to be
adhered to. We therefore underline that the use of force
in United Nations peacekeeping operations should only
be the last resort.

There must be a well-coordinated whole-of-mission
strategy as mentioned by the Secretary-General in his
latest report on the protection of civilians (S/2016/447).
We also fully agree with him that the sustainable
protection of civilians will ultimately require political
solutions. It is therefore imperative to ensure that
peacekeeping mandates are well defined, realistic and
linked to a wider political process, and that missions
are provided with all the resources necessary to the
implementation of their respective mandates.

We also emphasize that the development and
updates of guiding materials and training on how
to protect civilians should be widely discussed with
Member States. The United Nations system should
intensify its efforts to help enable a comprehensive
approach to protect civilians.

My delegation wishes to re-emphasize that the
protection of civilians is the primary responsibility of
the host country and, in this context, it shares the view of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
with regard to the supporting role of United Nations
peacekeeping missions to relevant Governments in
executing that responsibility.
Promoting respect for human rights and international
law is a long-term effort, which needs to be nationally
owned and supported by the United Nations and the
international community. Furthermore, as mentioned
in the draft 2016 report of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, we wish to re-emphasize the
significance of unarmed strategies to protect civilians
by United Nations peacekeeping missions as political
instruments that can effectively protect civilians by
helping to bring an end to violent conflicts, thereby
maintaining the confidence of parties in peaceful
solutions. It is also in this context that we wish to
acknowledge the important role of the United Nations
police components, including female police officers, in
protecting the civilian population and creating a stable
environment, consistent with their mandates.
It would be remiss if we did not include the notion
of conflict prevention in this debate. Prevention and
peaceful resolution should be given higher priority in
peacekeeping missions, and we should ensure that the
United Nations is more people-centred and impactful
and harnesses the strengths of existing regional entities.
For the safety and security of the threatened
populations, as well as of the peacekeepers, it is
also essential that the three basic United Nations
peacekeeping principles of consent of the parties,
impartiality and the non-use of force except in self-

Human life is indeed the most precious. And the
deplorable fact of the increasing deaths of civilians in
armed conflict situations deserves our full attention,
commitment and action.
Indonesia, with its current participation in 10 United
Nations peacekeeping operations, will continue to
support and contribute to United Nations efforts to lay
down the foundations for sustainable peace. We will
also continue to ensure that, before deployment, our
peacekeepers receive the most adequate training on
civilians’ protection.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Donoghue (Ireland): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important debate.
Ireland aligns itself with the statement made earlier
by the observer of the European Union. We would like
to provide the following remarks in a national capacity.
Ireland began participating in United Nations
peace operations in 1958, three years after becoming
a State Member of the United Nations. The nature of
international conflict has changed considerably since
then. We have today deliberate attacks on civilians and
on their hospitals and schools. We have the proliferation
of non-State armed groups and their asymmetric tactics.
We have blatant disregard for international human rights
and humanitarian law, along with a culture of impunity.
The three high-level reviews of last year pointed
to ways to address these issues. First, mandate design
must be improved and the needs of civilians must be
placed at the centre. No two conflicts are the same;
it follows therefore that no two mandates should be
identical. Unfortunately, this has not always been the
case in United Nations peace operations. We have, too
many times, followed a template-style format when
designing mission mandates rather than asking the

16-1667781/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

difficult questions: What are the specific needs of this
country? Of this conflict? Of these people? And how can
we help to meet these needs? While 10 out of 16 peace
operations now have protection of civilian mandates,
the aim to protect civilians is the intrinsic reason any
mission exists. The protection of civilians must be at
the heart of the planning process, with more proactive
and robust political, civilian and military interventions
for protection allowed for throughout all missions.
Secondly, our peacekeeping and protection efforts
must be grounded in respect for international law.
Peace missions are often deployed in situations where
there has been an almost complete break-down in the
rule of law. At the World Humanitarian Summit in
Istanbul, Ireland made a specific commitment to ensure
that our personnel deployed on overseas peacekeeping
missions operate at the highest standards in accordance
with international humanitarian and human rights law.
We also committed to ensuring accountability for any
failure that would amount to a crime under international
law, and we are pleased to be among the growing list of
Member States that have endorsed the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians.
While it is important to advance and propagate
international frameworks for the protection of civilians,
we need to ensure that this is felt on the ground. Next
week, the United Nations Training School Ireland
will host training for both national and international
students on the protection of civilians. Now in its
second year, this Irish Defence Forces initiative allows
participants to share best practices from the ground,
while delivering valuable training, including in the
area of international human rights law. Furthermore,
we cannot allow impunity for violations of some of the
most basic tenets of international law in the area of the
protection of civilians. Tackling the issue demands a
comprehensive approach to capacity-building from
Member States and the international and regional
system alike.
Thirdly, the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda is a valuable tool to advance
the protection of civilians. Resolution 1325 (2000) was a
milestone for the Council. It acknowledged that women
and girls face specific risks in conflict settings, which
require specific actions for protection. Ireland works
to mainstream gender throughout military operations
by appointing gender advisers in each brigade and
formation, and we have prioritized diversity in our
Defence Forces’ recently launched recruitment drive.
82/94

10/06/2016

The first workshop of gender advisers from across
regional organizations, which Ireland hosted this month,
is another firm step towards ensuring the participation
of women in peacekeeping. Furthermore, Ireland is
resolute in its belief that the heinous crime of sexual
exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers can be fully
stamped out, including by strengthened predeployment
and ongoing professional training programmes.
I conclude on a potentially paradoxical note.
Ireland believes that every discussion of peacekeeping
operations should include the following question: How
can we prevent the deployment of those operations in the
first instance? A successful whole-of-United Nations
approach to peacebuilding and conflict prevention will
require embedding in peace operations the objective of
tackling the root causes of their deployment.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Maldives.
Mr. Sareer (Maldives): Let me begin by expressing
our gratitude to the French presidency of the Security
Council for convening this high-level open debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, which
has become one of the most critical humanitarian
challenges for the Council. This debate is particularly
timely following the recent General Assembly thematic
debate on the United Nations, peace and security and
the World Humanitarian Summit. We would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2016/447)
on this issue, which comprehensively examines the key
issues at hand and provides a useful starting point for
today’s dialogue.
Although Governments and parties bear the
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, it is evident that United Nations
peacekeeping operations have had and will continue
to have a role in the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. To further enhance that role, the Security
Council and the respective Member States must make
the protection of civilians a clear priority in determining
the scope and mandates of peacekeeping missions,
while respecting the primacy of the host Government.
They must set out clear and comprehensive guidelines
to identify threats to civilians according to the local
context, along with respective response strategies, and
ensure that adequate staff is deployed to implement
those mandates effectively.
Peacekeeping operations should also work closely
with the local communities and Governments in the
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

conflict-affected zones to monitor and assess their
performance in fulfilling their mandates. In order to
facilitate that, mechanisms for community outreach
can be formulated in order to establish networks within
local communities. These can be built on lessons learned
from past experiences in the coordination between
peacekeeping operations and communities, which are
highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report.
As a country that has recently signed an agreement
with the United Nations with the intention of
contributing to the noble objective of peacekeeping,
Maldives recognizes the importance of providing
training to personnel on the protection of civilians.
Those priorities should be integrated into their basic
training at the national level, as well as into preparation
for specific missions through the United Nations.
The principles of international human rights law and
humanitarian law should also be an integral part of
their national training to ensure that those principles
are adhered to at all times. It is also essential to monitor
and assess the actions of peacekeepers to ensure that
they are upholding the mandate assigned to them. In that
regard, we welcome the development of new indicators
to better evaluate the performance of such mandates and
to enhance the efficiency of peacekeeping operations,
as recommended in the Secretary-General’s report.
In the context of the protection of civilians, it
is important to consider the protection of civilian
infrastructure. Too often, we observe that civilian
buildings in conflict zones, especially schools and
medical facilities, are being targeted with alarming
regularity. Not only do such attacks result in the tragic
loss of lives, but they also infringe on the basic human
rights of civilians. They deprive civilians of the sources
of their livelihood, impede access to basic material
needs, and severely impair the provision of educational
and health services.
The all-too-common result is the creation of a
broken society. In the aftermath of armed conflict,
civilians are confronted with the stark realities
of destroyed homes and infrastructure, limited
opportunities for gainful employment, a generation of
youth without access to a functional educational system,
the spread of preventable disease in the absence of
adequate health care, and the widespread destruction of
cultural heritage. Those present what are often almost
insurmountable challenges to a meaningful recovery
from conflict, leading to continued weakness in social,
political and economic institutions. Such weaknesses

S/PV.7711

create a breeding ground for future hostility and lead
to a potentially self-perpetuating cycle of conflict. It
is therefore critical that we devise a robust framework
for the protection of civilians and assist in the rapid
reconstruction and rehabilitation of societies in
conflict zones.
As the events of the past year have sadly shown
us, the protection of civilians in armed conflicts is
an issue on which much work remains to be done to
satisfactorily achieve that goal. We applaud the work
of the Security Council towards that end, and we
believe that the Secretary-General’s recommendations,
as well as constructive input from this debate, when
implemented, will have a meaningful impact on
furthering the protection of civilians and the recovery
of societies during and after armed conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Cambodia.
Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): First, allow me to congratulate
France on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of June and for organizing this
open debate on the protection of civilians in the context
of peacekeeping operations today.
I wish to associate myself with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and with the
statement made by the representative of Thailand on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN). I wish to deliver this statement in my
national capacity.
Armed conflicts that have spread across
continents, along with recurring terrorist attacks
throughout the globe, have exerted an unbearable
toll on civilian populations, making United Nations
peacekeeping operations obligatory. I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for the thought-provoking questions
in your concept note (S/2016/503, annex), highlighting
how peacekeeping operations can do more to provide
protection to civilians.
Peacekeeping operations are becoming increasingly
complex and varied. Widespread terrorism, mass
displacements of populations, large-scale disease
outbreaks and climate change have strained international
resources and undermined the effectiveness of
peacekeeping efforts globally. As peacekeeping
components of multidimensional operations are
designed to protect the most vulnerable population,

16-1667783/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

they should show more caring and humanitarian
responsibilities in carrying out their duties. Cambodia
advocates zero tolerance of sexual violence against
children and of serious crimes committed by United
Nations peacekeepers and staff. The protection of
civilians should be the motto of their missions.
Protection should cover civilians in both conflict and
non-conflict areas where peacekeepers are stationed. In
this instance, it is necessary to promote the rule of law
at the national and international levels. States have the
primary responsibility to protect civilians. Therefore,
countries hosting peacekeeping operations should work
more to strengthen their national rule of law, particularly
as it relates to legislation on the protection of civilians.
In this light, the predeployment and in-mission training
of United Nations peacekeepers and staff are critical
to protecting the civilian population. Training should
focus on United Nations standards of conduct, the
obligation to observe the laws of the host country, and
the promotion of humanitarian legal principles.
Mine action makes it possible for peacekeepers to
carry out patrols and allow humanitarian agencies to
deliver assistance to ordinary citizens to live without
fear. For this reason, Cambodia has contributed more
than 3,000 Blue Helmet troops to United Nations
peacekeeping operations worldwide. Through its
National Peacekeeping Operations Centre, Cambodia
looks forward to hosting training sessions, jointly run
by national and international experts, in the field of
demining and the destruction of explosive remnants
of war. Moreover, the ASEAN Regional Mine Action
Centre was inaugurated in May in Cambodia as a centre
of excellence to address the impacts of landmines and
explosive remnants of war.
While coordinated actions among the military
and civilian peacekeepers and local authorities are
being conducted, it is important to closely monitor and
report on the evolving security situation on the ground
in order to ensure a prompt response. In this sense, if
peacekeeping operations are to succeed on the ground
they will require the involvement of all stakeholders,
ranging from international organizations to the Security
Council, which is the organ responsible for setting the
mandates peacekeeping operations.
My country well understands the challenges that
United Nations peacekeepers are facing. The lessons
learned from my country are that when rebellious groups
were not taking part in the United Nations-arranged
84/94

10/06/2016

peace process, civilians in the most dangerous areas
were not adequately protected. Whenever, there was an
attack by the rebellious groups, either on civilians or
on peacekeepers, there was no effective response from
the United Nations, except to adopt a silent attitude that
only caused more trouble in the country. Therefore,
I believe that effective measures should be taken to
ameliorate such situations.
On a wider perspective, the lessons learned have
taught us that clear peacekeeping mandates, together
with political support, sufficient resources and
adequate financial and logistical support, are the key
elements necessary for the United Nations to effectively
safeguard and protect the most vulnerable civilian
population in conflict situations.
Finally, I cannot conclude without appreciating
the ongoing efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support to
improve the performance of peacekeeping operations
by developing a conceptual framework and protection
of civilians strategies, as well as training courses for
personnel to be deployed.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica thanks the French presidency
for convening this open debate on the protection of
civilians in the context of peacekeeping operations.
This initiative is of great importance to my country,
and we urge the Council to pursue this healthy practice,
which enriches the debate and political dialogue of
the Council.
We have analysed the concept note that has been
circulated (S/2016/503, annex) and the report of the
Secretary-General of May 13 (S/2016/447), and we
wish to refer to some of the issues raised therein.
Costa Rica shares with the Secretary-General the
sense that most of the deaths, suffering and displacement
of civilians in armed conflict could be prevented if
the parties involved respected the fundamental norms
of international law and human rights law. We are
alarmed by the atrocities committed against civilians,
the disregard for human life, the rape of women and
girls, indiscriminate and deliberate attacks on civilians,
including the bombing of schools and places of worship,
the use of children as human bombs to carry out suicide
bombings and as soldiers, the kidnapping and killing
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

of humanitarian workers and journalists, and the
destruction of hospitals and ambulances.
That is why we join the voices that advocate
the non-use of schools and universities for military
purposes in armed conflict. In that regard, Costa Rica
categorically condemns terrorism and urges the Security
Council to redouble its efforts to combat these acts of
barbarism, in the framework of international law, to
consider options to use the sanctions committees more
effectively to that end, and to bring those responsible to
justice. Justice is necessary if peace is to be sustainable.
Costa Rica reiterates its concern over and strong
condemnation of the repeated instances of sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations troops who
have been entrusted with the protection of civilians,
discredited international efforts and let down those
they were supposed to to protect. In this regard, we
support the zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse and other criminal conduct, and we advocate
in favour of accountability at all levels so as to ensure
that those responsible face the consequences of their
criminal acts. Impunity cannot be accommodated.
Costa Rica recognizes the importance of and is
pleased that the Security Council, in resolution 2272
(2016), has welcomed the Secretary-General’s enhanced
programme of action to prevent and combat sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations personnel, and
we call on States to cooperate with its implementation.
In most cases, the United Nations represents the last
glimmer of hope for communities and victims. The
Organization cannot fail in protecting civilians. Cases
of sexual exploitation and abuse perpetrated by its
own officials damage the credibility of peacekeeping
operations, a fundamental pillar of the Organization.
They prevent the implementation of peacekeeping
mandates and warp the local population’s perception of
the Organization’s fairness with.
The protection of civilians must be a State priority
and points to the need to find viable political solutions
to conflicts and ensure that there will be no impunity
for crimes committed against civilians, as well as to
work in close coordination with humanitarian and
community organizations in the field, which can be of
great help in the early detection of threats to civilians.
However, the international community must also act to
end the proliferation and international sale of weapons,
explosives and cluster munitions through the signing
and ratification of the Arms Trade Treaty, including

S/PV.7711

its provision concerning the gender violence criterion;
the signing and ratification of the 2008 Convention
on Cluster Munitions; the strengthening of the
International Criminal Court through the signing of the
Rome Statute; and above all the signatories’ respect for
and adherence to its provisions, as well as the guarantee
that cases referred by the Security Council enjoy the
financial resources needed to ensure the fulfillment of
the Court’s duties.
In addition, the waves of international displaced
persons and refugees require the international
community to take concrete action to support these
people in mitigating their vulnerability and finding
protection in their host communities. We must not lose
sight of the fact that a new approach that takes into
account the Sustainable Development Goals and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution
70/1) is needed, and that it imposes on us the challenge
not to leave anyone one behind.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Ms. Hailu (Ethiopia) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I would like to begin, first of all,
by congratulating your country on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of June 2016. I would also like to thank you, Sir, for
convening this debate on the protection of civilians in
the context of peacekeeping operations. This meeting
could not be more timely and relevant in the light of
the specific recommendations made by the report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(HIPPO) (S/2015/446) and the Secretary-General’s
implementation report on the protection of civilians
(S/2016/447). I also thank the briefers for their briefings
this morning.
(spoke in English)
We all know that peacekeeping has evolved and
adapted itself to changing security circumstances. That
is why most, if not all, of the peacekeeping operations
authorized by the Security Council today have
protection-of-civilians mandates. There is no doubt that
the primary responsibility for protecting civilians rests
with the host country, but in situations where that is
not possible and innocent civilians are at risk, United
Nations peacekeeping operations cannot and should not
remain indifferent. The shirking of responsibility by
peacekeepers for the protection of civilians in the face
of dire circumstances is indefensible.

16-1667785/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We are pleased to note that the HIPPO report has
recognized that fact. For us in Africa, that is a very
important matter, and we believe the lessons learned
from the bitter experiences of the Rwandan genocide
should never be forgotten. That is why we have made
a paradigm shift from the principle of non-interference
to one of non-indifference in grave circumstances
involving human rights violations and crimes against
humanity. That perspective is clearly enshrined in the
Constitutive Act of the African Union.
Although there has been much progress in setting
the normative frameworks for the protection of
civilians, challenges persist with respect to translating
such a mandate into action in the field. Undoubtedly,
there needs to be significant improvement in the
provision of peacekeeping operations with clear and
succinct protection-of-civilians mandates. But no
matter how elegant or elaborate the mandate, unless
it is put into practice by those that are in a position
to make a difference, not much can be achieved. The
enormous gaps in terms of the readiness, capacity and
training of United Nations peacekeeping operations in
carrying out protection-of-civilians mandates should
also be seriously looked into and adequately addressed.
Ethiopia is one of the leading troop-contributing
countries to United Nations peacekeeping operations.
The protection of civilians is, therefore, very relevant to
our peacekeepers, who are deployed in some of the most
volatile situations in Africa. It is not a matter of theory
but a practical challenge, one that our peacekeepers
face on a day-to-day basis, risking their own lives. That
is why we attach great importance to the protection of
civilians and why we are one of those countries that
have endorsed the Kigali Principles on the Protection
of Civilians. For us in Ethiopia, subscribing to those
principles was not difficult as such, because we believe
that our peacekeepers are already practicing them.
It is encouraging to note that a number of countries
have committed themselves to upholding those
principles, and we hope they will eventually become
the norm in United Nations peacekeeping. That will
certainly go a long way towards addressing the gaps in
the implementation of protection-of-civilians mandates
in peacekeeping operations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Pinheiro da Silva (Portugal) (spoke in
French): I would like, first of all, to express our
86/94

10/06/2016

gratitude to France for organizing this very important
debate on the protection of civilians. I also thank the
Secretary-General, the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the President of the
Central African Republic for their briefings.
Portugal aligns itself with the statement made
by the Deputy Head of Delegation of the European
Union and the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Switzerland, who spoke on behalf of
the Group of Friends of the Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict.
Civilians affected by conflict situations continue
to suffer the consequences of ongoing hostilities and
are the main victims of violations of international
humanitarian law as well as systematic human rights
violations. Millions of people are exposed to violence
on a daily basis, including sexual violence and
exploitation, and they are forced to try to survive in
very precarious conditions with respect to access to
water, food, shelter and health services. In very many
parts of the world, humanitarian access to the neediest
populations is being deliberately blocked. Millions
of children and young people are being deprived of
education. Schools and hospitals have been subject to
attack, and humanitarian workers are being targeted.
Mass displacements that are due to fighting and
violence are reaching levels without precedent since the
end of the Second World War. We must stop this trend.
The inability to put an end to violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights
violations, which, we must emphasize, may constitute
crimes against humanity and war crimes, underscores
the importance of giving priority to prevention as well
as to the fight against impunity. We must continue our
efforts to translate normative progress into concrete
improvements with regard to the protection of civilians
on the ground.
While Member States have the primary
responsibility to fulfil their international obligations to
ensure the promotion and protection of human rights
and international humanitarian law, it is nevertheless
crucial to strengthen accountability and improve
compliance with international obligations by all
parties to armed conflicts. Where national authorities
fail to take the necessary measures to ensure such
accountability, the Security Council may, if necessary,
play a more proactive role. Portugal recalls that the
International Criminal Court can play an important
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

deterrent role, complementary to that of courts at the
national level.
Undeniable progress has been made in recent
decades with respect to the integration of a civilian
protection component into United Nations peacekeeping
mission mandates. However, the United Nations and
its peacekeeping operations should work to keep pace
with a changing world and the rapid transformation
of the nature of conflict itself, and should anticipate
the risks and needs with a view to finding more
efficient approaches.
We recognize that the risks are higher and
threats are now more global than in the past, and the
operational environments in which United Nations
missions are working are more complex and dangerous
than ever. United Nations missions are increasingly
having to struggle to protect their own personnel and
innocent civilians on the ground in order to fulfil
their mandates. The adjustment includes, inter alia,
the United Nations having to endow its missions with
modern and flexible capabilities, including through
a human rights protection component, which helps
to strengthen the performance of the peacekeeping
operations themselves. In many respects, the
preparation of peacekeepers is the cornerstone of the
capacity-building process for missions in terms of the
implementation of the protection-of-civilians mandate.
Portugal reiterates its commitment to continue
to conduct training programmes for members of its
national security and armed forces who have been
deployed to international peacekeeping missions.
Such training programmes cover such issues as gender
equality, violence against women and girls, including
all forms of sexual violence and gender-based violence,
as well as trafficking in human beings.
Portugal has assumed its responsibilities with
regard to the deployment of personnel and forces
to United Nations peacekeeping operations and has
already decided to strengthen its participation in that
framework during the current year, 2016.
The results of the three review processes on United
Nations peace and security efforts have led to certain
clear conclusions and provided us with good avenues
for the United Nations to explore in remaining relevant
in the maintenance of peace and security. We believe
that only a consistent focus on addressing root causes
and intensifying political diplomacy efforts in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts, together with the

S/PV.7711

humanitarian aspect of development and peacebuilding,
will effectively enhance respect for international
humanitarian law and promote responsibility on the
part of all parties, as well as humanitarian access to
those in need, thereby strengthening collective efforts
to address the mass movements of people we are
witnessing every day.
Recalling the words of the Secretary-General on
the current humanitarian situation, “given the blatant
inhumanity,” the international community can no
longer remain an accomplice of collective apathy.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Gone (Côte D’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would like, first of all, to congratulate the French
presidency of the Security Council for holding this
open debate on the important issue of the role of the
protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations. As
in the previous debate, my delegation wishes to reassure
you, Mr. President, of its support for the successful
mandate of your presidency.
Civilians, in principle, are not fighters but
nevertheless count among the largest number of
casualties in armed conflict. They are subject to mass
killings, rape and often forced displacement — in
a word, all types of violence. Such violence against
civilians prompted the Security Council, in 1999, to
confer on a peacekeeping mission for the first-time
a mandate to protect civilians — the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Sierra Leone.
Since then, the issue of the protection of civilians
in times of conflict has been regularly debated,
including of course in the Security Council. As part
of the progress made, my delegation places special
emphasis in this debate on the adoption of the principle
of the responsibility to protect at the 2005 World
Summit of Heads of State and Government. Based
on that principle, the Council aided my country in
avoiding the worsening of the security situation of the
civilian population during the armed conflict in 2005
in the country. By way of resolution 1975 (2011), the
Security Council gave the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire the mandate necessary to ensure the full
protection of civilians in the face of the unacceptable
atrocities recorded regularly throughout the country.
Nevertheless, the implementation of the principle
of the responsibility to protect remains subject to
significant challenges, such as the obligation to respect

16-1667787/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the sovereignty of a country and the need to reach
consensus within the Security Council.
Having mentioned the issue of consensus within
the Security Council, I cannot but help to address the
question of the right of the veto. The use of the right
of veto over time has shown how that instrument was
sometimes the source of much inertia in the face of
unsustainable tragedies and unbearable humanitarian
crises. Faced with that major obstacle consisting of
the inappropriate use of the veto, France and Mexico
proposed, as part of the reform of the Security Council,
an initiative that wouldentail the permanent members
to voluntarily and collectively suspend their right to the
veto in cases of observed mass crimes. My delegation
is convinced of the enormous benefit to humankind
that such an initiative could bring about, and therefore
lends its full support for that proposal. Similarly, my
country supports the code of conduct relative to the
response of the Security Council to genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes, proposed by the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group.
We hope that the code will become more binding.
Protecting civilians in armed conflict in the context
of peacekeeping operations also implies addressing the
role of each actor. The deployment of a peacekeeping
mission involves many actors. It is therefore important
to undertake an organized effort and embrace shared
responsibility. To that end, the Security Council must
define its mandates in sufficiently clear and precise
terms. The host Government should prioritize the
protection of civilians and facilitate its implementation.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the Department of Field Support should ensure that
sufficient resources are deployed to carry out the
mission well. Troop-contributing countries should
ensure that their troops are not only well trained for
the mission, but also in the areas of humanitarian law,
international human rights law, refugee law and other
international conventions dedicated to the protection of
civilians in times of conflict. Ongoing evaluations of
those responsibilities should also be an essential part
of the protocol for the implementation of peacekeeping
missions. In that context, my delegation welcomes the
efforts of the Council, the Secretariat and the General
Assembly in regularly reporting and taking initiatives
on those issues and encourages them to continue to
expand their commitment.
In concluding my remarks, I would like to say
that the protection of civilians is the essence itself of
88/94

10/06/2016

peacekeeping operations in that it incorporates the goals
of the Charter of the United Nations and is perceived
by many citizens throughout the world, especially
in countries in situations of conflict, as a mirror of
efficiency and legitimacy, as well as the United Nations
credibility as a defender of peace in its promotion of
freedom and progress worldwide.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the French presidency for convening
this important open debate, as well as the briefers for
their insightful statements. Azerbaijan welcomes the
advancement of the protection-of-civilians agenda in
the Security Council’s work.
The intentional targeting of civilians remains one
of the most alarming trends of contemporary armed
conflicts. Civilians continue to suffer greatly from the
horrible consequences of armed conflict. The fact that
more than 60 million people were displaced as of the
end of 2015 is the only fact needed to demonstrate the
scale of the calamity of civilians. We appreciate the
generosity of countries that are hosting large numbers
of refugees.
My country commends the inclusion of the issue of
forced displacement in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) and
the Secretary-General’s Agenda for Humanity.
The World Humanitarian Summit, recently held
in Istanbul, should further encourage Member States
and the whole international community to strengthen
their efforts to reduce human suffering. We also look
forward to the high-level meeting on large movements
of refugees and migrants to be held on 19 September.
Azerbaijan also supports the growing awareness
about the problem of internal displacement worldwide.
As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/447)
acknowledges, strong protection frameworks are also
needed for internally displaced persons. In that regard,
the African Union Convention for the Protection
and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in
Africa — the first binding document on internal
displacement — is especially commendable.
Azerbaijan strongly condemns all attacks on
civilians and civilian structures in situations of
armed conflict. We are deeply concerned by sexual
violence in conflict, grave violations against children,
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the use of explosive weapons in populated areas and
attacks on humanitarian personnel, to name just a few.
The utmost attention should be given by all parties to
conflict to complying with international humanitarian
and human rights law and respecting the principles
of distinction, proportionality and precaution. We
echo the assessment of the Secretary-General that
most civilian casualties and suffering could indeed be
avoided if parties respected international humanitarian
and human rights law. First and foremost, a lasting
political solution should be achieved to put an end to
the plight of civilians.
We recognize the tremendous role that United
Nations peace operations have played in protecting
civilians around the globe. We condemn all attacks on
United Nations peacekeepers and pay tribute to those
who lost their lives while accomplishing their mission.
We cannot but agree with the recommendations offered in
the Secretary-General’s report that the Security Council
should accord priority to the protection of civilians in
the mandates of peace operations in situations requiring
such protection. Mandates related to the protection
of civilians should be clear, realistic and achievable,
and peacekeepers must be fully equipped with all of
the operational and logistical capabilities necessary to
carry out their mandates. Furthermore, United Nations
peacekeeping operations should complement the work
undertaken by the Governments affected.
Unfortunately, my country has also been affected by
the large-scale violations against its civilian population
committed by the Republic of Armenia. The occupation
of the Azerbaijani territories by Armenia has been
accompanied by deliberate attacks and the killing of
civilians, ethnic cleansing and forced displacement.
Resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and
884 (1993) refer specifically to the displacement of
civilians, attacks on civilians and bombardments of the
territory of Azerbaijan.
Azerbaijani civilians continue to be targeted by
Armenia. On 30 January last, I informed the Security
Council of the cases of two Azerbaijani civilians,
Mr. Shakhbaz Guliyev and Mr. Dilgam Askarov,
who were taken hostage by Armenia while they were
visiting the graves of their parents in the occupied
region of Azerbaijan. I once again draw the attention
of the Council to this issue, underlining the fact that
those civilians were captured on the territory of their
own country. Therefore, the illegal court proceedings

S/PV.7711

sentencing Mr. Askarov to life imprisonment and
Mr. Guliyev to 22 years in prison are null and void.
Mr. President, I appeal again, through you, to the
relevant international human rights bodies and
humanitarian actors to intervene in order to achieve
their release.
At the beginning of April, the Armenian armed
forces, using heavy artillery and large-calibre weapons
on their positions in the occupied territories of
Azerbaijan, increased the shelling of areas of Azerbaijan
close to the front lines, purposely targeting densely
populated areas. As a result, six civilians, including
two children, were killed, and 33 wounded. Houses,
schools, kindergartens and vital civilian infrastructure
have been substantially damaged by the Armenian
forces in order to create panic among the population
and trigger massive displacement. A large number of
civilians have been deprived of their basic rights to life,
health, property and education. Many of the violations
committed by Armenia against Azerbaijani civilians are
tantamount to war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Furthermore, despite the ceasefire agreed on
5 April, Armenia is now threatening Azerbaijan with
the use of “dirty bombs”. Hrant Bagratyan, a member of
the Armenian Parliament and former Prime Minister of
Armenia, has proudly stated that his country possesses
a nuclear weapon.
As a result of the occupation of a large part of
the territory of my country, hundreds of thousands
of Azerbaijanis have found themselves in a mass
displacement situation. The Secretary-General’s
report stresses the primary responsibility of national
Governments in protecting and assisting refugees
and internally displaced persons. In this regard, let
me emphasize that Azerbaijan has demonstrated
that it is possible to improve the living and housing
conditions of internally displaced persons (IDPs)
without undermining their return to their places of
origin. My Government’s efforts to tackle the problems
of IDPs have been hailed by numerous international
actors, including the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the International
Organization for Migration and others. Azerbaijan
remains fully committed to the return of IDPs, in safety
and dignity, to their native lands.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Lithuania.

16-1667789/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I thank you,
Mr. President, for having organizing this important
debate. Lithuania aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the European Union.
Today’s debate is a reminder once again that an
ample knowledge base exists on what is needed to
improve the protection of civilian populations by
peacekeeping missions, including as reflected in the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (S/2015/446) and last year’s reviews
on peacebuilding and women and peace and security.
As noted by many delegations today, clear, credible
and achievable mandates matched by the reliable and
readily availability of the necessary materiel, equipment
and critical enablers; strong mission leadership and
personal responsibilty; the pre-deployment training
of troops, including on the protection of civilians;
inclusion of thematic advisers on women, children and
the protection of civilians in peacekeeping missions;
a more robust, proactive protection posture; and the
existence of specific protection-of-civilians strategies
for each peacekeeping mission with a protection
mandate all play an important role in the protection
of civilians.
Furthermore, information obtained through
modern technologies can greatly enhance a
mission’s situational awareness and intelligence-led
decision-making. It provides advance warning of
armed groups’ movements and imminent attacks, thus
enabling a faster response and pre-emptive action,
which in turn helps to save civilian lives as well as the
lives of peacekeepers themselves.
Against the backdrop of this extensive knowledge
base and our experience on the ground, we believe that
a sharper focus is needed on how existing norms are
translated into more effective protection. Obstacles
may vary, including a weak chain of command; lack of
air lifts or capacity or fuel shortages that immobilize
patrolling vehicles; insufficient support for human
rights units; some 200 peacekeepers being sick with
malaria at any given time, as was the case in the
Central African Republic; protracted staff shortages;
and lack of analytical or intelligence capacity within
a mission. As a consequence, even the best resolutions
and recommendations will be no worth no more than
the paper they are written on if implementation falters
for these various reasons.
90/94

10/06/2016

The hurdles that missions face as well as good
practices and the dissemination of lessons learned
should be given greater attention in the Council’s
deliberations. Real interactive dialogues with force
and police commanders, going well beyond once-ayear formal meetings, would facilitate the removal
of existing obstacles and a better understanding the
situation on the ground.
The protection of civilians, a difficult task in
itself, will be even more complex without the buyin of local authorities and populations. The effective
protection of civilians and, for that matter, the safety of
peacekeepers themselves depend also on close ties with
and the trust of local communities, including women,
youth and marginalized groups. Such trust-based
relations provide peacekeepers with much-needed
local intelligence, enable a better understanding of the
specific vulnerabilities and needs of local communities
and facilitate the crafting of specific, targeted and
effective responses to the threats such communities face.
Nothing breaches this trust more than abuses
perpetrated by peacekeepers themselves. Protectors
turned into predators tarnish the good name of
the thousands and thousands of United Nations
peacekeepers who have served with dedication and,
increasingly, at a risk to their own lives, including those
who have paid the ultimate price for protecting others.
Those guilty of abuses should not be allowed to
hide behind national jurisdictions to avoid justice. The
onus is on the troop-contributing countries to bring the
perpetrators to account.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s strong
response to the latest sexual exploitation and abuse
scandal concerning the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and the concrete steps that have been taken
to tackle the problem. The Council should also do its
utmost to put an end to impunity. In this respect, we
welcome the adoption of resolution 2272 (2016) in
March this year and call for its full implementation.
At the same time, let us not forget that this
particular ill is not new. The first widely publicized
sexual exploitation and abuse cases date back to 1992,
in Cambodia, and others followed. In March 2005, a
a comprehensive strategy to eliminate future sexual
exploitation and abuse in United Nations peacekeeping
operations was released, and yet here we are again.
What use are reports if they are not implemented? We
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

have to make sure that our attention span lasts well
beyond the occurrence of a specific incident, and that
reports and recommendations are put into action in a
consistent and comprehensive manner. That is the only
way we can ensure that 10 or 15 years from now United
Nations peacekeeping will not go through yet another
cycle of scandal and shame.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): We wish France all
the best during its presidency of the Council for this
month. We also pay tribute to the Secretary-General
for his briefing, and commend him for continuing to
show commitment to the cause of civilians especially in
conflict situations. We also welcome the other insightful
briefings and comments we received this morning.
Botswana remains committed to the promotion of
and respect for humanitarian principles, in accordance
with international law and human rights law. As we
have always maintained, we reiterate our long-held
belief, which is shared by many, that States have the
primary responsibility to protect their own populations
from genocide, ethnic cleansing, war crimes and
crimes against humanity. It is for this reason that
Botswana continues to subscribe to the principle of
the responsibility to protect as a natural framework
to strengthen national sovereignty, while placing
responsibility on those who have the power to protect
and serve. It is in this regard that we reaffirm our abiding
faith in the principles and purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations, as well as the various multilateral
instruments under international humanitarian law and
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
With regard to the role of peacekeeping and other
missions, we take note of the deployment of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions in many
countries around the world as the most significant action
taken by the Security Council. The proliferation of such
missions illustrates just how instrumental they are in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We recognize the complex and violent environments
in which peacekeeping personnel operate. We also
share the view that care and attention should be given
to strengthening missions’ capabilities to effectively
discharge their mandates. To achieve that, we believe
that adequate the training and capacity-building of
personnel before, during and after deployment are
absolute necessities.

S/PV.7711

It is the view of my delegation that before conflict
erupts and perhaps escalates beyond proportion, there
are signs and signals pointing to a potential cause. In
this case, we believe that those within the vicinity of the
potential problem must be able to detect early warning
signals so as to enable the exploration of preventive
measures through an inclusive and mutually acceptable
process. It is the duty not just of all parties involved in
conflict but also that of the State to ensure that measures
are taken to protect human rights and humanitarian
law. It is in this regard that we agree with the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians, among others,
that all troops must be trained in the protection of
civilians prior to their deployment to missions, and that
they must not hesitate to take action to protect civilians
in accordance with the rules of engagement.
We must increase our efforts to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) in order to protect women
in armed conflict, as well as to involve them in all
levels and processes of mediation, peacekeeping and
peace maintenance, as well as reconstruction and
development. As history has shown, whenever there
is conflict there is likelihood of abuse of the rights of
populations, especially the vulnerable groups. Quite
often, there is systematic gender-based violence,
sexual enslavement, rape and the enlisting of children
in armed conflict by those who wield power. In most
cases, it is opportunistic militias, rebels, wayward
Government forces and sometimes leaders who use
brutal force, rape, massacre and repression as weapons
of war. Where governance institutions have collapsed,
impunity reigns. Women, girls and boys always bear
the brunt of all these atrocities.
My delegation views the commission of these crimes
very seriously and condemns them in all their forms and
manifestations. It is in this respect that we have always
called for those responsible for perpetrating human
rights abuses to be held accountable for their deeds.
The various multilateral criminal justice tribunals that
exist in the world must therefore be explored to bring
justice to the victims of these crimes.
As a friend and supporter of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), we have no doubt that the ICC
serves as the only permanent court of last resort for
victims of crimes against humanity, war crimes and
genocide. We believe that the millions of victims across
the world deserve dignity and justice. To this end, we
must not fail in our moral duty to offer them protection
in the face of impunity. We call on the Security Council

16-1667791/94

S/PV.7711

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

to continue to support the ICC in its quest to safeguard
the rights of victims.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Botswana’s
support for the international community’s efforts to
protect innocent civilians during armed conflict. 1
wish to also stress the importance of consolidating
and ensuring the implementation of existing normative
frameworks on the protection of civilians in countryspecific situations.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Ceylan (Turkey): I would like to thank
the French presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this debate. I also express our appreciation
to His Excellency the President of the Central African
Republic and the other briefers for their insightful
statements this morning.
The trends in global threats against humankind,
particularly the growing scale of violence and persistent
violations of the international humanitarian law, compel
us in the first place to consider the protection of civilians
as one of the biggest challenges to international peace.
It should be our major concern that, today, civilians
account for the vast majority of casualties resulting
from armed conflict. The indiscriminate targeting of
hospitals, schools, market places, holy shrines and even
camps for internally displaced persons, as well as such
heinous terrorist tactics as suicide-bombings, have
devastating effects that neither international law nor
any other moral value can tolerate. The perpetrators of
such acts should be held accountable.
Forced displacement, starvation, sexual abuse
and slavery are systematically used as warfare tactics
affecting the fate of the most vulnerable, namely,
children, women and the elderly. This dark picture
makes the protection of civilians a legal and moral duty
for the international community.
Turkey acknowledges that the primary responsibility
lies with States to protect their citizens. Turkey is fully
committed to the principles and purposes of the Charter
of the United Nations, and lives up to its commitments
under international law, international humanitarian
law and refugee law, where applicable. Turkey has long
played a unique role in its region in alleviating human
suffering. In that regard, Turkey is currently hosting
millions of displaced people on its soil and spares no
effort to meet their shelter, food and education needs.
92/94

10/06/2016

The number of people in need of international
humanitarian assistance has tripled over the past decade.
The international community cannot overcome this
challenge without effective cooperation and collective
action. The first World Humanitarian Summit, held
in Istanbul few weeks ago, was a ground-breaking
development in that regard. To address the root causes
of crises and end human suffering, Turkey — in line
with its commitments — will continue to work together
with the United Nations, Member States and relevant
stakeholders.
In the context of peace operations, the United
Nations must assume its responsibilities where States
fail to protect their own citizens, in accordance with the
principles and purposes of the Charter. Turkey adheres
to the peacekeeping principles of impartiality, the
consent of host State and the non-use of force except in
self-defence and defence of the mandate. The protection
of civilians in armed conflict is consistent with these
principles. Moreover, as the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations states, “those
principles ... should never be an excuse for failure to
protect civilians” (see S/2015/446, p. 12).
In conflict-affected societies, Governments may
lack the necessary capacity to secure the lives and dignity
of their citizens. As a matter of fact, that is the case in
most of the places where United Nations peacekeeping
missions are deployed. Political determination and
institutional strength are fundamental for the effective
protection of civilians effectively. Today, 10 out of
the 16 peacekeeping missions operate under specific
mandates to protect civilians.
In those missions, United Nations peacekeepers
courageously assume their duties, under the most
challenging conditions, although they themselves are
increasingly targeted by armed groups. The problem
is growing worse, and United Nations peacekeeping
operations should therefore pursue comprehensive
strategies to help nations increase their resilience in
crisis situations.
The role of United Nations police is critical
in building capacities for protecting civilians and
upholding the rule of law. As the 2016 report of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (see
A/70/19) stresses, providing peacekeeping operations
with clearly defined mandates, objectives and command
structures, adequate resources and training based on a
realistic assessment of the situation are key factors in
16-16677

10/06/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7711

the effective implementation of protection duties in the
context of peacekeeping operations.

the Secretary-General, adopted by the Ukrainian
parliament on 17 March 2015.

More broadly speaking, the United Nations has a
role to play in preventing the ongoing attacks against
civilians, not only in specific peacekeeping settings but
also in crisis-prone situations where special political
missions are deployed. To that end, the United Nations
should make effective use of early-warning mechanisms,
preventive diplomacy and mediation as necessary tools
for preventing conflict and thus human suffering.

“On behalf of Ukraine I address the SecretaryGeneral and the Security Council of the United
Nations to initiate appropriate procedures for
the deployment of a United Nations international
peacekeeping operation in the territory of
Ukraine, with the exact modalities to be defined
in consultations with the Ukrainian side, in
accordance with established practice. In particular,
I request that a preliminary assessment mission be
dispatched to Ukraine in order to assess the situation
and put forward recommendations for consideration
by the Security Council.” (S/2015/225, p. 4.)

Turkey believes that the worsening circumstances
and the inclusion of protection mandates may require a
change in the posture of peace operations. In that regard,
we appreciate United Nations efforts to develop strong
guidelines for ensuring the protection of civilians. The
report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians contains important recommendations in that
regard (S/2016/447).
In times of turmoil peacekeepers are seen as the
sole hope of defenceless peoples. Without undermining
that noble calling, the United Nations must, however,
ensure that the peacekeepers tasked to protect civilians
do not become a threat to them. The United Nations
must, therefore, rigorously implement the zero-tolerance
policy for sexual exploitation and abuse cases in which
its personnel are involved. It is Turkey’s expectation
that those utterly disgraceful acts will cease and that
the perpetrators will be prosecuted.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of Ukraine has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I give him the floor.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I know that it is late,
but my statement will not take long. Today, the Russian
delegation once again resorted to a flat lie, this time
stating that the Council did not receive any request from
Ukraine on the deployment of a peacekeeping operation.
Just for the record, Ukraine officially approached
the Council at the highest level, as well as the SecretaryGeneral, with such a request on at least two occasions.
Relevant appeals on the part of Ukraine, the President
and the National Security and Defence Council, as well
as the Parliament, were accompanied by letters from the
Ukrainian Minister for Foreign Affairs and officially
transmitted to the United Nations by our Mission in
February and March last year.
Let me recall a quote from an address by the
President of Ukraine to the Security Council and

One can ask oneself: if that is not a request
addressed to the Council, then what is it? Yet the
Russian delegation may try to deny even that. If so,
let me recall that the aforementioned address by the
President, adopted by the Parliament of Ukraine and
addressed to the Council, was distributed as an official
United Nations document on 2 April 2015 under the
symbol S/2015/225.
It is highly unusual for a Council member to deny
the existence of a document that can be found in the
online United Nations document system. I would
therefore like to ask the Secretariat to distribute hard
copies of the Ukrainian request. For ease of use and
reference, we will also upload that official Security
Council document to our Mission’s web page.
Moving on now to the substance of today’s debate,
I wish to inform the Council that, as the Permanent
Council of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in Vienna was informed
yesterday, Russian-backed separatist forces continue to
use advanced weapons and equipment to put civilians
at risk in eastern Ukraine. According to monitors of
the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine,
residents of Donetsk said that separatist fighters
position themselves on the roofs of their homes, launch
mortar attacks and then flee, leaving civilians to face
defensive return fire from Ukrainian soldiers.
Recently, Russian-backed separatists attacked
Ukrainian positions from a water-treatment plant,
using chlorine canisters stored there as a deterrent to
Ukrainian return fire, as the rupture of the canisters
would cause a local environmental disaster. There is
no justification for such acts, which intentionally place
civilians and critical civilian infrastructure at risk.
The meeting rose at 6.55 p.m.

16-1667793/94
