S/PV.7157

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7157th meeting

Wednesday, 16 April 2014, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Nigeria)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Llanos
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

14-30199 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1430199*

Ukraine

S/PV.7157

The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.

the protesters and police. Legislation that curtailed the
freedoms of expression and assembly and enhanced a
sense of impunity on the part of the police was rushed
through the Rada in mid-January and led to violent
action by some radical protesters, as well.

Adoption of the agenda.
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine in the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2014/136)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ivan
Šimonović, Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Ivan Šimonović.
Mr. Šimonović: The Security Council was briefed
this weekend on the latest political developments in
Ukraine. As the Council requested, my briefing today
will address the human rights situation in Ukraine and
give an update on developments since my last briefing,
on 19 March (see S/PV.7144). I will highlight key human
rights issues, taking into account the most recent events
in the East. My remarks are based on the findings of my
two recent missions to Ukraine, as well as on the first
few weeks of the activities of the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission in Ukraine. At the outset, I
wish to emphasize the strong interlinkages between the
chronic human rights violations in Ukraine, the Maidan
protests and the current situation in the east.
Almost a third of the population in Ukraine
reportedly lives under the poverty line. Huge
disparities in standards of living and inadequate access
to basic social services, attributed to corruption and
mismanagement, were among the underlying factors
that led to the Maidan protests. The protests that started
in Kyiv and swept across the rest of the country from
November 2013 to February 2014 revealed a deeprooted sense of dissatisfaction among the people of
Ukraine.
The violence by the security forces against
pro-European peaceful protesters in Kyiv on
30 November 2013 created outrage and led to the
radicalization of the protests and to clashes between
2/23

16/04/2014

Progress is still to be made in bringing to justice
the perpetrators of serious human rights violations
committed during the period of the Maidan protests.
During the protests, 121 persons were killed and
more than 100 persons are still unaccounted for. The
Office of the Prosecutor-General has initiated criminal
proceedings, and it is important to ensure accountability
for the perpetrators.
During the Maidan protests, there were some
expressions of national, racial or religious hatred by
certain groups and individuals. Some attacks against
the ethnic Russian community, in particular ethnic
Russians affiliated with the former Government,
were also reported. However, those attacks were
neither systematic nor widespread. They were isolated
incidents, which were then exaggerated through biased
media reporting, fuelling fear and insecurity among the
ethnic Russian community.
There have also been some cases of incitement to
hatred from right-wing extremists’ groups, such as the
so-called Right Sector. Fear and insecurity proliferate
when incitement to hatred, discrimination and violence
are not curtailed. It is therefore crucial that that issue
be addressed as a matter of priority. I welcome the
steps already undertaken by the Government and the
Office of the Prosecutor-General of Ukraine to publicly
condemn and investigate any such instances. In that
context, it is clearly unacceptable that one presidential
candidate calls his followers to arm themselves to
defend the east of the country, while another is beaten
because of his political views. Monitors are verifying
those serious allegations.
My visit from 21 to 22 March was the most recent
visit to Crimea by a senior United Nations official.
During my mission, I interacted with a wide range
of interlocutors, including local authorities and civil
society, and especially the victims themselves. That
allowed me to obtain a first-hand impression of the
situation.
The media manipulation significantly contributed
to a climate of fear and insecurity in the period
preceding the referendum. The presence of paramilitary
and so-called self-defence groups, as well as soldiers

14-30199

16/04/2014

Ukraine

in uniform without insignia, was not conducive to an
environment in which voters could freely exercise their
right to hold opinions and to freedom of expression
during the referendum on 16 March. There were
credible allegations of harassment, arbitrary arrests and
torture by those groups, which targeted activists and
journalists who did not support the referendum.
In reiterating General Assembly resolution 68/262,
on the territorial integrity of Ukraine, I stress the
obligations of the authorities in Crimea to respect
international human rights norms. It is also of concern
that, on 11 April, the authorities in Crimea rushed
through the adoption of a new Constitution. The
Crimean Tatar Majlis has raised important human
rights concerns about the complete lack of public
debate, as well as the exclusion of the Crimean Tatars,
from the drafting process of the new Constitution.
Concerns over citizenship issues also continue to be
raised, in particular with regard to the fact that those
who do not accept Russian citizenship will reportedly
face many obstacles in guaranteeing their property and
land rights, access to education and health care and the
enjoyment of other civil and political rights.
When I visited eastern Ukraine in March, the
situation was already very tense. Meanwhile, the
situation has significantly deteriorated. Reportedly,
armed pro-Russian activists established the People’s
Republic of Donetsk, taking control of a number
of Government buildings in several cities of the
Donetsk region, using violence, including against
law enforcement officers. In Luhansk pro-Russian
protesters continue to occupy the local building of
the security services. In Kharkiv participants in a
pro-Ukrainian rally were attacked and beaten by proRussian demonstrators, who broke through the police
cordon, resulting in some 50 persons being injured.
Ongoing incidents and clashes among various
groups of protesters, as well as with security forces,
are of serious concern. While reports indicate that the
number of protesters, including some allegedly from
outside the region, has not significantly increased — and
we are speaking of a couple of thousand — the level of
violence and the proportion of armed protesters have.
That has significant human rights implications.
While protest-related human rights violations
need to be investigated and verified urgently, security
forces must play their role in maintaining public order
in accordance with human rights standards. There are
clear lines between what can be considered the exercise

S/PV.7157

of the right to peaceful assembly and the violent
behaviour of armed protesters. However, in all cases,
security forces should not use force unnecessarily or
excessively.
The situation in the east, if not adequately addressed
as a matter of priority, risks seriously destabilizing
the country as a whole. Those who exercise influence
over the situation should take immediate action to halt
the violence. The arming of the protesters and their
transformation into quasi-paramilitary forces must be
stopped. Anyone inciting violence and providing arms
to protesters can be held accountable for the resulting
tragic consequences.
In order to de-escalate tensions across the country,
all parties should be encouraged to start an inclusive,
sustained and meaningful national dialogue based on
respect for the legal obligations of Ukraine under the
international human rights treaties already ratified.
Such a process should take into consideration the
concerns of all those who live in Ukraine, including
minorities, and address issues such as language rights
and the decentralization of the country.
Finally, I cannot stress enough the important
role that accurate human rights reporting can play in
preventing violence and defusing tensions. Yesterday,
we issued our first report on the human rights situation
in Ukraine on the basis of my two visits and the first
month of human rights monitoring. We intend to issue
our second report on 15 May. Anyone with relevant
information on human rights violations should share it
with us, so that we can verify it, further investigate if
necessary and include it in our next report.
The President: I thank Mr. Šimonović for his
briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I wish to thank the
Nigerian presidency for organizing this public briefing.
I would also like to convey my appreciation to Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights Ivan Šimonović
for his briefing.
The report presented on 15 April by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
squarely refutes Russia’s inflammatory narrative,
which it uses to justify its illegal actions in Ukraine.
While the report points out that Ukraine suffered
from human rights violations, lack of accountability,

14-301993/23

S/PV.7157

Ukraine

corruption and mismanagement of resources, as well as
a lack of a system of checks and balances and a lack
of free elections, the blame is placed on the previous
regime.
The report indicates that underlying human
rights violations were among the root causes of the
popular protests that led to a change in Government.
The adoption of restrictive anti-protest laws and the
excessive use of force by Berkut special police and
other security forces under Yanukovich transformed
a peaceful demonstration and led to the violence and
deaths that ensued. The report indicates, however, that
since the current Government took power at the end
of February, tensions have decreased, along with the
allegations of human rights violations.
In Crimea, the main concerns are linked to the
Russian-sponsored developments leading to and the
situation after the so-called referendum, which has
had a direct impact on the enjoyment of human rights
by local inhabitants, especially the indigenous Tatar
community, who chose to boycott the referendum. Their
situation has just been described. Many people may be
forced to leave their homes and face other consequences
arising from Crimea’s takeover. That is also confirmed
by the special monitoring mission of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
The report also highlights the highly questionable
character of the referendum, which was held in an
environment of intimidation by armed groups and a
total lack of media freedom. As Council members will
recall, the plebiscite was organized in a particularly
hurried manner, in the absence of established election
practices and election observation, without a public
debate on its merits and provided exclusively for a
secessionist option.
The report indicates too that in eastern Ukraine
grievances with regard to the failure of the central
Government to represent interests have a history long
predating the current Government. The report also
states that violations of the human rights of the ethnic
minorities in eastern Ukraine, Crimea and elsewhere in
Ukraine have been neither widespread nor systematic.
That is clearly confirmed by the most recent statement by
United Nations Special Rapporteur on minority issues,
Rita Izsák, who has concluded that the overwhelming
majority of minorities and others described harmonious
inter-ethnic and interfaith relations and conditions of
non-discrimination in all spheres of life. She stated that

4/23

16/04/2014

“The current human rights situation of minorities
in Ukraine and the civil and political, economic,
social and cultural conditions ... cannot justify
any violent actions or incitement ... by any party,
national or international”.
That is exactly what we have been saying all along.
Whatever the issues regarding the human and minority
rights situation in Ukraine, Crimea or eastern Ukraine
in particular, none of those issues can ever justify the
invasion and annexation of Crimea or the ongoing
destabilization of eastern Ukraine. Those issues could,
and should have been, resolved by way of established
and well-tried peaceful instruments, with the assistance
of regional organizations such as the OSCE and the
Council of Europe, as well as the United Nations.
Furthermore, the report notes that there are today
positive changes under way in Ukraine, or under
consideration, such as a willingness to break with
past injustices and to elaborate a new vision of the
country. Those conclusions, contained in the report,
are confirmed by the current Government’s efforts to
strengthen the rule of law, combat corruption, ensure
minority rights and address the issue of decentralization.
In fact, acting President Turchynov recently proposed
holding a referendum on the decentralization of the
country together with the national elections to be held
on 25 May.
All of the foregoing points to the fact that the crisis
provoked in Ukraine is not about the protection of
one particular ethnic minority or language minority,
or about Ukraine’s alleged extremist radicalism. But
we knew that all along as well, as various previous
conclusions by senior international representatives,
including those of the OSCE, have repeatedly
repudiated such allegations. Among other things,
this is about Ukraine’s destabilization with a view to
obstructing and preventing the 25 May elections, which
the interim Government in Kyiv announced the minute
it was appointed, for fear that power may slip out of
the fingers of the likes of Yanukovic and his corrupt
cronies.
This is also about a naked land grab and Russia’s
greater political and military ambitions. In a disturbing
instance of déjà vu, once again in clear violation
of Ukraine’s Constitution and accepted norms of
international behaviour, heavily armed militants
without any insignia are occupying local Government
buildings and declaring independence, which is a sad

14-30199

16/04/2014

Ukraine

S/PV.7157

caricature of self-determination in defiance of national
and international law.

displaced persons, to visit Ukraine and report on their
findings.

Furthermore, the systematic and well-oiled
propaganda war against Ukraine and its provisional
leadership is an extremely dangerous game, because as
we have seen time and again from various situations
around the world, including recently in the Central
African Republic, it is much too easy to release
the arms-wielding genie out of the bottle, a genie of
incitement and hate, but infinitely more difficult to
contain it afterwards.

It is also crucial to ensure independent monitoring
of the human rights situation in Crimea specifically.
We call on the occupying authorities to allow the
human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine to work
in Crimea, including the opening of a sub-office in
Simferopol. United Nations officials should continue to
visit Crimea and report on the situation of all ethnic
minorities, on media freedom and human rights.

We therefore urge the Russian side to stop its
disinformation and anti-Ukrainian and anti-European
propaganda campaign before it is too late. International
bodies, Europe and Ukraine have repeatedly called for
the path of restraint and dialogue. The way towards
that path are still open as we await the holding of
the quadrilateral meeting to take place in Geneva on
17 April. We once again call on the Russian Federation
to pursue that path.
Much remains to be done for the current and future
Governments of Ukraine. Fighting corruption — and
we welcome the fact that the relevant legislation is
now being put in place to improve access to education,
health and social services — providing real equality for
all its citizens, addressing the deficiencies of the justice
system and combating impunity, which was so common
in the country, are the main issues of concern where the
international community, including the United Nations,
the OSCE and the Council of Europe again can readily
provide further assistance.
Impartial reporting on human rights violations
will help to prevent the manipulation of information by
whomever. We therefore support continuous reporting
by the United Nations human rights monitoring mission
in Ukraine to ensure a regular and continuous flow of
updates on the situation in the country. We also have
to provide necessary mid- and long-term funding for
the mission going well beyond June. The mission must
continue its work throughout the entire territory of
Ukraine, including Crimea.
Other human rights monitoring instruments are also
necessary. We look forward to receiving the findings
of the visit to Ukraine by the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on minority issues from 7 to 13 April. We
welcome equests by other thematic mandate holders
under the special procedures of the Human Rights
Council, such as the Special Rapporteur on internally

The people of Russia and Ukraine have become
victims of the propaganda and disinformation that
provoked and fanned unconstitutional actions by local
militants, with external assistance. The situation is
very tense, but a reversal of course is still possible. It
is time to heed the countless calls to de-escalate and
for Moscow to stop interfering into Ukraine’s internal
affairs.
The current Government is set to address human
rights violations, language policy, the rights of ethnic
minorities, the decentralization of power and corruption,
and to strengthen accountability and the rule of law. It
is in our common interests that this Government and
the future Government of Ukraine should be allowed to
carry out that work unobstructed. We must also support
its efforts to ensure that a free and fair election on
25 May, with the participation of all Ukraine in all its
rich diversity, can take place.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The recent events in south-east Ukraine
are of great concern. On 13 April, having convened
an emergency meeting of the Security Council (see
S/PV.7154), the Russian delegation has insistently
called upon a number of members of the Council to use
all tools available to them to prevent the use of force in
the crisis in the eastern regions of Ukraine. In response,
we have heard a number of ambiguous statements, with
some delegations expressing their understanding for the
plans of the Ukrainian authorities to use force against
their fellow countrymen. The result is obvious.
Those who usurped power in Kyiv through a violent
Government coup have now taken the route of ignoring
the legitimate demands of the inhabitants of southeastern Ukraine and exercising the unconstitutional use
of military force in order to pacify their own people,
whom they blasphemously call bandits and terrorists.
Such reckless steps are fraught with the potential to
unleash a real civil war in Ukraine. The first blood has

14-301995/23

S/PV.7157

Ukraine

already been shed. The citizens of the south-east have
repeatedly warned the authorities that they are ready to
act as human shields. In a number of areas regular units
of the Ukrainian army and internal forces have openly
refused to shoot at their fellow countrymen. There
have been cases where soldiers have gone over to the
side of the people. Is that not why the self-proclaimed
leaders of Kyiv are deploying the right-wing militants
and other illegal militias behind whose bayonets
they actually came to power? For example, people
in black uniforms — not belonging to the Ukrainian
Ministry of Defence or internal troops — were sent
into Kramatorsk. Who do those elements answer to?
Of course, it is hardly likely that anyone can have any
illusions about the independence of Kyiv’s actions. And
that raises the question that perhaps the coup scenario
for Kyiv was suggested by the countries whose senior
emissaries are constantly whispering things in the ears
of the Ukrainian leaders they sponsor.
The recipe for a way out of the massive internal
political crisis afflicting Ukraine is both simple and
complicated. The Ukrainians must launch a dialogue,
provided that it is inclusive and comprehensive. Every
region and political force in the country, without
exception, should participate in it on equal terms and
with the same right to decisions on the pressing issues.
All of that should be reflected in a thoroughly reformed
Constitution that Ukraine’s multiethnic society would
perceive as trustworthy, based on a foundation of a
legitimate Government with a long-term perspective.
Without that, it will be difficult for Ukraine to remain
unified or resolve its current tangle of urgent problems.
The plan is to make this subject the main topic at the
Geneva meeting, which for now is still on the agenda,
and it should be the basic task of the international
community when it expresses its concern about what
is happening in Ukraine. It must be made to begin
genuine constitutional reform, not a cosmetic version.
Right now it is vital that we receive accurate
information about what is happening in Ukraine. If
the internationalists want to justify their presence in
the country, they should assess the evolving situation
objectively and impartially. Unfortunately, the
report published yesterday by the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights suggests the opposite.
The document is one-sided and biased. Its drafters
preferred not to notice that the current authorities in
Ukraine acquired that status through an armed coup, not
civilized democratic elections. Attacks by illegal armed
security groups and the pillaging of administrative
6/23

16/04/2014

buildings by radicals miraculously qualify in the
report as peaceful protests, while demonstrations by
Ukrainian citizens in the country’s eastern regions are
declared to be illegal acts. The report states credulously
that the Ukrainian Government is apparently firmly
committed to breaking with past injustices and
elaborating a new vision for Ukraine’s future. It omits
inconvenient facts that testify to the fact that from day
one this Government’s activities have been carried out
in an atmosphere of violence and lawlessness that it has
itself created.
The report gives no attention whatever to the
highly dangerous trend towards the uncontrolled
growth of aggressive nationalism and neo-Nazism.
In fact, the term “neo-Nazism” is delicately not used
at all. The raging chauvinism in western and central
Ukraine whipped up by right-wing and other far-right
groups is presented only in the characterization the
right of minorities to participate in political life is not
fully taken into account. Nothing is said of the public
calls to incite national hatred and even destroy the
Russian population. The pronouncements of the leader
of the parliamentary Freedom party refer to liberating
Ukraine from the so-called Moskal’sko-Zhidovskaia
mafia — for those who have not heard this gangster
slang before, it means Russians and Jews. I would like
to recall that this individual, according to the Simon
Wiesenthal Center, appears in fifth place on the list of
the most rabid anti-Semites in Europe. For all practical
purposes, this party is now in charge of the military and
other forces in Kyiv.
Those who foment incitement to murder and
violence based on ethnicity are criminals. They
should be promptly arrested and brought to justice in
compliance with Ukraine’s international obligations,
including in the area of human rights, not acting as
the backbone of the National Guard and the current
ruling elite. Despite the fact that the report rightly calls
Ukrainian society bilingual, the true position of the
Russian-speaking population is not reflected in it at all.
We should remember that at different times they are
referred to as non-natives, a minority, aliens, invaders.
The Russian language is gradually being pushed out of
circulation.
There have been numerous cases of harassment
and of Ukrainian nationalists and radicals’ use of
physical violence against representatives of the former
authorities as well as those who simply disagree with
the current regime. In recent examples, on 7 April

14-30199

16/04/2014

Ukraine

participants in a congress of justices were mocked and
insulted. On the night of 15 April the headquarters
of the Communist Party of Ukraine in Sumy was
destroyed. Unfortunately, the authors of the report
preferred to ignore this scandalous evidence of the
lawless acts of supporters of the current regime in
Kyiv. Instead, it is packed with references to the
testimony of various anonymous witnesses who saw or
heard something, somewhere. The report’s assessment
of the situation as it relates to freedom of speech
and the press does not stand up to scrutiny. As if the
Ukrainian authorities’ continued attempts to hinder
objective coverage of the situation, their threats against
and intimidation of journalists, their refusal to allow
representatives of foreign media into the country
did not exist. Concern about this situation has been
expressed not only by credible non-governmental
organizations such as Reporters without Borders and
the Committee to Protect Journalists, but also by the
European Commission. How can we possibly talk about
respect for human rights and the rule of law if even
presidential candidates in Ukraine — Oleg Tsarev and
Mikhail Dobkin — are being attacked, and Ukraine’s
Parliament has finally been turned into a type of mightmakes-right democracy?
With regard to the OHCHR report and today’s
baseless fabrications by Mr. Šimonović about the
situation in Crimea, that region has declared itself a
subject of the Russian Federation and therefore cannot
in principle be an object of the discussion in today’s
meeting on the situation in Ukraine, and would not serve
the purposes of that discussion. We get the impression
that the report was fabricated based on conclusions
formulated in advance whose political orientation
Mr. Šimonović expressed in a statement about the results
of his first visit to Ukraine in March. In general, we
are obliged to conclude that the report undermines the
credibility of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights as an impartial defender of human
rights. We will continue to closely monitor the work
of the mission. Let us see how its future reports reflect
the violence being unleashed on the south-east of the
country thanks to the Kyiv authorities.
We advise all who champion human rights in this
country through deeds rather than words to pay special
attention to the actions of Kyiv’s self-proclaimed
authorities, who threaten the east and south-east
with enforced pacification, inflicting brutal, massive
violations of human rights, especially on the Russian
and Russian-speaking populations of those regions.

S/PV.7157

Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would first
like to thank Mr. Ivan Šimonović, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Human Rights, for his briefing.
Chad remains deeply concerned about the situation
in Ukraine, which has been marked by human rights
violations and violence likely to be lead to unforeseeable
and incalculable consequences. Chad condemns every
form of human rights violations and violence, wherever
they come from. We ask that an independent inquiry be
carried out to determine the respective responsibilities
of the various parties in the human rights violations
that have been committed. However, we believe that it
is difficult to clarify the situation with regard to human
rights violations without a modicum of stability and a
reduction of the prevailing tensions.
We therefore call on all the parties to exercise
restraint and calm and urge them once again to give
priority to finding a peaceful settlement of the crisis.
We believe that a political solution is possible within the
framework of direct and candid negotiations among the
relevant parties, mindful of the fundamental principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the
concerns of all components of Ukrainian society in
all their diversity. Accordingly, we encourage all the
parties to give negotiations a chance and to back the
mediation efforts currently under way. We hope that the
meeting scheduled for 17 April in Geneva will enable
us to make progress in our search for a solution to the
crisis.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank Mr. Šimonović for his briefing today. I
would also like to thank him and the United Nations
human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine for
producing the report of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
published yesterday.
The United Kingdom welcomes the report and its
findings. To date, it is the most comprehensive and
independent assessment of the human rights situation
in Ukraine since the onset of the crisis. It is therefore
an important contribution to our discussions on the
situation in Ukraine. Attempts to discredit the report as
biased or politically motivated, as my Russian colleague
has just done, lack all credibility.
The OHCHR report is clear: human rights violations
were a root cause of the popular protests that began in
November last year. The report found that since the
change of Government in late February, allegations

14-301997/23

S/PV.7157

Ukraine

16/04/2014

of human rights violations had decreased. But we do
not underestimate the magnitude of the task ahead. In
that regard, it is encouraging that the OHCHR report
finds “clear indications of a willingness by the present
Government to ensure a break with past injustices and
to elaborate a new vision for Ukraine’s future”. The
United Kingdom is fully committed to supporting
Ukraine in that endeavour.

report expresses “serious concern about violations
of the civil and political rights of the inhabitants of
Crimea”. It cites cases of abduction, unlawful arrest
and detention, harassment and violence against
peaceful demonstrators, arbitrary arrest and torture.
It also expresses deep concern at the consequences
of introducing Russian citizenship and estimates that
3,000 Crimean Tatars have been displaced.

The OHCHR report comprehensively refutes
assertions made by the Russian Federation in the
Chamber and elsewhere to justify its illegal intervention
in Ukraine. I will give just three examples.

Lastly, the report contains damning evidence that
Russia has used propaganda and misinformation to
exacerbate tensions and destabilize Ukraine. It says
that the Russian State television and radio broadcasting
company has been “disguising information about Kyiv
events” in an attempt to justify Crimea’s return to the
Russian Federation. Moreover, the report states that
greatly exaggerated stories and misinformed reports
were “systematically used to create a climate of fear and
insecurity” to support Russia’s case for the annexation
of Crimea.

First, on 1 March, President Putin requested
authority to use Russia’s armed forces in Ukraine on
the basis that there was “a threat to the lives of citizens
of the Russian Federation, our compatriots and the
personnel of the armed forces”. That oft-repeated
claim underpinned Russia’s justification for military
intervention in Ukraine. But the OHCHR report
concludes that in fact attacks against the ethnic Russian
community in Ukraine were “neither systematic
nor widespread”. It further assesses that “Russianspeakers have not been subject to threats in Crimea”.
That finding supports those of other independent
authorities, including the High Commissioner on
National Minorities of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, who also found no evidence
of violations or threats to the lives of Russian-speakers.
Secondly, Russia bases its justification for the
illegal annexation of Crimea on the legitimacy of the
16 March referendum. On 18 March, in his address to
the Russian Duma, President Putin said, “a referendum
was held in Crimea on 16 March in full compliance
with democratic procedures and international norms”.
In stark contrast to that bold assertion, the report
concludes that
“the presence of paramilitary and so-called selfdefence groups as well as soldiers in uniform
without insignia, widely believed to be from the
Russian Federation, was not conducive to an
environment in which voters could freely exercise
their right to hold opinions and the right to freedom
of expression”.
The report also states, “the OHCHR delegation
received many reports of vote rigging”, including
cases of non-Ukrainian citizens participating
in the referendum, as well as individuals voting
numerous times in different locations. Overall, the

8/23

Turning to current events, the United Kingdom
fully supports the right of freedom of assembly and
freedom of expression. Those Ukrainians who wish
to demonstrate against the Government are entitled to
do so, provided that they do so peacefully. But there
is a line. Well-equipped paramilitary units armed
with automatic weapons are not peaceful protesters. A
legitimate sovereign State must insist on a monopoly
of the use of force. We express particular concern
as Mr. Šimonović did in his briefing today about the
arming of protesters and their transformation into
quasi-paramilitary forces.
Yesterday, the Ukrainian Government began
an operation to restore law and order in Donetsk, in
eastern Ukraine. The Ukrainian Prime Minister stated
that operations would proceed gradually, responsibly
and prudently. The Foreign Minister emphasized that
the operations were initiated only after all other means
to resolve the situation had been exhausted. We have
received assurances that the operation will comply fully
with Ukrainian and international law, safeguard human
rights and uphold Ukraine’s international obligations.
The Ukrainian Government has acted responsibly
throughout the crisis, even in the face of immense
provocation, not least the illegal annexation of its
territory and despite continuing interference from
Russia. We therefore have confidence that Ukrainian
security forces will continue to act proportionately and
in the interests of all citizens of Ukraine.

14-30199

16/04/2014

Ukraine

We have heard from the Permanent Representative
of Russia today a new fantasy narrative about
developments in eastern Ukraine. I have no doubt that
future independent reports from the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights will prove that new
narrative to be as false as the Russian narrative on
Crimea has comprehensively been shown to be.
We remind Russia that it cannot use the situation in
Ukraine, for which it bears significant responsibility, as
a pretext for further illegal military activity.
Our appeal to Russia is simple: stop interfering in
the internal affairs of Ukraine, move your troops away
from Ukraine’s borders, rescind the authorization to use
military force in Ukraine and enter into dialogue. The
European Union wants to see Russia as a partner, as a
friend and as an ally. A stable, peaceful and prosperous
Ukraine is just as much in Russia’s interest as it is in our
own. Rather than pursuing a strategy of destabilization,
Russia should take its place at the negotiating table
and environment xplain its concerns. We hope that the
quadrapartite talks scheduled for 17 April will provide
just such an opportunity.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I wish
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Šimonović for
his briefing today and for his diligent work on this
controversial issue.
We meet today to discuss the work of the United
Nations human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine
and the timely report of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights. After weeks of
Russian disinformation and propaganda, the report
gives us yet another opportunity to focus on facts. The
independent and impartial reporting we have heard
today is essential to prevent the kind of distortions that
may lead to further instability in an already combustible
situation, a situation that continues to grow more
dangerous every day.
Today’s remarks by the representative of the Russian
Federation, in which the independent report provided
by the United Nations was disparaged — indeed,
slandered as biased and unfounded — is deeply
worrying. If we do not like the message, the Russian
strategy appears to be, metaphorically, shoot the
messenger. Even if those attacks are attacks on the
entire international community, which asks the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights to provide
independent reporting, we urge the United Nations to
continue to provide independent reporting and not to

S/PV.7157

be deterred by slander and intimidation being practiced
by those who do not like facts that have proven
inconvenient and truths that credibly repute Russia’s
false and self-justifying claims.
Let us be clear: the actions the world witnessed
in Crimea and the denials of Russian involvement in
the lead up to its illegal annexation and occupation
are repeating themselves in eastern Ukraine. Again, a
region has been transformed almost overnight from a
state of relative calm to manufactured unrest. Over the
last several days, heavily armed pro-Russian separatists
have seized the city administration, police stations and
other Government buildings in 11 cities in Donetsk
oblast. Every major city in the region has at least one
building under occupation. It is clear that those actions
were not a set of spontaneous events or home-grown,
but rather a well-orchestrated professional campaign of
incitement, separatism and sabotage of the Ukrainian
State. And there is substantial evidence of involvement
from Russia, which is now diverting attention from its
own actions, its own territorial expansion, its own fearmongering, by trying to change the subject. Well, it will
not work.
The contrast between the actions of the Ukrainian
Government and those of the Russian troops could not
be starker. Ukrainian security forces have responded
more carefully and in more measured ways to
provocations in the east that would be difficult for any
of us to accept in our own countries. The Ukrainian
Government has repeatedly sought to negotiate with
the armed groups that have seized public buildings
and established unauthorized road blocks in eastern
Ukraine, in an effort to resolve the situation peacefully
through dialogue. Ukrainian officials have offered
amnesty. We appreciate the Government’s statements
that any actions it undertakes will be gradual and
responsible. Contrary to the conspiracy theories put
forth by the Russian representative today, we continue
to call for restraint, privately and publicly. Obviously,
the best way to de-escalate the situation is for the armed
militants to leave the buildings that they have seized.
While the report speaks to an earlier period in the
crisis, it is important to note that even several weeks
ago the monitoring mission had already received
allegations that some of the people stoking unrest in the
region were not Ukrainian citizens, but in fact agitators
coming from the Russian Federation. Obviously, it is
a critical question whether Russia is continuing its
policy of seeking to destabilize and ultimately annex

14-301999/23

S/PV.7157

Ukraine

land from its neighbour. For purposes of establishing
the truth, it is essential that the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission go forward with its work
and that it have full access to every part of the country,
including Crimea.
The United States commends the Ukraine
Government for facilitating the mission’s activities
and for supporting the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe’s (OSCE) ongoing efforts to
monitor every aspect of the scheduled 25 May elections.
Now let us consider some of the truths set forth
in the High Commissioner’s report. From December
2013 until February 2014, the Berkut special police and
other elements of the federal security apparatus used
excessive force against anti-Government protesters.
That deadly violence did not end until former President
Yanukovych abandoned his office and fled the country.
Since late February when the new Government assumed
office, evidence of human rights abuses has decreased
dramatically, except in Crimea, where Russian policies
threaten the rights of Ukrainians, Crimean Tatars and
other minority groups. Let me emphasize that according
to the new independent report, the only region of
Ukraine that has suffered a rapid deterioration in human
rights is the part over which the Government in Kyiv
has least control. In Crimea, where the role of Russian
authorities is as profound as it is illegal, journalists
and human rights defenders have faced harassment
and torture, censorship is common and the presence of
paramilitary and soldiers “widely believed to be from
the Russian Federation” has sharply inhibited freedom
of expression. The report raises valid concerns about
the introduction of Russian citizenship in a region that
does not belong to Russia and about discrimination
against Ukrainian citizens inside their own country
and a plethora of practical issues related to property
ownership, pensions, wages, health care, labour rights,
education and access to justice.
The new report also examines the allegation
repeated over and over again by Russian officials
that there have been systematic attacks against ethnic
Russians in Crimea and in eastern Ukraine and that
Jewish communities have also come under threat. The
reality is that there have been a few isolated incidents
against individual members belonging to minority
groups, and we should and do condemn those incidents.
But the report makes clear that those incidents were
neither widespread nor a reflection of Government
policy. On the contrary, the report presents vivid

10/23

16/04/2014

evidence that the Ukraine Government has sought
actively to safeguard the rights of all citizens within its
jurisdiction.
It is revealing that while Russia has sought to deny
the realities cited in the United Nations latest report,
the leaders of Ukraine are making a good-faith effort
to implement its recommendations. Among other
initiatives, they are moving ahead with constitutional
reform, plans to decentralize power, preparations for
the election and initiatives to curb the corruption that
flourished so blatantly under the former President.
Overall, the new Government has acted with tremendous
restraint under extraordinarily difficult conditions.
There will always be more to do, but the allegation that
the Government is primarily to blame for the present
tensions is completely baseless.
Before moving to my conclusion, I want to draw on
the even-handed recommendations in the United Nations
human rights report in order to show that the charges
against the United Nations are inaccurate. Among
the report’s recommendations to the Government of
Ukraine are the following: ensure accountability for
all human rights violations during the unrest, ensure
inclusivity and equal participation in public affairs
and political life, prevent media manipulation, combat
intolerance and extremism and implement measures
to eradicate corruption. The recommendations to the
authorities in Crimea include: actively resolve cases of
missing persons, take all measures needed to protect the
rights of persons affected by the changing institutional
and legal framework, including citizenship, disarm
and disband paramilitary units and investigate hate
speech and media manipulation. Those are not the
recommendations of a biased report.
The release of the human rights monitoring report
should remind us all of our responsibilities. The
Government of Ukraine has a responsibility to continue
its reform initiatives and to ensure inclusivity and
respect for the human rights of all groups. The people of
Ukraine have a duty to cooperate with their Government
and fellow citizens in seeking to resolve disputes
through peaceful means. The Russian Federation has an
obligation to fulfil its commitments under international
law, to respect the rights and the territorial sovereignty
of Ukraine and to back its professed desire for stability
with actions designed to achieve that goal, instead of its
opposite. The Russian Federation must move its troops
back from the border region, withdraw its forces from
Crimea and cease all efforts to destabilize Ukraine.

14-30199

16/04/2014

Ukraine

The international community has a responsibility to
support the people of Ukraine in their desire to build a
strong and united country with a robust democracy and
effective national and regional institutions. We have
a collective responsibility as well to do all we can to
prevent further bloodshed and to find a peaceful and just
conclusion to what has been a tragic and unnecessary
crisis. Tomorrow in Geneva, senior representatives from
Ukraine, Russia, the European Union and the United
States are scheduled to meet to discuss de-escalation,
demobilization, support for elections and constitutional
reform. My Government looks forward to participating
in that meeting as an opportunity to resolve the crisis
through diplomacy before it is too late.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Assistant Secretary-General Šimonović for his
briefing. China is deeply concerned about the recent
escalation of the situation in Ukraine. We hope that all
parties can remain calm, exercise restraint and prevent
a further deterioration of the situation. The priority
now is to work within the framework of law to resolve
differences through dialogue and negotiation, with
full consideration of the legitimate rights, interests
and aspirations of all regions and ethnic communities.
That is the only approach that can bring lasting peace
and stability to Ukraine, in keeping with the long-term
fundamental interests of the nation as a whole and all
of its communities.
China views the issue of Ukraine as highly
complex and believes that the only solution is to
remain on the path to a political settlement, which
requires a favourable external environment. China has
been calling on the international community to work
constructively through its good offices to de-escalate
the situation in Ukraine. China has put forward a
three-point proposal on seeking a political solution to
the Ukrainian issue. We have taken note of the ongoing
discussion on establishing a multilateral mechanism
for dialogue. China welcomes those efforts, which are
largely in line with the Chinese proposal.

S/PV.7157

necessary that the Council give such careful focus on
the human rights situation in Ukraine. We have heard
repeated assertions about threats against particular
groups, but we have seen little evidence to substantiate
those assertions. Those claims have been used,
however, as a justification for continuing interference
in Ukraine’s affairs, including the threat and use of
force, contrary to the Charter of the United Nations.
As the Council, we need to be clear-eyed and
responsible about the situation on the ground and the
true nature of the challenges facing the Ukrainian
people. The report of the United Nations human rights
monitoring mission is what the Council needs to see at
this critical point in such an unstable and dangerous
environment. It seems to us to provide a balanced and
neutral depiction of the human rights situation and a
clear picture of the events leading to the Maidan protest,
the situation prior to the referendum held on 16 March
in Crimea, and the current situation both in Crimea and
in eastern Ukraine.
Russia has made various assertions about the
motivation of the Maidan protestors. The report makes
clear that human rights violations were among the root
causes of the demonstrations that took place throughout
Ukraine and in particular in Kyiv. The protests were not
driven by a so-called fascist agenda, but were a push
for a more representative and effective Government.
The heavy-handed response from security forces
was a catalyst for their escalation. These actions
of the security forces came against a backdrop of a
long-standing culture of impunity for human rights
violations, including by the police. We welcome reports
that the new Ukrainian authorities have committed
to investigating those violations and to holding
perpetrators to account.

China supports the early launch of dialogue and
consultations among the relevant parties, based on full
consideration and accommodation of all legitimate
interests and concerns in order to find a definitive
solution that is acceptable to all.

The report also sheds light on the events in Crimea.
Russia has consistently argued that Russian-speaking
minorities were threatened with repression. It has used
that reasoning to justify its decision to take control
of and annex Crimea. The report makes clear that
there was no evidence of harassment or attacks on
ethnic Russians in Crimea ahead of the referendum.
Misinformed reports, however, of harassment of ethnic
Russians by Ukrainian extremists served to create a
climate of fear.

Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Šimonović for the report of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and for his briefing. It is obviously very

The report notes that since the referendum of
16 March, measures have been taken in Crimea that
are of deep concern from a human rights perspective.
Those include the introduction of Russian citizenship,

14-3019911/23

S/PV.7157

Ukraine

making it difficult for those who chose to maintain their
Ukrainian citizenship to stay in Crimea and raising
concerns about legal residency and the right to work.
As we heard at the 31 March Arria formula meeting
of the Council, the situation is particularly concerning
for Tatars. The report confirms that, noting that the
number of displaced Crimean Tatars is estimated to
have reached 3,000. The actions of paramilitary groups
in Crimea remain outside the law and threatening. The
report calls for their disbandment. It also emphasizes
that independent and impartial reporting on human
rights in Crimea would deter violations, stimulate
accountability and prevent the spreading of rumours
and political manipulation.
The report looks carefully at the situation of Russian
minorities across Ukraine and finds nothing to support
the claims by Russia about threats to them. Russia’s
claims on that point simply do not hold. The report
clearly notes that although there were some attacks
against the ethnic Russian community, in particular
those affiliated with the previous Government, “these
were neither systematic nor widespread”. As Assistant
Secretary-General Šimonović has just told the Council,
“they were isolated incidents which were then
exaggerated ... fuelling fear and insecurity among
the ethnic Russian community”.
The report does make good proposals, which we
should all support, on the protection of minorities,
including the recommendation to ensure that minority
groups are consulted in developing laws on language
and recommendations to ensure that the treatment of
those associated with the previous Government is in
accordance with the rule of law and not motivated by
revenge. We welcome the Government of Ukraine’s
willingness to ensure a break with past injustices
and create a better future for the people of Ukraine.
Elections are essential in that regard, and it is crucial
that the people of Ukraine be able to decide on the
future direction of their own country. We therefore
fully support the upcoming elections on 25 May and
call on all parties in Ukraine and in the international
community to support a free and fair ballot. Ukraine
must be allowed to prepare for these elections without
outside interference or any coercion in its domestic
affairs.
To conclude, the international community has
repeatedly urged Russia to actively reduce tensions, stop
its destabilization in eastern Ukraine and withdraw its

12/23

16/04/2014

forces from the provocative posture they have assumed
on Ukraine’s border. Ukraine’s own response has
been restrained and responsible. The talks scheduled
to take place tomorrow in Geneva between Ukraine,
Russia, the United States and the European Union are
a crucial opportunity, now, for genuine dialogue. The
latest combustible events in eastern Ukraine — where,
as Ambassador Churkin has said, that the first blood
has been shed — make it essential that Russia engage
seriously in this dialogue.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): The report
before the Council is damning for two reasons. First, it
describes in the harshest terms the sorry tale of years
of corruption and abuse on the part of former President
Yanukovych and his predatory and criminal team. Is it
any wonder that the Ukrainian population, exasperated
by years of incompetence and corruption, rose up in
protest? There was no foreign involvement there. The
report also describes how the regime responded to
legitimate, peaceful demonstrations with the use of
force.
The titanic task of restoring trust of all Ukrainians
in their institutions lies with the new Ukrainian
Adminstration. The report underscores that since
the very first measures were undertaken by the new
Administration, calm has returned to Kyiv. On the
issue of languages and regional status, we encourage
the Kyiv authorities to pursue their efforts to promote
a return to reason, launch constructive and inclusive
dialogue, and reassure the people regarding their place
in Ukraine. The acting President has refused to repeal
the law on official languages. This symbolic decision
demonstates the will of the Ukrainian authorities to
strive for the country’s reconciliation. Ukraine can
preserve the diversity that constitutes its richness and
uniqueness.
To that end, Ukraine needs our support. The
first stage — the holding of the presidential election
on 25 May — is key. We must support the Ukrainian
authorities in order for the election to be held in the best
possible conditions and ensure the representation of all.
We must move towards a free and transparent election,
guaranteed by the presence of international observers.
It would be unacceptable for the activities of violent
groups to threaten the holding of that democratic step,
which is essential to the country’s future. We will not
accept the result of that vote, the harbinger of great
hope for the entire country, being disputed as result of
any event devised from outside.

14-30199

16/04/2014

Ukraine

I now come to my second point. The report draws
a bleak picture of the impact of Russia’s actions on
the situation inside Ukraine. It describes the chain of
events that led to the annexation of Crimea. It once
again underscores that there was no threat to the
Russian-speaking population of Crimea, a defence
that is nevertheless upheld by Russia to justify its
intervention. Quite the opposite, the report underscores
that the risk of human rights violations now threatens
the Ukrainian and Tartar populations. The United
Nations must continue to take note of the human rights
situation in Crimea, which is an integral part of Ukraine,
as the General Assembly recalled by an overwhelming
majority.
The report also underscores that the deteriorating
conditions and human rights violations that preceded
the holding of the referendum in Crimea on 16 March
were the result of deliberate acts. The presence of
soldiers in uniform without insignia, the seizure of
public buildings, intimidation of the civilian population,
journalists and human rights activists, the presence
of foreign voters and the violent propaganda against
Kyiv broadcast on Russian television channels were
all coordinated and orchestrated acts. They served as a
prelude to an annexation unprecedented in the twentyfirst century. Today, we are seeing a similar scenario in
eastern Ukraine.
In that regard, I believe that all Council members
and all my colleagues here in the Chamber read the
excellent article in this morning’s New York Times,
which describes how Russia has established its own
virtual reality, which bears no relation to the real
situation. My Russian friend’s statement today shows,
I believe, just how accurate and how true to the reality
that article is. Let us recall the past. Participants will
perhaps recall being told of 600,000 refugeees fleeing
the Ukrainian terror, who seem to have disappeared
from one day to the next. We were told that there were
no Russian soldiers in Crimea, while on YouTube we
could see lorries with Russian army number plates.
Today, the same disinformation continues. We are
told of peaceful protesters, while again on the Internet
one can see that they are heavily armed militia. We are
told that there is no Russian intervention, while again
on the Internet one can see soldiers without insignia,
flaunting weapons with which only the Russian army
is equipped. We are told that a fascist terror prevails
in Kyiv, while we know very well that if we were to
go to Kyiv we would see that calm prevails. We are

S/PV.7157

told that Jews in Ukraine are threatened, while the two
Ukrainian Jewish organizations themselves say that
they are not threatened. I could mention many more
examples, but never was a statement clearly so far from
the reality that, thanks to the Internet, we all can see on
the computer.
Ukraine is cornered and under attack. On Sunday,
right here, it was ordered not to react. One cannot
imagine that it would suffer without reacting to the
aggression to which it was first subjected a month ago,
condemned by the General Assembly in resolution
68/262, and which it is again experiencing in the east of
the country. We welcome the restraint of the Ukrainian
security forces, who seek to respond in a proportional
way to the unprecedented destabilizing actions against
them, organized from abroad.
We call on Russia to commit to de-escalation and
to condemning, together with the rest of the Council,
the attempts at destabilization in eastern Ukraine.
Furthermore, we call on Russia to stop trapping itself
in a spiral to extremes that can lead only to tragedy.
It must withdraw its troops from the border. It must
cease its destabilizing activities. It must stop shouting
about an immiment civil war. No one is deceived by
the scenario of the arsonist firefighter — an unsubtle
picture and not even a real semblance of credibility.
The situation is now extremely serious. A meeting
that will bring together Russia, the United States, the
European Union and Ukraine will be held in Geneva
tomorrow. That event is crucial, and we call on parties
to remain calm and to exercise restraint. In the case of
failure or if Russia were to seek to avoid that meeting,
new sanctions would be inevitable. That is not our
preferred path. We will be firm. Fully legitimate
authorities must be established in Kyiv. Elections must
be held on 25 May, and we will not allow Russia either
to prevent them from taking place or to discredit them.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Ivan Šimonović for his
briefing.
We take this opportunity to reiterate our full support
for the United Nations human rights monitoring mission
in Ukraine. We are confident that such independent and
credible international mechanisms can contribute to
the de-escalation of tensions on the ground. We hope
that the United Nations monitoring mission, in close
cooperation with the special monitoring mission of the

14-3019913/23

S/PV.7157

Ukraine

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
will continue to play a constructive role in that process.
The recent report of the United Nations monitoring
mission raises a number of human rights concerns
in Ukraine. There have been credible allegations of
harassment, arbitrary arrests and torture, targeting
journalists and activists. In Crimea, the referendum
was marred by a significant increase in propaganda and
incitement to hatred and violence. We are especially
concerned that such distorted narratives and restriction
of media freedom are also being exploited in eastern
Ukraine to further exacerbate the tense and vulnerable
situation.
We are closely monitoring unfolding events
in eastern Ukraine and are alarmed by the violent
seizure of key public buildings by armed individuals.
Such instances point to a serious deterioration in the
situation. We condemn any use of force in seeking a
change is status. Any further incitement to hostility
and provocative actions aimed at destabilizing Ukraine
must stop.
With the important election scheduled in May, we
call on the Ukrainian Government to lead an inclusive
political process that reflects the region’s diversity
and ensures the protection of all ethnic and linguistic
minorities. That is esential for any sustainable solution
to the crisis.
Before concluding, we stress that a solution to the
crisis can be found only by exploring all diplomatic
efforts, especially bilateral dialogue between Russia and
Ukraine. In that regard, we welcome the forthcoming
Geneva meeting among Ukraine, Russia, the United
States and the European Union and encourage all
concerned parties to continue such efforts to seek a
peaceful political solution.
We once again reaffirm our full supprt for Ukraine’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
its internationally recognized borders. Ukraine’s future
must be steered solely by the will and aspirations
of Ukrainians themselves without intervention or
influence by outside forces.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by thanking Mr. Ivan Šimonović,
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights, for his
briefing on the human rights situation in Ukraine.
What else can we say except to reiterate that
Argentina is following with great concern the

14/23

16/04/2014

increasingly tense situation in Ukraine, in particular
in the eastern part of the country, and its potential
consequences for the region’s stability? What more is
there to say that to reiterate that we are deeply concerned
that the threat of violent clashes may mean paying a
heavy price and hamper the possibility of finding a way
out of the current crisis and of stabilizing the situation
in the country?
The delegation of Argentina therefore reaffirms
once again our belief that we must uphold the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular that of non-intervention — be it military,
political or economic — in the internal affairs of other
States. We understand that the actions of any State or
international organization must show due respect for
Ukraine’s management of its internal affairs and its
future.
As Mr. Šimonović informed the Council, human
rights violations were reported in Ukraine in the lead-up
to the protests of November 2013. Serious human rights
violations were also committed during the protests and
afterwards. Although the report notes that denunciations
of human rights violations have eased off since the new
authorities in Kyiv assumed power, serious concerns
remain among sectors of the population with regard to
respect for the rights of minorities, and those concerns
and fears have been raised as a result of certain attacks
or threats against various minorities. Undoubtedly we
need to have more information and we must continue to
follow those events closely.
In that context, the availability of impartial
information on the human rights situation will
contribute not just to ensuring accountability for
human rights violations and abuses, but will also help
to prevent any manipulation of such information, which
would only exacerbate a climate of impunity, insecurity
and violence. At the same time, we believe that the
exhaustive investigation into the violations and abuses
that have taken place since the beginning of the protests
in Maidan Square, regardless of who the perpetrators
are, and the sentencing of those individuals will help
to restore calm and foster institutional normalization
which is needed in Ukraine. Measures undoubtedly
need to be taken to build confidence among the various
regions and ethnic communities and provide security
to all Ukrainians throughout the country that their
primary concerns and legitimate demands will be
addressed. We must also end the incitement to hatred,
discrimination, hostility and violence.

14-30199

16/04/2014

Ukraine

We are not saying anything new as a delegation.
We are simply recognizing the difficult situation in
Ukraine, which cannot be resolved by unilateral actions.
We insist on the need to avoid any action that would
make the situation even more complex and complicate
the search for a peaceful political solution to the crisis.
All the parties must work together to calm the situation,
must show maximum restraint and must contribute to
an inclusive dialogue.
What can those of us who hope that those who
will be meeting in Geneva on 17 April will have a
constructive dialogue and that they will find a peaceful
political solution to the crisis? As members of the
international community, we can do a great deal. We
can hope that the much-needed meeting of 17 April will
take place in a different climate. Those of us who will
not attend that meeting must make sure that we do not
detract from it. We must recall that human rights are
not anyone’s property but everyone’s responsibility. We
must recall that the Charter of the United Nations is
not made up of isolated chapters or loose principles,
but is rather an unbreakable whole. With that positive
attitude, we express our desire for a positive discussion
to be held so that Ukraine can find the serenity it so
sorely needs.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan)
(spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights,
Mr. Ivan Šimonović, for his briefing to the Council on
the human rights situation in Ukraine, as well as for
his efforts and those of the human rights monitoring
mission in Ukraine. The delegation of Jordan would
also like to underscore its support for the mission’s
work and the importance for all parties to cooperate
with it in carrying out the recommendations contained
in the report of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights on Ukraine,
particularly in light of the delicate and sensitive
situation experienced by the country.
The report reveals the direct relationship between
the widespread and significant human rights violations,
including the right to freedom of expression, the
previous Government’s corruption, and the protests and
insecurity that have swept Ukraine since November
2013. Attacks on the protesters, particularly in Maidan
Square, and the use of excessive force against them
have led to rapid political changes in Ukraine, the
establishment of a transitional Government and
the appointment of an acting President. The tense

S/PV.7157

situation in eastern Ukraine as a result of the ongoing
rebel movement must be addressed responsibly and
reasonably by all parties. As we have said previously,
the Ukrainian Government has the right and is dutybound to end the rebellion and preserve the country’s
territorial integrity and unity. Given the current
situation, all efforts must be made to ensure as peaceful
a settlement to the rebellion as possible.
International norms and human rights must be
respected in imposing the rule of law in those regions.
We underscore our call to bring pressure to bear on
the rebels to end their protests and engage in dialogue
with the Government in Kyiv on all matters related
to Ukraine’s future. By the same token, we welcome
the convening of the quadripartite meeting in Geneva
tomorrow, which we hope will lead to the proposal of
suitable solutions to end the crisis and persuade the
stakeholders to de-escalate the situation and work to
restore stability and security in Ukraine.
The current situation in Ukraine requires urgent
measures to be adopted and steps taken to build
confidence among all parties. It is necessary to limit
extremist national and political diatribes. We call
upon influential Powers to use their sway to end to the
problem, which underpins current events in Ukraine,
especially in the eastern regions. We also underscore the
need for continued dialogue between the Government
of Ukraine and the country’s diverse communities,
factions, linguistic groups and political parties in order
to agree an appropriate political course of action that
addresses the interests of all parties and charts a path
for Ukraine’s future with regard to the rule of law, its
institutions and human rights.
The dialogue must begin forthwith. States and
influential parties must also create a climate conducive
to the successful holding of presidential elections in
May. Ukraine’s future depends on a successful political
transition that is based on human rights, sovereignty and
the rule of law and that represents all parts of society,
without regard to language, ethnicity or religion.
We stress that there must be no interference in the
internal affairs of Ukraine, or threat of force and that
the people of Ukraine will be allowed to determine
their own future. The international community must
assist Ukraine at this stage of its political transition
to overcome the obstacles to security and stability and
preserve its sovereignty and territorial integrity.

14-3019915/23

S/PV.7157

Ukraine

Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this briefing on the human
rights situation in Ukraine. I thank Mr. Ivan Šimonović,
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights, for his
briefing and for his efforts in reporting and ensuring
human rights in Ukraine.
The report of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights issued yesterday
indicates worrying patterns of human rights violations,
mainly born of the current crisis. The report also
indicates a culture of effective impunity, including
torture, extortion, arbitrary detention and corruption.
It is unfortunate that the situation has bloomed into a
deadly crisis in which over 120 people have lost their
lives due to gunfire and severe beatings, while 100
remain missing.
The situation in Ukraine again proves that there are
fault lines in our preventive measures. Nonetheless, it
is our view that the international community still has a
chance to prevent a further deterioration of the situation
in Ukraine. We again welcome the establishment of a
United Nations human rights monitoring mission in
Ukraine, which we support. We believe that we can
build on the work of the mission to support Ukraine in
its efforts to build the State that Ukrainians deserve.
It is incumbent on the Ukrainian Government
and indeed a priority to build confidence between
the authorities and the people and among the various
communities, with a view to reassuring all people
throughout Ukraine that their concerns will be
addressed, especially the Russian-speaking community.
It is time to ensure the inclusion and equal participation
of all Ukrainians in public affairs, rather than adopting
legislation regarding a lustration policy that would lead
to further isolation and radicalism.
In eastern Ukraine, the situation on the ground has
deteriorated in the past few days, instigating a dire need
for a viable political solution. We express concern about
the seizure and illegal occupation of public buildings
and infrastructure by armed protestors, and stress the
need for security forces to avoid any excessive use of
force while restoring the necessary public order.
In the meantime, we are extremely concerned
by the increased rhetoric and negative propaganda
that have exacerbated a situation, and in some cases
driven decisions taken to prevent the possibility of
stakeholders reconciling. Once again, we reiterate our
call on all parties to de-escalate the crisis and engage

16/23

16/04/2014

in genuine dialogue, with respect for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine. In that
regard, we look forward to the talks among Ukraine, the
Russian Federation, the European Union and the United
States of America to be held tomorrow in Geneva. We
hope that the meeting will contribute to a sustainable
political solution in Ukraine and the region.
Let me conclude by saying that the people of
Ukraine will judge us by our action, or lack of action.
Failing them is not an option. It is time to support a
truly Ukrainian-led solution, with the support of the
region and the larger international community.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank Mr. Ivan Šimonović, Assistant Secretary-General
for Human Rights, for his briefing.
The discussions of recent weeks in the Council have
shown that not all members have the same assessment
of the situation in Ukraine. We have often witnessed
here a dialogue of the deaf, while an information war is
raging on the ground. Given that backdrop, Luxembourg
welcomes the publication yesterday of the first report
on the human rights situation in Ukraine, including
Crimea, by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. The report, based
on eyewitness accounts, has provided an objective
picture of the situation. I thank Mr. Šimonović for the
topical information he has just provided the Council, in
addition to the report.
The report and Mr. Šimonović’s briefing paint
a very bleak picture of the situation in Crimea. The
consequences of the annexation to Russia for people
living in Crimea are dire. That is especially true for
minorities, such as the Crimean Tatars, who have had to
leave the peninsula out of fear of violent repression, and
for Ukrainians themselves, who have are subjected to
flagrant discrimination if they refuse to adopt Russian
citizenship.
The report confirms that the referendum held on
16 March in Crimea, in violation of the Constitutions
of both Ukraine and Crimea, was held in conditions
devoid of any legitimacy. Crimea was occupied and cut
off from the rest of Ukraine, journalists and members
of civil society were intimidated, and freedom of
the media was severely hampered. Cases of torture,
forced disappearance and murder must be the subject
of independent judicial investigation. Urgent measures
are needed to restore the rule of law and protect human
rights and fundamental freedoms. I join my colleagues

14-30199

16/04/2014

Ukraine

S/PV.7157

who have stressed the importance of providing United
Nations representatives with access to the entire
territory of Ukraine, including Crimea. This applies in
particular to the members of the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission.

negotiators from Ukraine, Russia, the United States and
the European Union in Geneva tomorrow will allow for
a dialogue to be initiated and a way out of the most
dangerous crisis that Europe has faced since the end of
the Cold War to be found.

With the report of the High Commissioner, we
now have confirmation of what Mr. Šimonović told
the Council on 19 March (see S/PV.7144) — there
have been no systematic or widespread attacks against
“the ethnic Russian community” in Ukraine. Yet the
unfounded rumors of threats of such attacks continue
to be exploited to foment unrest in eastern and southeastern Ukraine. Russian media are systematically used
to create a climate of fear and rouse local populations
against the Ukrainian Government. Luxembourg
therefore endorses the appeal launched yesterday by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Representative on Freedom of the Media,
Ms. Dunja Mijatović, on measures to be taken to counter
propaganda and misinformation. The current situation
is explosive. It would be irresponsible to further fan the
flames.

Pending a political solution, the
presence
throughout Ukraine of impartial United Nations and
OSCE observers is crucial to establishing the facts and
countering warmongering rhetoric. We encourage the
human rights observer mission to redouble its efforts
in that respect. As the Secretary General of the OSCE
stated in Brussels today, to observe in a neutral manner
and report on the facts is to help establish the conditions
for a de-escalation of this dangerous situation.

Luxembourg condemns the actions carried out
since 6 April by armed groups in several cities in
eastern and south-eastern Ukraine, especially in the
Donetsk region. Those actions lack all spontaneity.
They are coordinated and well-orchestrated, akin
to what happened in Crimea. We are particularly
concerned by the targeted deployment of pro-Russia
individuals in the local demonstrations, as noted in the
High Commissioner’s report. We are not challenging
the right to demonstrate freely, but the deployment of
pro-Russia elements has led to violent incidents and the
forceful occupation of Government buildings and local
law-enforcement institutions. We call on Russia to
publicly distance itself from the actions of the separatist
militias.
We pay tribute to the outstanding composure and
restraint shown by the Ukrainian authorities in the
face of these destabilizing actions. We understand that
they cannot fail to act in the situation. We encourage
the Ukrainian Government to proceed in a measured
and proportional manner, with full respect for human
rights.
Luxembourg still believes that a peaceful solution
to the crisis can be found. Such a solution would require
direct dialogue between Russia and Ukraine. We hope
that the four-party talks that will bring together chief

Mr. Llanos (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
Assistant Secretary-General Šimonović for his briefing
on the human rights situation in Ukraine.
Chile supports the appeal made by Mr. Šimonović
to ensure accountability for all human rights violations
committed during the demonstrations in Kyiv that took
place between December 2013 and February 2014.
It is crucial that immediate measures be adopted to
build trust between the interim Government and the
population, while taking into account ethnic minorities
in particular. Similarly, it is urgent to guarantee full
respect for the rule of law, democracy and human rights
in Ukraine, including the rights of all minorities.
We are particularly disturbed by the deterioration
of the human rights situation in the eastern region
of Ukraine, in particular violations of freedom of
expression and freedom of assembly through attacks
against and the harassment of activists, journalists
and members of the political opposition. We urge the
parties to find a peaceful solution to the crisis through
direct political dialogue, to act with moderation, to
abstain from adopting any unilateral measures that
may increase tensions and to take part in international
mediation efforts in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 68/262. We hope that the meeting to be held
tomorrow in Geneva, in which Ukraine, the Russian
Federation, the European Union and the United States
will take part, will help find a way out of the crisis.
I would conclude by welcoming the good offices
that the Secretary-General continues to carry out
and by highlighting the work of the United Nations
human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
on establishing the facts, reducing tensions and creating

14-3019917/23

S/PV.7157

Ukraine

an environment conducive to the holding of presidential
elections on 25 May.
The President: I shall now make a few remarks in
my national capacity.
I also want to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Ivan Šimonović for his briefing on the human rights
situation in Ukraine. We have studied the report of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights on the human rights situation in Ukraine
and note that it is comprehensive.
We are encouraged by the relentless and consistent
engagement of the United Nations in Ukraine. That
is exemplified by the establishment of the United
Nations human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine,
the readiness of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to provide testimonial
assistance for legislative reforms and the recent highlevel visits by the Secretary-General, Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman, Senior Adviser Robert Serry and
Mr. Šimonović.
We believe in the central role of the United Nations
in de-escalating tensions in Ukraine. The United
Nations provides an impartial platform and professional
expertise, which are both essential ingredients in the
efforts to ensure that human rights are respected and
protected in Ukraine. Independent monitoring and
analysis of the human rights situation will outline
technical, legal or other assistance needs and may
contribute to addressing the root causes of the violence.
The human rights issues linked to the current crisis in
Ukraine need to be comprehensively addressed within
the framework of a peaceful and negotiated resolution
of the crisis. The authorities must continue to engage
all groups in the country and assure them that their
concerns will be addressed.
The ongoing rebellion in eastern Ukraine
flagrantly rubs salt in the wound and exacerbates an
already tenuous political situation, with far-reaching
implications for human rights, peace and security. We
all know that it is an established fact that violations
of human rights often occur in situations of conflict.
That underscores the imperative for a speedy political
and diplomatic resolution of the crisis in Ukraine. We
urge all concerned parties to cease beating the drums of
war. They must work assiduously to ease the escalating
tensions and embrace dialogue and all its ramifications,
for the larger interests of the people of Ukraine. All of
us around this table have expressed the hope that the

18/23

16/04/2014

meeting to take place tomorrow, 17 April, will lead to
a resolution of the crisis. I hope that our hopes are not
misplaced. I hope that our hopes will be justified.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting of the Security
Council to discuss the report on the human rights
situation in Ukraine. I am grateful to Assistant
Secretary-General Ivan Šimonović for presenting the
report today.
Today’s meeting is being held with the following
fact on everyone’s mind: it is only because of the Russian
military aggression, which should be unimaginable
in the twenty-first century yet is unfolding in plain
sight, that the situation in Ukraine has emerged on the
Council’s agenda. Ukraine welcomes the publication of
the report, which reflects the situation in my country in
the field of human rights objectively enough.
Unlike the previous Administration, the new
Government in Ukraine is willing and ready to embrace
recommendations aimed at promoting human rights
and the rule of law in our country. At the same time,
we hope that the other Government mentioned in the
report will also take specific actions to stop and prevent
human rights violations.
The document strongly rejects the allegations of
violations of the rights of Russian minorities in Ukraine,
which were used as a reason for Russia’s military
aggression against our country and the annexation of
Crimea, which was declared illegal by the General
Assembly.
My Russian colleague stated today that the Russian
language is in danger in Ukraine. Let me give the
Council some comparative figures on the situation
concerning the protection of the language rights of the
several million Ukrainians in the Russian Federation
and the Russians in Ukraine. These figures are based
on the report of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe’s High Commissioner on
National Minorities, dated March-April 2009. I ask
members to please compare the figures.
On secondary schools, there are no Ukrainian
secondary schools in the Russian Federation for at least
2 million people. In Ukraine, there are 101,256 Russian
secondary schools.
14-30199

16/04/2014

Ukraine

S/PV.7157

On publications, seven Ukrainian newspapers are
published at the expense of the local authorities and
Ukrainian organizations of the Russian Federation.
Financial support at the federal level is not provided
to ensure the information needs of the Ukrainian
community in the Russian Federation. There are 1,176
newspapers published in the Russian language in
Ukraine.

to say that we condemn all forms of violence, especially
when it concerns opposition leaders and candidates
for President. In that context, work must be done
by the police, who are obliged to carry out a proper
investigation and to submit it to the court. Today, the
Ukrainian Parliament considered those cases, and we
expect that they will be assessed and that the Office of
the Prosecutor will then comment.

On broadcasting, there is only one Ukrainian
broadcast radio programme in Russia. Russian language
television and radio programmes in Ukraine consists of
about 74 per cent of the total broadcasts in Ukraine.

I would also like to note something interesting
in that situation. Coupled with the aggressive actions
against Ukraine, that situation cannot be excluded
as provocation from our opponents. I point out that
Mr. Tsarev was attacked by unknown assailants. Those
who rescued him were from the Right Sector — precisely
the forces that Russia has consistently accused
of demonstrating extreme intolerance towards it.
Mr. Tsarev openly thanked the representatives of that
group for rescuing him. This story was broadcast widely
by Ukraine’s main news channels. Russian television
channels showed only part of that interview. We have
the full version on a disk and will give it to our Russian
colleagues.

The Russian Permanent Representative today
stated that there was growing anti-Semitism and
neo-Nazism in Ukraine. And the Russian side is
concerned about the fact that this is not reflected in
today’s human rights report. Allow me to quote some
excerpts from the joint letter addressed not long ago
to Russian President Vladimir Putin by an association
made up of 266 Jewish organizations in Ukraine.
“The
speculation
about
the
violent
Ukrainization and the prohibition to speak in
Russian, which was always stressed in the Russian
media, should remain on these authors’ conscience.
Mr. President, your confidence expressed on the
growth of anti-Semitism in Ukraine does not
meet the real facts. Perhaps you were confused,
indicating Ukraine instead of Russia, where Jewish
organizations have documented the growth of
anti-Semitism last year.
“We were and still we are being frightened
by the fact that Bandera followers and fascists
are rushing to power in Ukraine, and we should
expect the Jewish pogroms. Yes, we are aware
that political opposition and the social powers that
achieved positive changes in the executive branch
of the country are made up of different groups. The
nationalists are among them, but even the most
marginal of them do not allow themselves to express
anti-Semitism and other forms of xenophobia. And
what we know is that our nationalists are under the
control of civil society and the new Government
of Ukraine, which is not the case with the Russian
neo-Nazis, who are encouraged by your secret
services”.
Today our Russian colleague also touched upon
the case concerning Mr. Tsarev and Mr. Dobkin as
candidates in the presidential election. I am authorized

We call on the States Members of the United
Nations to take close note of the human rights
violations detailed in the report before and during the
Crimea pseudo-referendum of 16 March. The include
harassment, arbitrary arrests, torture, violations of
the freedom of expression, media freedom, access to
information and the protection of journalists. Particular
attention is rightly given to violations of the rights of
the inhabitants of the peninsula under the Russian
occupation. The most vulnerable communities in the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea are considered to
be the Crimean Tartars and Ukrainians, who were
intimidated and forced to leave their homes because
of the lack of a safe environment and the oppression
of their rights and freedoms. Tartar leaders consider
the situation as the third act of genocide against their
ethnic group in the past century.
Given the ongoing systematic violations of human
rights on the Crimean peninsula, the Ukrainian side
insists that the situation in the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea should remain under the radar of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and its mission and other international
monitoring mechanisms. In that respect, we welcome
the intention of the United Nations monitoring mission
to establish its sub-office in Simferopol.

14-3019919/23

S/PV.7157

Ukraine

Mindful of the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 68/262, entitled “Territorial integrity
of Ukraine”, is is alarming that — along with an
analysis of recent developments and factors in the
eastern regions of Ukraine — the document reports on
external interference in the situation, in particular the
participation in the protests and clashes by individuals
who arrived from Russia. At the Security Council
meeting held on Sunday, 13 April (see S/PV.7154), we
gave some facts about such interference. One can find
much more evidence by visiting the official site of the
Ukrainian Secret Service.
Ukraine is surprised that the only criticism of the
peace enforcement operation in Ukraine comes from
the Russian Federation. The Council will recall that this
country is one of the most frequent users of counterterrorism tools against its citizens. I would like to draw
the Council’s attention to the fact that Russia uses the
same strategy in all counter-terrorism operations: if
the enemy does not surrender, it is stormed at any cost.
Dozens of examples could be given. The enforcement
operation in Ukraine is being undertaken to protect
people and to restore law and order in some regions of
Ukraine. The operation is targeted exclusively at armed
groups who are committing acts of a criminal nature,
including the seizure of administrative buildings,
police and military facilities and airports. Those armed
groups are strongly supported by the Russian special
operations force units, illegally infiltrated into the
territory of Ukraine.
My Russian colleague mentioned today that the
the first blood has been spilled in eastern Ukraine,
that of five Ukrainian peace enforcement officers who
were killed in a well-prepared attack overseen by the
Russian officer Ihor Strielkov.The Council can find
detailed information on the website of the Ukrainian
Secret Service: www.sbu.gov.ua.
It is in that light that we look forward to the mission’s
next report, which will focus on eastern Ukraine.
United Nations experts have stated clearly that a
number of human rights violations in other parts of
Ukraine were a legacy of the previous Government,
which became one of the main reasons that caused the
Ukrainian mass protests that took place from November
2013 to February 2014. The reasons posing a challenge
for decades to human rights in Ukraine generally,
and in its eastern and southern regions in particular,
are well known, that is, poverty, a high level of child
mortality, unemployment and dangerous working
20/23

16/04/2014

conditions, especially in the coal-mining industry. As
a result, basic human rights and principles outlined in
the Constitution of Ukraine were not always respected
in my country.
The only way Ukraine can cope with those
problems is to dramatically change its inherited status
quo in order to build an open, democratic civil society.
The newly formed Parliament and Government of
Ukraine have repeatedly stated their commitment to
reforms designed to eliminate those vestiges of the
past, and we are grateful to the authors of the report for
noting positive trends in the new Ukrainian authorities’
activities that indicate their willingness to ensure a
break with past injustices and elaborate a new vision of
Ukraine’s future. The action plan for the Government
presented by the new Cabinet covers the problems of
each and every region of Ukraine. It focuses on the
practical needs of the population, including ethnic
minorities. What we need, in order to achieve those
goals, is to be left in peace by Russia.
We greatly appreciate the role the United Nations
is playing in normalizing the situation in Ukraine, and
we are ready to enhance our cooperation with its human
rights bodies in order to give proper consideration to
human rights issues in implementing our wide-ranging
reforms. Those reforms are aimed at ensuring the
rule of law, developing a democratic, pluralistic
society, eliminating corruption, complying with social
standards and protecting the rights of minorities. The
real watershed in this process will be the presidential
elections to be held in Ukraine on 25 May. We are
determined to have them whatever the circumstances,
and to make them the most transparent elections in the
history of independent Ukraine.
I thank the Council for its support and understanding.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, I feel compelled to pause on
various assertions that my Ukrainian colleague just
made in his statement. I cannot analyse his entire
statement, particularly since it is impossible to figure
out which parts of his speech are his own and which
parts are borrowed from some mystery source, the
when and where of whose proclamations are unknown.
In any case, of course, he is responsible for everything
that was said.

14-30199

16/04/2014

Ukraine

We will not discuss the situation in Crimea in the
Security Council, or at least not under the rubric of
the situation in Ukraine. But he made one assertion
that is simply crude provocation that I cannot ignore,
which is that the Tatar population of Crimea believes
there will be a third act in the history of genocide
against them, and so forth. That is simply nonsense,
and a crude provocation. The new Constitution that has
already been adopted in Crimea, for instance, actually
strengthens Tatar as a third official language in Crimea,
which it never was before, alongside Russian and
Ukrainian. High-level positions in Crimea’s ministerial
departments have been reserved for representatives of
the Tatars, which was also not the case previously.
Moreover, the Crimean Tatars will be able to take
advantage of the fact that not only will their social,
economic and other issues be dealt with by the Russian
authorities, who are giving them the attention they need,
but that this will be done with the help of Tatarstan, one
of the strongest, most powerful and successful subjects
of the Russian Federation. An agreement between the
Russian and Tatarstan authorities to work together on
this issue is already in place. The Council therefore has
no need to worry about the fate of the Crimean Tatars.
Over the past two and a half decades since Ukraine
became independent, the Crimean Tatars have struggled
with what we in Russian call a wretched existence. That
condition will now come to an end, although it will
probably take some time.
Turning now to another topic that is not appropriate
for the Security Council, but my Ukrainian colleague
wrongly characterized what I said about the Russian
language in Ukraine. What I said was that the Russian
language is gradually being pushed out of circulation.
And that is exactly the case. The first step that
Mr. Sergeyev’s new leadership took was to shut down
the Russian-language versions of all its ministerial
department websites. He cited a great many figures;
I have one. According to my information, of the 195
Russian schools that existed in Kyiv in the 1990s, five
remain. In order to enter any Ukrainian university, a
candidate has to do an interview in Ukrainian. While
Ukrainian is close to Russian, it is still a language that
has to be studied separately, so Russians have to struggle
with Ukrainian in order to get through the university
entrance interview. However, this is a major subject
that deserves separate discussion and consideration,
which would include the rights of Ukrainians in Russia.
Of course, Ukrainians in Russia do not all live in a
compact area, unlike the Russians living in Ukraine.

S/PV.7157

I would now like to say a few words about the
statements made by some of my other colleagues in
the Security Council. Needless to say, many aspects of
our discussion are reminiscent of a broken record, and
indeed we have already gone over this subject a dozen
times, but some things said by my colleagues today were
genuinely startling. For example, our British colleague
said that Russia should explain its concerns. We have
made numerous statements at the highest levels. We
have explained our concerns at the level of our Ministry
of Foreign Affairs. Our United Nations delegation has
repeatedly gone into great detail in spelling out our
vision of how we — together with the Ukrainians and
those members of the international community who
are ready to do so — propose to work to help Ukraine
extricate itself from this crisis. But some people are still
sitting there, waiting for us to explain our concerns.
Maybe they are simply not listening; or perhaps they do
not want to listen. That is quite another issue.
Turning to the second aspect of this issue, it is
of course good that our concerns are listened to and
understood, but the important thing is to understand the
concerns of the people of Ukraine, and in this case to
understand the concerns of the people of south-eastern
and southern Ukraine. What has the Kyiv leadership of
Ukraine done to listen to their concerns? Mr. Yatsenyuk
visited the Donbas region. He did not even meet with
any of the protesters. He met with his friends, with
oligarchs — people whom the Kyiv leadership has
appointed to various positions. It is true that he did say
some of the right things, which later were essentially
contradicted by his colleague Mr. Turchynov, who on
the following day said that military force should be
used against the south-eastern region.
I now turn to the statement made by my respected
colleague from the United States. She said something
quite true, which is that it is not good when an opposition
takes up arms and seizes administrative buildings. It is
annoying, however, that this understanding on the part
of the United States representative has come too late.
For instance, why was it not expressed in January, when
Kyiv was in turmoil that was several degrees more
intense than what we are seeing in the cities of eastern
Ukraine. Why did the representative of the United States
not say the same things here in the United Nations, in
Washington, D.C., or in its numerous talks with the
Kyiv authorities? Perhaps then this crisis would not
have occurred. Of course it is not good when citizens
take up arms, but in Kyiv, when the issue of illegal
units came up, one statistic emerged to the effect that

14-3019921/23

S/PV.7157

Ukraine

there were 3 million illegal firearms in Ukraine. But
when people are worried about their well-being and are
trying to defend themselves somehow, how can they not
arm themselves? That is undoubtedly understandable,
although from the point of view of lawfulness, in the
normal sense of the word, it naturally raises questions.
My French colleague brought up an excellent phrase,
“virtual reality”. Indeed, I found myself thinking about
just that phrase when I was listening to the statements
of some of our colleagues. People have come to power
in Kyiv by military means. Many of them have the sort
of reputation that would make you think twice about
shaking their hands. In 2012, the European Parliament
resolved that there was no way any coalition could be
struck with them. They seem to make promises of some
sort, but they do not keep any of them. For instance,
they undertook to disarm people in Kyiv. They did not
do so. Were any objective investigations conducted
into the violence that took place in Kyiv in February,
and perhaps in the crisis that was ongoing before
that? A Prosecutor General appeared who was also
a representative of a political party and said that the
former authorities were to blame for everything. And
some of them are making promises to the outside world,
and they believe them. Are they so naive?
It is interesting that this is not the first time we
have seen this in the past few years. For some reason,
some of our Western colleagues believe that if an
armed coup — preferably an armed one — takes place,
democrats will always come to power — that Thomas
Jefferson will always take charge of the whole thing.
But where do we see anybody in Kyiv in power who
might have a serious reputation in democratic politics?
There are no such people there. Have these pseudodemocrats done anything to ensure that something
resembling democracy will emerge even in Kyiv? In
the Verkhovna Rada there are nothing but fistfights.
Anyone who protests is forcibly ejected. Just as there
were before, there are military camps on the Maidan;
none of the far right-wingers have been disarmed. And
these democrats, having failed to establish any kind of
democracy in their stronghold in Kyiv, are now seeking
to establish democracy — or law and order, as some of
our colleagues have said — by sending armed forces
into south-eastern Ukraine. There is your virtual
reality.
A number of my colleagues have approvingly
mentioned the elections of 25 May. They are being
prepared for, and we do not know how it will all get

22/23

16/04/2014

done, but who is worrying about that here? I have to
agree with my Ukrainian colleague — I do not recall
exactly what he said — that there must be a radical
break with the accursed past, a radical change. But now
the Ukrainian people are being asked to buy a pig in a
poke. They are being told to go and elect a president on
25 May, but the kind of power that president will wield
is completely unclear. What sort of Government will
he preside over? Will he have the greater authority or
will the Prime Minister? That was clearly the logical
path for the intended agreement of 21 February — start
out with constitutional reforms, then follow those with
presidential elections. But no, that has all been turned
on its head and some elections for deputies are being
pushed forward. Is this really democracy? Is this really
the way to a break with the past and the building of a
new democratic Ukraine?
Last of all, regarding the negotiations in
Geneva — which we hope will take place — we are
preparing diligently for them, if they are not torpedoed
by these reckless activities of forces in south-eastern
Ukraine. But how will Ukraine prepare for the
negotiations? How will our Western partners prepare for
it? That is an important question for us. It may not be a
big secret, but as some of our colleagues know, we have
tried through various formats to find a way to involve
representatives of the region. Since the authorities
themselves are incapable of launching a dialogue, we
thought it might be done through this format. But the
response to our proposal was negative. Let us see what
will come of the Geneva meeting. Of course, we would
hope that it would genuinely put Ukraine on a path
to normal development whereby every region, every
ethnic and religious group would know what to expect
tomorrow. And then at that point we will be able to
address Ukraine’s economic problems. We have invited
our partners to participate in a dialogue on that subject,
including through the letter that, as we know, President
Putin sent to a number of Heads of European States.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Ukraine to make a further statement.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine) (spoke in Russian): I have
come to realize that it is sometimes useless to comment
on certain things, since our Russian colleagues will
stand by their opinion and represent the situation the
way they want, regardless.
That is the reason for the virtual reality that our
Russian colleagues have constructed, where they live
in their own world while everyone else says the same
14-30199

16/04/2014

Ukraine

thing. Whether Mr. Churkin wants to or not, he will
have to take part in a discussion of the issue of Crimea
because it is Ukrainian territory. It may be temporarily
occupied, but until it is returned we will discuss it. We
have seen the entire world lend its support for Ukraine
on this subject.
It is a shame that the Russian Ambassador should use
such language as “lies” and so forth when commenting
on his colleagues’ words. It is a shame that neither he
nor his deputies attended the Security Council’s meeting
with the delegation from the Crimea, led by the wellknown human rights champion Mustafa Dzhemilev,
who spent 15 years in Soviet prisons for defending the
rights of his people. He said what I said when I repeated

S/PV.7157

his words, which the Russian Ambassador called lies
and provocations. So the Crimean Tartars will now hear
that the Russians consider their position to be mere lies
and provocations.
I have no further comment, because everything
said to date consists yet again of manipulation and
distortion in a style we are all familiar with. I think
Council members for their attention, their support and
their patience..
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

14-3019923/23
