S/PV.8480

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8480th meeting

Friday, 8 March 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Gueguen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Ms. Bustamante
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Philips
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (covering the period from
1 December 2018 to 26 February 2019) (S/2019/191)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-06505 (E)
*1906505*

S/PV.8480

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South
Sudan (covering the period from 1 December
2018 to 26 February 2019) (S/2019/191)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. David Shearer,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
South Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, and Ms. Angelina Nyajima Simon Jial,
founder of Hope Restoration South Sudan.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/191, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on South Sudan, covering the period
from 1 December 2018 to 26 February 2019.
I now give the floor to Mr. Shearer.
Mr. Shearer: It is my pleasure to be present at the
Security Council today. There have been considerable
developments in South Sudan in the past months. I
would like to touch on those and to make a number of
observations about the opportunities and challenges
moving forward.
The peace agreement signed on 12 September
was brokered by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), and in particular through the
commendable efforts of South Sudan, and it continues
to hold. It is also a testament to the efforts of the parties
that have built sufficient trust and confidence among
themselves and have committed to working together
towards durable peace.
Four positive changes are notable. First, the
opposition politicians from the different parties are
moving freely around Juba without hindrance and are
2/23

08/03/2019

taking part in the various meetings as part of the peace
process. I would like to recognize the Government
for creating the space and the security conditions for
that to happen and to thank the opposition leaders for
having the courage to return and participate in the
peace process.
Secondly, there have been more than 71 meetings
and rapprochements held across the country where
Government and Sudan People’s Liberation Army in
Opposition forces and politicians have met. Many have
been facilitated by the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS). The enthusiasm for peace among the
people is palpable.
Thirdly, overall levels of political violence have
diminished significantly. In blunt terms, many people
are alive today who might not have been without the
agreement having been signed. The exception is in
Central Equatoria, where the fighting close to Yei
between the forces of Thomas Cirillo and the South
Sudan People’s Defence Forces has led to clashes. Once
again, the civilians in that area have borne the brunt,
with reports of killings, looting and sexual assaults.
Cirillo shows no sign of wanting to join the existing
peace process.
Fourth, for the first time in three years, people are
expressing a willingness to return home. An estimated
135,000 refugees have returned, in addition to many
internally displaced who have signalled that they want
to go home. So far, the actual numbers are relatively
small compared to the approximately 2.3 million people
who live as refugees and 1.9 million displaced inside
South Sudan — a figure that comprises nearly one
third of the population. But it reflects a trend of people
seeking to travel in the dry season, which is now, to be
home in time to plant crops in July.
That is the positive side. The significant challenge
now is to maintain the momentum of the peace process.
The timetable set out in the agreement is well behind
where it should be and many of the bodies set up
under it are still dealing with procedural rather than
substantive issues.
There are fundamental issues still to be resolved,
many of which were deferred to enable the peace
agreement to be signed. These include the resolution
of the boundaries and states issue and the formation
of a unified armed force to be deployed in Juba and all
major towns. The constitution-making process has also
faced challenges in this period.
19-06505

08/03/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The current phase of the peace process, the
pre-transitional government period, ends on 12 May.
From that point, the revitalized transitional government
is scheduled to take over and the Vice-Presidents,
including the First Vice-President, Riek Machar, should
have taken up their roles.
What does this mean? A peace process that falters
will generate frustration, anger and a possible return
to violence that could equal what occurred in 2013 and
2016. We cannot allow that to happen. There are some
who believe that a return to violence is inevitable. We
do not concur. The agreement has a broader buy-in from
parties than the 2015 agreement. It is widely embraced
by the population.
We, too, have our concerns about the peace process
but there is yet to be a perfect process. For our part, the
United Nations has focused attention and resources on
making it work and will continue to do so.
I want to stress that there is no alternative plan.
There is only this agreement and this path forward. For
it to have a chance to work, it needs to be supported.
A year ago, most of us, including myself, did not
believe that we would be at this point today. It has
confounded the critics. But we have arrived at this point
through the leadership and drive largely of IGAD.
A fully engaged IGAD, supported by the efforts
of the African Union, is absolutely critical. But the
months ahead will be as challenging as those before
it have been. I would welcome the urgent appointment
by IGAD of the new Chair of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission to help steer the process
forward and overcome some of those challenges.
The United Nations has been working in partnership
with IGAD and the people of South Sudan throughout.
Through my good offices we have provided, and
will continue to provide, specific expertise, ideas
and opportunities to the process in order to maintain
confidence and trust and substantively move the peace
implementation forward. It is an area where we would
welcome a more explicit reference in our mandate to
our ability to play that role.
However, we must also acknowledge that the
suffering goes on. Five months of a more stable
environment cannot redress the levels of food insecurity
or the absence of health or education services overnight.
Humanitarian assistance is still needed to bridge the

S/PV. 8480

gap to self-reliance and to support those who want to
move home.
But we should remember that tens of thousands
of South Sudanese citizens, young and old, are alive
today because of the generosity of donor nations and
the heroic work of humanitarian agencies. The fact
that their country is supported by taxpayers around the
world is a reality that South Sudan’s leaders often forget
or take for granted.
Last year, donor nations gave lifesaving support of
more than $1 billion — more than twice South Sudan’s
State budget. That enabled humanitarian agencies to
deliver assistance to 5 million people, or approximately
83 per cent of those whom they had targeted. This
year’s target is $1.5 billion to reach 5.7 million people.
Humanitarian agencies have largely been able to
move freely across South Sudan. However, in specific
areas, in places such as Yei, particularly where there is
conflict and where, as a result, civilians have been most
vulnerable, denials have occurred.
Governmental delays, including the processing of
shipments and the imposition of taxes, have also wasted
time and incurred costs in the past three months.
Peace saves lives. It also saves money. South
Sudan is a country of abundance where nobody should
be hungry.
I would argue that the humanitarian bill is
ultimately unsustainable. We have felt strongly the
need to switch approaches in the country, and so in
the past few months United Nations agencies and
UNMISS, backed by donors, have begun to focus more
on resilience, which fosters greater self-reliance within
communities in more stable areas where we can work.
There is a potential in those areas to move away from
purely humanitarian support.
Secondly, a trust fund has been established to
intervene in areas of ongoing conflict. It aims not only
to reconcile differences between warring communities
but also to bolster agreements with economic support
and services. In the Wau protection of civilians site,
for example, the Fertit community has wanted to move
back to their land, which they were forced to abandon.
A greater chance of success is likely for them if the
differences between them and Dinka cattle keepers in
the area can be reconciled and if the agreement reached
is anchored with support to housing, health services
and benefits for all communities.

19-065053/23

S/PV.8480

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

With the peace deal, some displaced families are
choosing to return home and rebuild their lives. The
number of people living in protection of civilians
sites has dropped from about 205,000 to 193,000 in
just three months. In Wau, it has gone down to about
13,000. UNMISS supports the returns process. We
have undertaken frequent look-and-see trips where we
helicopter people to locations to assess for themselves
whether it is safe to go home. As a result, many decided
to leave. Hundreds have now left the Bor protection
of civilians site. While some were transported by
helicopter, most have been transported by barge.
Humanitarian agencies are currently programming
agricultural, education and health support in areas
expected to be of high return. UNMISS peacekeepers
are refocusing priorities from more static operations
around protection of civilians site sites to patrolling
areas of anticipated return to increase confidence.
UNMISS is very mindful of its protection mandate.
Let me be absolutely clear — we will not push people
out of protection of civilians site sites against their
will. However, we will support those who want to leave
because not doing so means condemning them to a life
in a camp. Our actions will continue to be consistent
with international principles and humanitarian
non-governmental organization guidelines that returns
must be voluntary and dignified. The next three months
will be critical. After that time, the rainy season will
make land transport impossible in South Sudan, and
the window for planting crops will be lost, resulting in
another year’s delay.
People tell us that a key reason why they are
reluctant to return home is, of course, security. Sexual
violence continues to cause immense harm to women
and girls across the country, most recently in northern
Unity, where the concentration of forces from all sides
of the conflict has led to horrific incidents. The violence
must end and the perpetrators must be held to account.
Ending impunity is a core function of the Government
and a vital part of the reconciliation and peace process.
It is the mandated role of UNMISS to actively deter and
prevent as many of these horrific crimes as possible,
as well as to monitor and report publicly on violations
of human rights, particularly where sexual violence is
concerned, as we did two and a half weeks ago in Bentiu.
It is worth stating that we are also working with the
Governments to build the capacity of the justice system
to deal with these crimes. That includes operating a
4/23

08/03/2019

mobile court system whereby prosecutors and judges
are being flown to hotspots like Bentiu and Malakal to
hear the cases. It has led to several dozen perpetrators
being tried and jailed. At one session in Bentiu, for
example, our legal team reported back to me that 49
women queued up in the sun to give evidence in a
pre-trial meeting against offenders who were about to
be tried. Their desire for justice and to end impunity
is inspiring.
In another case, four young men accused of gang
raping a 15-year-old swaggered into the court, where
they encountered their victim and witnesses. Their faces
fell as they realized that the survivor of their brutality
had the courage to testify against them and had the faith
that justice would prevail. They were all convicted, and
they were all sentenced to between three and twelve
years. Those are small steps, but they are important
ones. This month, a United Nations-supported special
court will open in Juba with jurisdiction over crimes of
sexual and gender-based violence.
In conclusion, there are just over two months left
of the pre-transitional period, and progress has been
slow. There is still much to be done. All of us — the
parties and stakeholders, but most of all the regional
partners — must drive the implementation forward and
ensure that it is adequately resourced. The Government
needs to play its part and contribute financially.
The peace agreement is far from perfect, but it is
the one that we have in front of us today and we are not
going to get another chance at it. The cost of failure is
unthinkable, so while responsibility lies primarily with
the parties to the conflict, it is also beholden on us all
to ensure that we make the necessary moves forward
together to make the agreement a reality for the sake of
the people of South Sudan.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Shearer for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Jial.
Ms. Jial: It is a particular honour to be invited to
brief the Security Council on International Women’s
Day. I want to dedicate my remarks today to the women
all around the world who continue to fight for the rights
of women and girls and who work daily to restore peace
in their communities.
I speak to the Council today as the founder and
Executive Director of Hope Restoration South Sudan,
an organization that works for the protection of people
19-06505

08/03/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

with special needs and provides much-needed services
for women and girls who have suffered gender-based
violence. I also represent a broader community of
humanitarians in South Sudan and am a member of
the South Sudan Women’s Coalition, which was a
representative at the peace talks in 2015 and 2018.
I want to focus my remarks today on civil society
in South Sudan, particularly women-led organizations,
which I believe play a crucial role in building peace
and security in our country. The mass rape in Bentiu
last November was a symptom of a much deeper
problem affecting women and girls in South Sudan,
which suffers from some of the highest rates of genderbased violence in the world. It is in that context that
civil society and women-led organizations across
South Sudan work tirelessly to deliver some of the most
critical life-saving services. They respond to genderbased violence, protect people with special needs and
create women-friendly spaces that offer services like
psychosocial support and income-generating activities.
Because we employ local staff, we can operate in the
parts of the country that are hardest to reach. We work
throughout the rainy season. We stay and deliver to our
communities even when the fighting is going on around
us, and we will still be there when the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) has left.
However, we struggle to operate when we lack
the necessary resources to carry out our work and
to continue to provide these life-saving services
to our communities, which have suffered from
decades of conflict. In South Sudan today, there
is intense competition between international and
national non-governmental organizations (NGOs) for
humanitarian resources. The bulk of the funding goes
to United Nations agencies and international NGOs,
and the smallest portion to national NGOs. Within
national civil society, by far the smallest portion of
funding goes to women-led organizations. We cannot
build a strong and vibrant civil society in South Sudan
with those constraints, and without us our community’s
hopes for a lasting peace will fade.
In September 2018, my own organization, Hope
Restoration, received a grant from the South Sudan
Humanitarian Fund to open a woman- and girl-friendly
space in Leer, where we provided programmes for
survivors of gender-based violence. Within months
of opening, we were surprised by the number of
women who began visiting that space. As they started
building relationships of trust with our case workers

S/PV. 8480

and counsellors, many of them began to open up
about their own stories. We were even more surprised
when we found that nearly half of these women were
survivors of gender-based violence; some had suffered
multiple rapes.
We started providing medical and psychosocial
support services, which most of those women had never
had access to. For me, that was our goal — helping
our community heal. But then, in early 2019 we lost
our funding. One can imagine what it was like for our
staff to have to tell those women in Leer that the space
would close on 1 March, just six months after opening.
How does one tell someone who has been subjected to
horrific acts of violence that one can no longer help
them? It is very disheartening, but we cannot afford to
give up hope. We cannot because we know those women
depend on us to keep fighting for them.
I take heart that this year’s humanitarian
response plan has prioritized gender-based violence
programming. That should give local women-led
organizations, such as mine, more resources to provide
essential services. It is also encouraging that Mark
Lowcock, the Head of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, recently announced that he
will review the United Nations pooled funds to make
sure that more money is allocated to women-led local
organizations. That shows that more leaders across the
United Nations system value the work that we do — that
is, filling some of the biggest gaps in humanitarian
response and doing so with cost-effective programmes
that are making a real difference in our communities.
We are the best value operators in town.
So, what does that mean for the Security Council
as members consider next steps in South Sudan and the
renewal of the UNM1SS mandate?
First, it means including South Sudanese local
NGOs, especially women-led organizations, in the
UNMISS mandate. We are not there, and that needs to
change. There ought to be urgent recognition that we
cannot meet humanitarian needs, rebuild institutions
or craft a new Government without addressing the
deep-rooted gender inequality in South Sudanese
society. Women must be involved in discussions about
our country’s future. We have talented, determined,
visionary women in South Sudan. We are ready to fill
the 35 per cent quota in the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South

19-065055/23

S/PV.8480

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Sudan, but in order to do so we need the backing of the
international community and the Council.
The women and peace and security agenda is much
more than just getting women to the table. It is about
women being central players in all aspects of peace
and security, including at the onset of an emergency,
throughout the crisis and when rebuilding their
communities after conflict has ended. To truly make
a difference and address the scale and severity of the
needs across South Sudan, local NGOs, particularly
those led by women, need greater financial support
to operate on a more sustainable basis and to scale up
their work.
There are no short-cut fixes if one is serious about
ending violence against women and girls. We need
long-term funding, and we must be able to provide
services where they are most needed. As Council
members know, most people are not in protection of
civilians sites. We know that one-stop centres work in
South Sudan. We need to be able to offer more of them
to our communities. By that, I mean a place where a
woman can come for medical and legal services and to
develop skills so she can earn an income. Being able to
do all that in one place works.
In the UNMISS mandate renewal next week, I
urge the Security Council to make a direct request to
international donors and humanitarian actors to work
with South Sudanese local NGOs. We need the Mission
and international NGOs to support us in taking on
a much greater share of the humanitarian work. It is
critical that we scale up the work local NGOs do to help
resolve disputes in and between our own communities
in ways that do not involve violence, raiding each other’s
cattle or abducting women and girls. Those grassroots
efforts are critical if we are to build safer communities
and sustain peace across the country. To me, that kind
of partnership between local NGOs, donors, UNMISS
and the international humanitarian community has
been one of the critical missing pieces in South Sudan.
I think that partnership will work better if we have a
clearer understanding of the challenges women and
girls face and what their needs are.
That brings me to my final recommendation and
another key element missing in South Sudan — effective
engagement with South Sudanese communities. We
need not just to be consulted, but to be heard. When we
raise concerns about tensions mounting or the need for
services, we speak from an informed position of local
6/23

08/03/2019

knowledge. Those are our communities. We understand
the complexities of what troubles our communities,
whether they are historical tribal grievances or more
recent disputes over land or cattle, because we live there.
In conclusion, I want to leave one very clear message
with the Council. Within communities and local NGOs
in South Sudan, there is a wealth of untapped potential.
The key to unlocking that potential is finding better
ways to work together. As local NGOs, we stand ready
to work with the soon-to-be established transitional
Government of national unity, with UNMISS, with
the international humanitarian community and with
donors. I look forward to building those partnerships
and working with men and women across the country
to build a peaceful South Sudan.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Jial
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Shearer and Ms. Jial for their
briefings about the latest developments on the ground
in South Sudan.
Today, International Women’s Day, reminds us of a
key reason that our conversation on the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) is so important. We
must do everything possible to promote a better future
for the millions of women in South Sudan who face
staggering and unrelenting levels of sexual violence.
Five months into the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, the United States remains watchful of the
parties’ implementation and their commitment to finally
putting an end to the horrific violence and instability
that have plagued South Sudan for far too long.
On the one hand, we are encouraged by reports
that the ceasefire appears to be holding in most parts
of South Sudan. At the local level, formerly warring
military commanders have engaged with one another
in peace celebrations. We are similarly encouraged
to see a rapprochement between the Government and
opposition parties in communities throughout South
Sudan, including a variety of confidence-building
measures that have sparked increased economic activity.
On the other hand, the United States is deeply
concerned by the apparent lack of political commitment
19-06505

08/03/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

from all parties at the national level to fully implement
all tenants of the agreement. The assault, detention
and abuse of members of a Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism team by Government officials in December
is one glaring example that calls into question the
Government’s commitment to the peace process. Such
actions against individuals and institutions working
to assist in the implementation of the agreement
are appalling.
We are also alarmed by continuing violence by
all sides in the vicinity of Yei, which has led to mass
displacement, the killings of civilians and an urgent need
for humanitarian assistance. The violence represents a
flagrant breach of the cessation of hostilities agreement
and the Revitalized Agreement. Those military actions
must stop now. The United States is disturbed by
reports that the Government of South Sudan continues
to unlawfully recruit young people from military
service. That too must stop. Having seen previous peace
agreements in South Sudan fail to hold and the country
fall back into conflict and instability, the United States,
the rest of the Council and the South Sudanese people
all expect South Sudan’s leaders to demonstrate a clear
commitment to the implementation of the agreement in
words and in action.
One fundamental, yet powerful, step the
Government should take is to use its own resources
to support peace rather than war and corruption.
The Government should make use of its increased
oil revenues in a transparent manner to support the
agreement’s implementation and provide services
to South Sudan’s people, many of whom are on the
brink of famine yet again. Absent such transparency,
South Sudan’s leaders cannot expect the international
community to provide substantial financial support to
implement the peace agreement.
The commitment to the agreement is not solely a
matter of money. There are clear and immediate steps
that the Government and opposition parties can take to
underscore their commitment to the South Sudanese
people and the agreement. Those steps include full
adherence to the ceasefire, taking action against genderbased violence, ceasing the obstruction of ceasefire
monitors, permitting unhindered humanitarian access
and ending the inappropriate taxes and fees imposed
on aid workers, releasing all political prisoners,
establishing the Africa Union hybrid court and opening
up political space for peaceful dissent.

S/PV. 8480

As South Sudan saw during the 2016 outbreak
of violence, a peaceful and secure Juba is paramount
for any peace agreement to hold. To that end, the
Government must allow UNMISS to fulfil its mandate
to provide a secure environment in and around Juba and
other parts of South Sudan. The Government’s frequent
violations of the status-of-forces agreement through
unreasonable clearance processes and impromptu road
barricades cannot continue. The United States calls
on the Government to allow UNMISS to undertake its
roles and responsibilities in support of stability in Juba.
There is no bigger supporter of the people of South
Sudan than the United States. We want to see this
peace process lead to long-term stability and security
in the country. In 2018, the United States provided
$845 million for South Sudan, the vast majority of
it in support of the most vulnerable South Sudanese,
who have borne the terrible brunt of this conflict.
We have contributed more than $3.7 billion to South
Sudan since it gained independence in 2011, but as we
announced last year, our assistance is not infinite. Our
expected return on current and any future assistance is
that the Government and opposition parties will take
primary responsibility for the implementation of the
peace Agreement in South Sudan and for the welfare
of its people. This will help restore the confidence
of the South Sudanese people and the international
community in the future of South Sudan.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I would first like to congratulate you
personally, Madam President, and all the women
staff members of the United Nations Secretariat and
Permanent Missions accredited to the United Nations,
on International Women’s Day. It is in honour of this
wonderful holiday that my colleagues have brought you
flowers, in keeping with Russian tradition.
It is highly symbolic that this holiday is said to have
been born here in New York when women came out to
protest and demand equality with men on 8 March 1857.
For the holiday itself, we probably have to thank our
German colleagues and my friend Christoph Heusgen
personally, whose compatriot Clara Zetkin proposed in
1910 to observe this holiday. From way back we have
always devoted a great deal of attention and care to
women, and we first celebrated this holiday in 1913,
while after the October Revolution of 1917 our country
became a true leader of the women’s movement. We
declared 8 March a holiday at the national level in 1965,
after which the countries of the Soviet Union continued

19-065057/23

S/PV.8480

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

their efforts to improve the situation of women, and in
1975, as we know, International Women’s Day began to
be observed at the United Nations.
Since then much has been done both in Russia
and all over the world to achieve gender equality and
expand women’s rights and opportunities. Of course, a
great deal remains to be done. Russia will continue its
efforts to improve the situation of women and ensure
that women’s rights and opportunities are equal to
men’s. At the same time, however, we value women for
their femininity and tenderness, and we do not try to
compete with them in those areas. Russian society is
traditionally built on the harmony of the sexes and their
mutual complementarity.
But I should return to the subject of today’s
meeting. We would like to thank David Shearer, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Ms. Angelina Jial, whom I also wish to congratulate on
International Women’s Day, for their briefings on the
situation in South Sudan and the progress of the peace
process there.
Looking back on the past year, we believe that its
most important event was the signing of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan. It is important that the
South Sudanese parties have shown a willingness to
compromise and a desire to settle their disputes. We
welcome the significant progress that we are seeing in
the implementation of the agreements that have been
reached, and in this connection we note the formation
and launch of the structures and mechanisms provided
for in the Agreement. We are pleased that since the
signing of the Revitalized Agreement there has been
a significant drop in the level of violence as well as in
the number of cases of human rights violations in South
Sudan. A growing number of refugees and internally
displaced persons have expressed the wish to return to
their permanent homes. We believe that all of this is
related to the implementation of confidence-building
measures and interactions among the opposing parties
on the ground. It is significant that thanks to the security
conditions established by the authorities, opposition
politicians are already returning to the capital and
moving around freely. We also note opposition leader
Riek Machar’s expressed intention to return to Juba in
the near future.
We join in the appeal to the South Sudanese parties
to finally formalize the arrangements on security issues
8/23

08/03/2019

and complete the process of amending the Constitution.
We believe that only full and universal compliance by
the parties with the commitments they have undertaken
will make it possible to enhance mutual trust and
prevent any repetition of the mistakes made in the past
during the South Sudan settlement.
We would like to once again pay tribute to the
countries of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development for their coordination of the mediation
efforts, in which they initiated and assured the
productive negotiation process held in Khartoum
between June and August, as well as the signing of
documents vital to the peace process. We greatly value
the personal contribution of President Omer Al-Bashir
of the Sudan to the achievement of the peace Agreement.
We note that the regional stakeholders have continued
to maintain their united approach to the settlement in
South Sudan, which is extremely important for the
future of the peace process.
We do not share the view of a number of our
colleagues, who assert that the visible progress in the
settlement has been partly enabled by the increase in
sanctions pressure on the Republic of South Sudan and
the imposition of an arms embargo. The Council should
not take credit for the success of the regional mediators,
who, by the way, were against the imposition of
additional sanctions on the parties in South Sudan. We
urge everyone to face up to the truth, which is that it is
actually the arms embargo that has prevented regional
organizations from providing a flexible response with
the help of their own initiatives in the area of security.
We welcome the desire of the Agreement’s
guarantors to help to achieve the peace accords through
the representation of national contingents from the
Sudan, Uganda, Djibouti and Somalia in the Regional
Protection Force. We see this as a practical realization
of the principle of African solutions to African
problems, and an example of the possibility of effective
cooperation between the United Nations, its Security
Council and regional organizations. We are ready to
consider substantive proposals concerning the Regional
Protection Force after the South Sudanese parties have
reached concrete agreements on security issues. The
Russian delegation supports extending the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, and we are
ready to work constructively on the text of the relevant
draft resolution.
19-06505

08/03/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Like my colleagues, I too
will start by taking note of International Women’s Day.
I am grateful to my Russian colleague for mentioning
Clara Zetkin, who originated the movement.
I think it is very timely that we are discussing the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and
the situation in South Sudan today, because the situation
of women there remains a nightmare. Our view on the
role of women is not limited merely to femininity and
tenderness, but also includes a focus on leadership,
equal rights and protection. The Chancellor of Germany
is a woman, as are our Defence and Justice Ministers.
Perhaps one day Clara Zetkin will be successful in
Russia, and it will have a woman President too.
To come back to the very serious issue of the
shocking level of sexual and gender-based violence in
South Sudan. In just one instance, in Bentiu, there were
a reported 134 cases of rape. What we heard today, of
course, is very positive, with 49 women standing their
ground and deciding to testify. I think it is a very good
sign that there was accountability and that results were
achieved. Of course, that is only a part of it. We must
continue our efforts and much more must be done.
Germany and Peru, with the participation of the United
Kingdom, co-chaired last week the first meeting of
the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security held on the situation in South Sudan. It was an
important sign from the Security Council because it is
an Informal Expert Group of the Council.
Let me repeat what I think are important elements.
With regard to accountability, the mobile court
initiative is very good but more has to be done. The
peace agreement calls for the establishment of the
hybrid court for South Sudan. With regard to the issue of
participation, I totally agree with the remarks made by
Ms. Angelina Jial, who spoke earlier on behalf of civil
society. The participation of women is important — not
only participation in which they merely sit at the table
but one that ensures they are listened to and that their
advice is heard. It is not enough that they have a chance
to participate. They should be part of the process.
The peace agreement sets the quota for women’s
representation at 35 per cent and that has not been
achieved. I think that we should do everything possible
to ensure stronger women’s participation. I wonder why
the percentage is only 35. Women make up 50 per cent
of the population in South Sudan and therefore 50 per
cent of those in Government and other groups should
be women.

S/PV. 8480

With regard the UNMISS mandate, I think that the
protection of civilians needs to be at the centre. A total
of 1.8 million people or more have had to flee. It is the
third largest group of refugees after those from Syria
and Afghanistan. They need to be protected. UNMISS
should also focus on protecting women from sexual and
gender-based violence.
I would like to pay tribute to Special Representative
Shearer and his work, engagement and dedication and
to all peacekeepers. We believe that they need to stay.
The mandate should follow the recommendations of
the Secretary-General. The mandate is being respected
thus far. The freedom of movement of UNMISS is
guaranteed. With respect to Mr. Shearer’s remarks about
support and the increased participation of UNMISS in
the peace process, Germany has contributed $5 million
to the trust fund that has been set up and we ask
delegations around the table to contribute to it.
I said that the protection of civilians is important.
I find it very encouraging that there is now a drive to
motivate civilians to leave the protection of civilians
sites. Mr. Shearer is absolutely right. The future is not
in protection of civilians sites. Refugees must return in
a safe, voluntary, well-informed and dignified manner.
The support UNMISS provides in order to give them a
chance to see where they must go is exemplary. Such
support should also be provided in Myanmar. It should
be continued as a main task performed by UNMISS.
With respect to the implementation of the peace
agreement, I can only echo what our American
colleague, Mr. Cohen, just said pertaining to the fact
that the commitment to the peace agreement has to
be very strong. It must be Government-owned. The
Government must also allocate funds in its budget
to implement the agreement. It must also uphold the
ceasefire and establish the hybrid court. With regard
to the remarks made by our Russian colleague, I think
it is important that the opposition is now in Juba,
although Riek Machar is still not there. I believe that
the strongest leader of the opposition and counterpart
to the President must be present in Juba.
Last but not least, I would also like to echo what
my American colleague said with regard to children in
conflict situations. Some have been rescued from the
militias, but we hear now that some of them have again
been recruited. That must be stopped. We must prevent
children from being involved in armed conflict.

19-065059/23

S/PV.8480

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Ms. Philips (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Shearer,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
South Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, and Ms. Jial for their briefings.
Today, on International Women’s Day, I would like
to focus on the devastating impact that the conflict in
South Sudan has had on women and girls. In five years
of fighting, the conflict has claimed nearly 400,000
lives and driven 4.3 million people from their homes
and 1.4 million to the edge of famine. As we have heard
from Ms. Jial, it is often women and girls who have
borne the brunt of the violence. Women, including
those in their sixties, and girls as young as eight have
been subjected to brutal acts of rape and sexual assault.
Yet, despite the depth of the horror, time and again
perpetrators are not held to account. That impunity
drives the cycle of violence.
Despite the signing in September of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan and the welcome reduction in
political violence, there has been a concerning uptick
in intercommunal violence and sexual violence. We are
particularly concerned about the recent United Nations
reports warning of the normalization and persistence
of conflict-related sexual violence perpetrated by
fighters on all sides, including armed militia groups
that have been mobilized and used by the parties in
recent offensives and frequently, directly or indirectly,
encouraged by commanders.
Despite calls for the Government of South Sudan to
take action to identify those responsible and hold them
to account, that has not happened. Instead, in some
instances, the organizations that provide support to the
victims have come under attack by the Government.
We cannot accept such brutal acts committed against
mothers, sisters and daughters. We cannot allow
impunity to persist.
On this day above all, and on each and every day, in
order to support lasting peace, we call for an end to the
pernicious use of sexual violence and to the culture of
impunity in South Sudan. We call on the Government
to uphold its responsibility to protect civilians and to
thoroughly investigate all instances of sexual violence
and bring those responsible for those crimes to justice.
We must all support organizations to help survivors, as
Ms. Jial has suggested, and continue to exert pressure
for accountability whether through national courts, the
hybrid court for South Sudan or international sanctions.
10/23

08/03/2019

But I do not want to focus just on the disproportionate
impact of the conflict on women and girls. It is also
important to focus on the crucial role women have
to play in delivering sustainable peace. The United
Kingdom has consistently pressed for the greater
inclusion of women in political and peace processes,
and we welcome the contributions of brave civil society
actors, including those present today. We welcome the
commitments made in the September peace agreement
to at least 35 per cent executive representation, but
that has not yet translated into action and we call on
the parties to deliver on their promises, not for some
abstract concept of quotas, but because we know
that when women meaningfully participate in peace
processes, the resulting agreement is more likely to last.
We are grateful that Ms. Jial has been able to join
us today. Civil society has played a vital role in the
peace process by representing the views and voices of
the people of South Sudan, and we support her call for
greater engagement with South Sudanese communities.
We are therefore concerned that the space for civil
society continues to shrink and we encourage all
parties to engage in open dialogue with civil society
organizations, particularly those representing women.
Finally, it is important to register that the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2019/191) is the last 90-day
report before the May transition date envisage in the
September peace agreement. We welcome the progress
made to date and reductions in overall violence, as
set out by Special Representative Shearer. The United
Kingdom remains committed to supporting those
working for peace, but like the Special Representative
we are concerned about the lack of progress on some
of the most difficult issues, alongside increases in
intercommunal and sexual violence.
Conflict is the main driver of South Sudan’s manmade humanitarian and protection crisis. Peace is the
only solution. It is vital that the Security Council, the
region and the parties to the conflict do not allow this
loss of momentum to persist and to destroy the hope of
progress that September’s agreement brought. We urge
all parties to bring renewed momentum to ensuring that
the deal is implemented in full. We must work together
or risk failing to deliver a future free of violence for the
people, including the women and girls of South Sudan.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I extend my
congratulations on the commemoration of International
19-06505

08/03/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Women’s Day, a day on which we celebrate the progress
made and raise awareness on the work that lies ahead in
order to achieve gender equality.
Returning to the theme at hand, we wish to thank
Ms. Angelina Nyajima Simon Jial and Mr. David
Shearer for their important briefings on the situation in
South Sudan.
Since the signing of the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan last year, some progress has been made in the
situation in South Sudan. For example, the number of
victims of political violence has decreased, opposition
political leaders can move freely in Juba and can
participate in the peace process and some displaced
persons have returned to their places of origin.
Nevertheless, that modest progress is fragile and
easily reversible. In this precarious environment, threats
against civilians and the humanitarian crisis persist.
Sexual violence continues to rise, intercommunal
conflicts linger and humanitarian personnel are still
being blocked access. Humanitarian personnel must
be able to move freely without restriction in those
territories. The Government of South Sudan must
also live up to its responsibility to protect, including
through the full implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement. More substantive progress is critical. The
signatory parties must resolve their differences and put
in place measures to reach a timely political solution
to the crisis. Regional and international stakeholders
must focus on and fully support the process to resolve
the conflict and enable the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) to play a supporting role.
In addition to the political crisis, we are concerned
about civilian vulnerability and the grim reports of
human rights violations and sexual violence. It is
unthinkable that in a period of 10 days, more than 100
women and girls were sexually assaulted in Bentiu, and
that the prevalence of such acts in 2018 was significantly
higher than in 2017. Such violations, kidnappings and
other sexual crimes are a constant occurrence in this
conflict. It is alarming that those instances of abuse
are not investigated, persecuted or sanctioned, and
that the Government’s efforts to eradicate such actions
are insufficient.
That leads us to wonder whether there is truly
the necessary will to put an end to this cruel reality.
Impunity should be the rare exception, not the norm. We
call on the Government of South Sudan and the parties

S/PV. 8480

to hold the perpetrators accountable, regardless of rank
or seniority, and submit them to justice in accordance
with the 2014 joint communiqué, and to honour their
commitment to the action plan of the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict.
In that regard, we welcome the initiative of the
South Sudan People’s Defence Forces to develop and
endorse their own action plan, to be launched next week.
We also commend the Government of South Sudan for
ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the Involvement of Children
in Armed Conflict, and we hope that the Government’s
action plan on this issue will be revised to address the
six serious violations committed against children.
We also welcome the setting up of mobile courts
and the upcoming launch of a special court in Juba
to hear cases on sexual and gender-based violence.
Nevertheless, it is vital to establish without delay the
independent hybrid court for South Sudan and the other
transitional justice mechanisms. It is also essential to
provide comprehensive services to survivors of sexual
violence and to ensure that conflict-related sexual
violence is addressed as a central element of the 2018
Revitalized Agreement.
It is the responsibility of UNMISS to support
those processes and to promote the political will to
implement them. It is crucial to invest in mediation and
peacebuilding efforts that are led by women and youth.
Even though the Revitalized Agreement includes
important provisions on women and peace and security,
including the requirement of a minimum composition
of 35 per cent women in important decision-making
bodies, only one of the mechanisms and committees
have done so, while the Joint Transitional Security
Committee and the Joint Defence Board do not have
a single female member. The quota provisions are
not optional. We therefore call upon the parties to the
agreement to follow through on that commitment.
This crisis has destroyed the living conditions of
the people and forced more than 4.2 million people
to leave their homes. The number of people in need
of humanitarian assistance in 2019 is 7 million, half
of whom are suffering from severe food insecurity.
Given those circumstances and as we prepare to renew
the UNMISS mandate, we need the political will
and leadership to face these challenges. It is time to
redouble our efforts in South Sudan. The failure of the

19-0650511/23

S/PV.8480

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

peace agreement is unthinkable. Even though it is not
a perfect tool, it is what we have available to ensure
sustainable peace. As Mr. Shearer said, this is plan A.
There is no plan B.
Ms. Bustamante (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Madam President, for convening this
meeting and David Shearer and Angelina Jial for their
important briefings.
A few months from the end of the transition period,
we are gratified to know that the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan remains in force and that political violence
in that country has decreased.
We recognize the expressions of mutual trust
between the Government and the different opposition
parties. The various meetings held in the territory of
South Sudan are undoubtedly an important step in the
peace process. We regret, however, that there has only
been modest progress in its implementation. Concrete
progress on substantive issues is needed to achieve
sustainable peace in South Sudan.
A few months ago, the Secretary-General
called on the leaders of South Sudan to achieve two
objectives — the establishment of transitional security
arrangements and the formation of a revitalized
Transitional Government of National Unity — as
priorities in the period leading up to the transition. We
express our deep concern that neither of those basic
objectives have been met.
We urge the parties to implement those
commitments in a timely manner. There are still some
key outstanding issues, such as the establishment of
the Independent Boundary Commission, the adoption
of a draft law on constitutional reform that would
incorporate the Agreement into the Transitional
Constitution and the adoption of the governance system
for the transitional Government.

08/03/2019

in neighbouring countries are proof of the magnitude
of the situation. Added to that are the obstacles
impeding the work of humanitarian workers and the
violence perpetrated against them and their property,
which prevents aid from reaching the most vulnerable.
We hope that the parties will be able to guarantee a
safer environment.
We must also strongly condemn the continuing
violations of human rights, in particular the rampant
sexual violence in South Sudan and especially against
women and girls. We call on the Government and all
parties to fulfil their commitments to punish those
responsible for crimes of atrocity. The incidents
documented in Bentiu a few months ago are a warning
of the urgency of implementing transitional security
arrangements as soon as possible.
In that regard, we welcome the training provided
by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan to senior
commanders of the South Sudanese forces to raise
awareness of conflict-related sexual violence, which
we hope will be repeated on a regular basis. We believe
that more effective and preventive support could be
provided by the Mission through a close relationship
with women-led non-governmental organizations
working on the ground with communities.
Today, on International Women’s Day, we reiterate
our desire that women, rather becoming victims,
become strong leaders in the process of implementing
the peace Agreement. The United Nations, together
with the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the guarantors
of the Agreement, must ensure the fulfilment of all the
commitments of the Agreement, including the 35 per
cent quota allocated to the representation of women at
all levels and in all Government institutions in which
political decisions are made.

Meanwhile, tensions continue in various parts of
the country. We regret that intercommunal violence
and clashes between Government forces and factions
that did not sign the Agreement continue to affect the
civilian population. We reiterate that true peace in
South Sudan will be possible only through political will
and dialogue among all parties.

Moreover, we welcome the positive impact that the
peace Agreement has had on the return of displaced
persons. We stress, however, the importance of ensuring
that such return and resettlement takes place gradually,
in a voluntary, dignified and safe manner and on the
basis of informed decisions, while also taking into
account the dynamics of each civilian protection centre
and complying with international human rights norms
and standards.

We express our deep concern over the grave
humanitarian situation. The 1.87 million internally
displaced persons and 2.27 million displaced persons

I will conclude by highlighting the work and
efforts of IGAD and the African Union. We reiterate
the importance of maintaining the unity of the Council

12/23

19-06505

08/03/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

in the political support and follow-up required to make
further progress in the South Sudan peace process, as
well as the importance of working in close coordination
with the African Union and IGAD.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Shearer,
for his briefing and exceptional work under difficult
conditions. I would also like to warmly thank Ms. Jial
for her touching remarks.
Today, I would like to address three aspects of
the situation in the South Sudan — the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan and its implementation; the
security and humanitarian situation; and the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
Since the last renewal of the mandate in March 2018,
the political landscape and conflict in South Sudan
have changed dramatically. In particular, Belgium
congratulates the parties and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) on their role in the
signing of the agreement in September 2018. Progress
has been made on the ground since then, including the
reduction of large-scale political violence.
However, problems remain in the implementation
of the agreement, including delays in the approval of
security provisions. It is essential that the parties agree
on a joint vision of the future of the security sector
in order to avoid further large-scale violence. The
success of that process will depend on the meaningful
participation of women in all areas of the peace process,
especially in the committees established in accordance
with the peace agreement. Belgium would like to
emphasize to all parties to the conflict, signatories and
non-signatories alike, that the agreement represents
a window of opportunity to achieve lasting peace in
the country.
We have been alerted by the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2019/191) that armed groups continue to target
civilians and that a disproportionate humanitarian
crisis is affecting the entire country, with 1 in 3 South
Sudanese becoming displaced. Although political
violence has been reduced, intercommunal violence has
intensified in recent months and more than 500 people
have lost their lives in that type of violence since the
beginning of the year. A better understanding of the
root causes of intercommunal violence is essential in
order to find a way to address them more effectively.

S/PV. 8480

Women and girls in South Sudan are not yet
reaping the dividends of peace, as Ms. Jial mentioned.
On the contrary, sexual violence against women has
even increased since last year. No lasting solution to the
conflict in South Sudan can be found without urgently
and effectively addressing such violence, which targets
mainly women and girls but men and boys as well.
The terrible mass rapes committed in Bentiu at the
end of 2018 are a sad example of such violence. They
revealed gaps in the detection, prevention and response
to incidents of sexual violence. In a horrific way, an
additional nine women and girls were subjected to gang
rape in a separate incident near Bentiu a few weeks
ago. The need for justice for those women is real and
we encourage UNMISS as well as the international
community to support the fight against impunity for
those acts by all possible means.
In a few days’ time, we will gather around this
table to adopt a draft resolution on the renewal of the
mandate of UNMISS. The protection of civilians must
remain the priority task of UNMISS and must be a
priority in all decisions relating to the use of resources
by the Mission. The reconfiguration of the civilian
protection sites, which others have alluded to, will be
possible only under the following conditions.
First, the conditions must be truly favourable in
the areas of return. Secondly, a long-term strategy
must be put in place that defines sustainable solutions
for all displaced persons, including refugees. Thirdly,
displaced persons should not be allowed to return to
their village or town of origin unless their relocation
is voluntary, well-informed, safe and dignified.
Fourthly, efforts towards returns must be supported
by gender-sensitive planning in cooperation with
humanitarian actors.
UNMISS must continue to provide protection and
security at the civilian protection sites until those four
conditions are met. We would also like to see UNMISS
increase its off-site patrols. In addition to providing
physical protection, we encourage UNMISS to make use
as well of the full range of unarmed civilian protection
mechanisms, including community engagement,
local mediation, community policing, human rights
monitoring and information analysis.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank our
briefers today, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral David Shearer and Ms. Angelina Nyajima

19-0650513/23

S/PV.8480

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Simon Jial, for the information they shared with us in
their briefings.
The signing of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan
represented a significant milestone towards achieving
peace in South Sudan. Although we welcome the steps
taken towards the implementation of the agreement
in recent months, we remain concerned that several
fundamental provisions of its, such as establishing
transitional security arrangements and concluding the
work of the Independent Boundaries Commission, have
yet to be implemented, while the timelines set by the
agreement are not being adhered to. At the same time,
we take it as a good sign that the permanent ceasefire
has been largely respected throughout South Sudan
and that the parties to the agreement have continued
confidence-building measures. We strongly call on all
non-signatory actors to join the peace process.
While we welcome the overall improvement in the
security situation, we remain deeply concerned about
the increased levels of intercommunal violence and
the persisting tensions. The primary issue of grave
concern is sexual violence against women and girls in
South Sudan. We are appalled by the heinous attacks
in and around Bentiu and condemn in the strongest
terms the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war by
the parties to the conflict in South Sudan. We are also
deeply troubled by the latest report of the Commission
on Human Rights in South Sudan (A/HRC/40/69) and
its findings that continuing violence and human rights
violations in the country, including rape and sexual
violence, may amount to war crimes.
Allow me to repeat emphatically — violence
against women and girls in South Sudan must end.
There must be accountability for gross violations of
human rights and serious violations of international
humanitarian law. We join the Secretary-General in his
call on the Government to spare no effort in bringing
the perpetrators to justice and fulfilling its obligations
with regard to the protection of civilians.
We are convinced that there will be no durable
peace without inclusiveness. We call on South
Sudanese political actors to put into practice the
provisions of the peace agreement regarding women’s
representation in the pre-transitional, transitional and
other decision-making bodies and institutions. We
believe that the participation of women in the political
process in South Sudan is indispensable. We also see
14/23

08/03/2019

a need for the genuine inclusion of young people and
South Sudanese civil society in the peace process. It
is our strong belief that it is only by ensuring inclusive
implementation that the peace agreement will stand a
chance of being sustainable.
Regional engagement is another important factor
that is crucial to the sustainability of peace in South
Sudan. We have commended the involvement of
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
its member States in brokering the peace agreement,
and we continue to believe that the region’s role in
ensuring the implementation of the agreement cannot
be overestimated. However, there is still a long road
ahead for South Sudan. In order to maintain the positive
momentum it is vital to ensure sustained regional
engagement in the monitoring progress and to hold the
parties to the agreement accountable.
The dire humanitarian situation in South Sudan
requires our full attention. The scale of the famine in
South Sudan is enormous as a result of the destruction
of plants and seeds in previous years. If humanitarian
aid is not delivered, many children and other vulnerable
people will face the threat of starvation. That matter
should be treated with the utmost importance, not only
by the international community but also by all parties
to the agreement — above all by the Government of
South Sudan.
On the eve of the renewal of the mandate of United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), allow me
to briefly agree with the Secretary-General that the
current mandate of the Mission remains valid and that
it should be amended to allow UNMISS to support the
peace process in a flexible manner.
I would like to conclude by thanking UNMISS for
its tireless efforts in ensuring the protection of civilians
and a conducive environment for humanitarian actors
to deliver assistance, as well as by thanking the Special
Representative once again.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): South Sudan today is
better than South Sudan at the end of 2018.
We would like to express our appreciation to you,
Madam President, for convening and presiding over
today’s meeting. We would like to thank your great
country for allowing you to be our boss on International
Women’s Day. It is a great tribute to France.
We would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General David Shearer for his
19-06505

08/03/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

comprehensive briefing and for all the efforts of United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) on the
ground. We ask Mr. Shearer to convey our greetings
and appreciation to all the women serving in UNMISS
for the service that they are providing to the South
Sudanese people in ensuring peace in the Sudan. We
value the service of the women of UNMISS and all
those serving in the United Nations in all the regions of
the world in different circumstances.
We thank Ms. Angelina Nyajima Simon Jial,
Founder and Executive Director of Hope Restoration
South Sudan, for her enlightened contribution. We
also ask her to convey our thanks to the thousands of
ordinary women in grass-roots organizations for their
tireless efforts and contributions to make South Sudan
safer for everyone.
I would also like to welcome my colleague and
friend the Permanent Representative of South Sudan to
the Council. I look forward to his statement later on,
in amity.
South Africa pays tribute to the sustained role
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) in the Sudanese peace process. The leaders of
that region have done everything possible to bring about
the current improved environment in South Sudan. As
Mr. Shearer said earlier, political parties are moving
freely throughout South Sudan, visiting communities,
talking to their supporters and familiarizing themselves
with the aspirations of the South Sudanese people. As
he also said earlier, the South Sudanese people are
gathering peacefully across communities in the country
to dialogue about the peace in the Sudan that they want.
We are beginning to see the steady return of internally
displaced persons and refugees. The journey to go home
has begun. The role of the Council is to work to ensure
that that journey continues and the Sudanese return to
their land to live a normal life. The Council needs to
harness those positive developments and encourage the
IGAD leaders to continue their efforts to ensure that
the peace process in South Sudan is irreversible. The
Council should continue to support David Shearer and
his team in continuing their good work and to tackle
the outstanding issues that he talked about. There is
a base. I think that they can now move to deal with
those issues.
The Council should address the issues highlighted
by our sister Ms. Angelina Jial, who said that we need
to take into account the local and grass-roots concerns,

S/PV. 8480

participation and resources in the peace process in
South Sudan. She also said that grass-roots efforts had
the capacity to anchor the peace process solidly around
and across communities and clans in South Sudan. For
our part, South Africa thinks that the Council should
take to heart what the grass roots can do. That is a very
compelling argument by Ms. Jial on behalf of the grassroots communities in South Sudan.
South Africa welcomes the signing of the final
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan by the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement/Army-In Government, the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement/Army-In Opposition,
the Former Detainees and the South Sudan Opposition
Alliance in September last year. We recognize the
importance of the Revitalized Agreement as a positive
step towards creating a conducive environment for
engaging in the constructive dialogue and democratic
processes necessary for working towards sustainable
peace and development in South Sudan.
My delegation welcomes the shuttle diplomacy
and efforts undertaken by the President of Eritrea,
Isaias Afwerki, and the Prime Minister of Ethiopia,
Abiy Ahmed, recently in trying to provide support and
lifeblood in order to maintain the momentum of the
implementation of the peace agreement in South Sudan.
It seems that the discussions with President Salva Kiir
were very positive.
The visit by the two leaders was very important,
as it highlighted the leadership undertaken by African
Leaders in making peace in a very volatile region
through African solutions and engagement. It is our
hope that the rapprochement between Ethiopia and
Eritrea will permeate through the region and move the
peace processes towards resolution.
In that regard, we encourage the Government
of South Sudan, my brother, and other parties to do
everything in their power to complete the establishment
of the mechanisms and committees provided for in the
Agreement, particularly during the pre-transitional
period. The return of Vice-President Riek Machar to
South Sudan before May is crucial to ensuring the
implementation of the Agreement.
For our part, South Africa will continue to play
a key role in supporting the peace process in South
Sudan through the mediation efforts of President
Ramaphosa as Chair of the African Union (AU)
High-level Ad Hoc Committee for South Sudan and

19-0650515/23

S/PV.8480

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Deputy President Mabuza as our President’s special
envoy to South Sudan. Such efforts have always been
geared towards complementing the African Union
and Intergovernmental Authority on Development
processes, not to replace them. South Africa notes with
concern that the peace landscape in South Sudan still
remains a little fragile in some areas given the lack of
resources in other areas.
On the humanitarian front, South Africa urges
international stakeholders to make meaningful
contributions to post-conflict reconstruction and
development, in particular as people are returning to
their communities. We further appeal for funds for the
repatriation and resettlement of internally displaced
people and other returnees.
South Africa further wishes to call on all
international partners to mobilize and make available
resources and relevant expertise in support of the
implementation of the Agreement. We support the
renewal of the UNMISS mandate in line with the
recommendation of the Secretary-General. We
maintain that the continued presence of the Mission
is critical to ensuring the impartial implementation of
the Revitalized Agreement and to provide support for
the protection of innocent civilians from the scourge of
armed conflict, as colleagues have said.
Lastly, on sexual violence, which impacts women
and girls, as many, including Ms, Angelina Jial, said,
we are encouraged by the work being done by the
Government and UNMISS through the special courts
and in building the capacity of the justice system to
combat sexual violence in all conflict areas. That
issue is particularly important today as we celebrate
International Women’s Day. It should also remind us
of the importance of ensuring the inclusivity of women
in peacemaking.
With the United Nations, working closely with the
AU, subregional organizations such as IGAD, partners
and local communities, change for the better in South
Sudan is possible. As I said at the beginning, South
Sudan today is better than South Sudan at the end of
2018. I would like to wish all women, all over the world,
a happy International Women’s Day.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): Today
is International Women’s Day. To all women colleagues
present and to all women peacekeepers serving in
missions around the world, I would like to offer my
holiday greeting and pay my high tribute.
16/23

08/03/2019

China thanks Mr. Shearer, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for South Sudan, for his
briefing. China also acknowledges the briefing by
Ms. Jial.
The Government of South Sudan and major
opposition groups signed the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan in September 2018, bringing the light of peace
to the South Sudanese people. China is pleased to note
that, over the past few months, the situation in South
Sudan has continued to improve. Signatories to the
peace agreement have been making efforts to implement
it. The ceasefire has been maintained in large parts of
South Sudan. The Government of South Sudan has
engaged in in-depth and extensive consultations with
the opposition on political and security arrangements
for their transitional period and has adopted a multitude
of measures to increase mutual trust. The South
Sudanese parties held a national dialogue in Wau
from 25 February to 2 March. Displaced persons and
refugees in some parts of the country have begun to
return home.
At the same time, the implementation of the peace
agreement still faces many difficulties. There have
been delays in some of the work stipulated in it. The
international community, in particular the Security
Council, should provide more assistance and continue
to help maintain the momentum of the peace process in
South Sudan and push all parties to work for the further
implementation of the agreement. China would like to
stress the following three points.
First, the South Sudanese parties bear the primary
responsibility for implementing the peace agreement.
The international community should, in the light of the
needs of the South Sudanese parties, actively provide
the necessary funding and technical support and respect
the leadership role of South Sudan. At the same time,
in monitoring the implementation of the agreement,
efforts should be made to bring into active play the role
of ceasefire and transitional security arrangements, the
monitoring and verification mechanisms and the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission.
Secondly, efforts should be made to actively
support regional and subregional organizations, such as
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, as well as the countries of the region,
and to continue to strengthen their good offices. The
priority should be on pushing the South Sudanese
19-06505

08/03/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

parties to reach consensus quickly on such key issues as
implementing the political and security arrangements,
as provided for in the peace agreement, and urging all
the relevant parties to sign the agreement at an early
date and take part in the political process.
Thirdly, efforts should be made to continue
to provide humanitarian assistance and economic
support to South Sudan and assist it in addressing its
food security, while placing priority on strengthening
imports, agriculture, energy facilities, infrastructure,
education and medical care, with a view to helping
the South Sudanese people to rebuild their homes and
resume their capacity for development.
China highly commends the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) for its important
contribution to maintaining peace and stability in
South Sudan. China supports the mandate renewal of
UNMISS as well as its focus on the priority work to
assist the South Sudanese parties in implementing the
peace agreement.
China has always supported peace and development
in South Sudan and has contributed more than
1,000 Chinese peacekeepers, including 25 women
peacekeepers, to UNMISS. Last month, China provided
South Sudan with 1,000 tons of rice in food assistance
and a batch of anti-malaria drugs. China will, as
always, support actively and participate constructively
in the peace process in South Sudan and will make our
contribution to South Sudan’s realization of a durable
peace and sustainable development.

S/PV. 8480

With regard to the peace process, my country once
again welcomes the signing, on 12 September 2018,
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and commends
the signatory parties for the measures taken to establish
and strengthen trust. Côte d’Ivoire urges them to make
a firm commitment to the success of the political
process.
This is an appropriate time to welcome the holding,
during the current pre-transition phase, of the various
meetings of the peace agreement’s implementation
organs, which were attended by several opposition
leaders. However, three months into the transitional
period, my country notes with concern the delays in
achieving several important goals planned for the
pre-transition phase.
My country therefore calls on stakeholders to
proceed expeditiously with the substantive issues
related to the implementation of the relevant provisions
of the agreement — the inclusion of the provisions
of the agreement in the Transitional Constitution,
the establishment of the Independent Boundaries
Commission, the formation of a transitional
Government and the establishment of transitional
security arrangements, as well as defence and security
sector reform.

Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): First of
all, my delegation would like to add its voice to those
of the speakers who preceded it in paying tribute to all
women on this day that is dedicated to them. The fight
for the full recognition of their rights is appropriate and
valid.

In addition, Côte d’Ivoire would like to acknowledge
the efforts of Mr. Ismail Wais, Special Envoy of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development for South
Sudan, to reach out to the non-signatory parties to the
peace agreement with respect to their participation in
the process. In that regard, my delegation welcomes
the aspiration of the South Sudan United Front/Army
to participate in the peace process and encourages the
signatory parties and the Government of South Sudan
to respond favourably to that request and to all other
similar requests.

Regarding the topic that brings us together, my
delegation would like to commend the briefers on the
quality of their briefings, namely, Mr. David Shearer,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
South Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS), and Ms. Angelina Nyajima
Simon Jial, Founder and Executive Director of Hope
Restoration South Sudan. Their briefings call for
comments on the peace process, the security situation,
the humanitarian issue and, finally, the implementation
of the UNMISS mandate.

With regard to the security situation, Côte d’Ivoire
welcomes the decline in the level of violence and the
overall respect for the cessation of hostilities agreement.
However, my country notes with regret the resurgence
of crime, community clashes and conflict-related sexual
violence. My delegation strongly condemns those acts,
which are encouraged by the presence of militias,
widespread impunity and the absence of transitional
security arrangements. Côte d’Ivoire therefore calls for
the urgent disarmament of ex-combatants, followed by
their social integration and reinsertion.

19-0650517/23

S/PV.8480

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Security sector reform is also an important measure
to bring about the unification of the belligerent forces
with a view to creating a disciplined army that conducts
itself in accordance with international standards. In
addition, since transitional justice bodies must also be
set up to fight impunity in the country, Côte d’Ivoire
reiterates its call for the diligent establishment of the
Hybrid Court of South Sudan and its operationalization.
On the humanitarian front, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes
the improvement of the general security conditions,
which has allowed the voluntary return of a large
number of internally displaced persons to their areas
of origin. Yet despite that encouraging development,
the estimated numbers of internally displaced persons
and refugees remain high, at 1.8 million and 2.2 million
persons, respectively. My country therefore urges the
South Sudanese authorities, with the help of United
Nations agencies and regional and international
partners, to create the necessary conditions for the
voluntary, sustainable, safe and dignified return of
those persons.
My delegation also remains concerned about the real
risk of famine and the health situation in South Sudan.
Since the beginning of the year, about 5 million people
have been considered food insecure. In addition, a
measles epidemic was recently confirmed in Mayom, in
former Unity state. In response, the Ministry of Health,
with the support of the World Health Organization, the
International Organization for Migration and the United
Nations Children’s Fund, launched a campaign to
vaccinate approximately 40,000 children. My country
also urges the authorities and armed groups to ensure
free and unhindered access for humanitarian workers
to vulnerable populations so that they can provide them
with the assistance they need.
With regard to the implementation of the UNMISS
mandate, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its support for this
United Nations force, which is essential in overcoming
the crisis and resolving the conflict in South Sudan. My
country would like to echo the Secretary-General’s call
for the renewal of the UNMISS mandate, but also for it
to be strengthened and made more flexible.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire, based on its recent
experience, calls on all parties to the conflict to
give priority to dialogue for the settlement of their
disputes. It also calls on the Government to foster
strong national ownership of the post-crisis process in
order to ensure its success. Furthermore, we urge the
18/23

08/03/2019

international community, including the United Nations,
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, to maintain its support for the
Government of South Sudan with a view to restoring
sustainable peace and stability in that country.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): In Spanish there is a saying that, no matter
how brave one is, one must still be courteous. I would
therefore like to add my voice to those of the previous
speakers by congratulating, at the outset, all the women
in world on this very special occasion, with a special
thought for the women of my country. I would like
to recall how important this day is, as it makes us
remember how important the women in our lives are.
Indeed, in my country, Equatorial Guinea, this is a
national holiday that is celebrated in acknowledgement
of the work that our sisters, wives, daughters and so
forth do.
Before I focus on the topic under discussion, I would
like to thank Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and Ms. Angelina Nyajima
Simon Jial, Founder of Hope Restoration South Sudan,
for their fruitful briefings. I would also like to welcome
the presence of my brother Mr. Akuei Bona Malwal,
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of South
Sudan to the United Nations.
The Government of Equatorial Guinea believes
that the signing of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, on 12 September 2018, was a significant step
forward on the path towards South Sudan’s return to
peace and stability. For that reason, on behalf of my
country, I congratulate the signatories on the spirit
of that agreement. Furthermore, we believe that the
formation of the Transitional Government of National
Unity has been an achievement for the peace process.
We therefore encourage the parties to redouble their
efforts to reach a general security agreement for the
cantonment and integration of security forces.
We understand that the overall situation in South
Sudan has improved, as has been acknowledged by the
Ambassador of South Africa. However, we would like
to remind the parties to the conflict that the time has
come to assume their responsibilities and demonstrate
the necessary political will for the full and timely
implementation of the peace agreement in its letter and
spirit, as it has been demonstrated that the only viable
way to resolve the situation in South Sudan is through a
19-06505

08/03/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

negotiated political solution among the parties. In that
regard, my country hopes that the confidence-building
measures that have begun to be put in place will help
silence the guns. I think that the phrase “silencing the
guns” should be familiar because of resolution 2457
(2019), which we recently adopted.
We regret the persistence of sporadic fighting
between the Government and opposition forces in
Central Equatoria, as well as among opposition groups.
We also condemn in the strongest terms all sexual
assaults against civilians. We urge the parties, above
all the Government, to spare no effort to bring to justice
all those responsible for those atrocities.
We welcome the improvement in the humanitarian
situation and encourage donors to continue to support
humanitarian agencies. Attacks against humanitarian
workers and the personnel of United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) are unacceptable. I therefore
urge all parties, in particular the Government, to
ensure a safer environment for humanitarian personnel,
who work tirelessly to provide assistance to the most
vulnerable civilians in South Sudan. At the same time,
we welcome the fact that some displaced people are
already beginning to return to their homes.
Equatorial Guinea congratulates the Government of
South Sudan and all the stakeholders for having put their
country’s overriding interests above personal ambition.
As the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
said, there is no plan B to the agreements in South
Sudan, so there can be no going back in the process that
has begun. Equatorial Guinea will always stand with
South Sudan in those efforts.
We support the renewal of the mandate of UNMISS
because we continue to believe that it is essential for the
country’s stability.
In conclusion, my Government thanks the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development for its
the mediation and commitment, as well as the Heads
of State and Government of Ethiopia, Kenya, the Sudan
and Uganda for their collective efforts to achieve
the signing of the Revitalized Agreement, without
forgetting the important contribution of the United
Nations and the African Union.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
welcome you, Madam President, as you preside over
this meeting which clearly has particular significance.
I believe the message is clear to all States of the

S/PV. 8480

world. I also would like to join others who preceded
me in congratulating women all over the world on
International Women’s Day. I would like as well to
thank the special representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Ms. Angelina Nyajima Simon Jial, founder
of Hope Restoration South Sudan, for their briefings. I
would like to address three basic issues.
First, with regard to the political developments,
we are pleased at the progress made by the parties to
the Revitalized Agreement for the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan. We hope that the parties to the
agreement will complete the pre-transitional process by
next May, as agreed and with the participation of all
peacemakers, including women, for whom we are today
celebrating the International Women’s Day. We hope to
ensure the continuous active participation of women, but
we should not be concerned only with the participation
of women on this occasion, but all stakeholders.
We welcome the return to Juba of various political
leaders who are parties to the agreement, as well as
the reunification efforts made by factions of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement. We look forward to
welcoming at our next meeting the joining of other
non-signatory parties to the Revitalized Agreement.
Secondly, the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), our meeting today
comes at a critical and sensitive time for UNMISS. As
the security situation continues to improve in Juba and
most parts of South Sudan, UNMISS has to continue
protecting civilians and supporting the political
process. Kuwait supports that trend and appreciates
the flexibility and cooperation of the United States
delegation during the ongoing negotiations on the draft
resolution to renew the Mission’s mandate.
We cannot but to thank once again South Sudan’s
neighbouring States, especially countries of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development that
have sought to achieve and support peace and want
to continue participating in the Regional Protection
Force. We welcome that participation as long as it is
within the standards that apply to any of the Mission’s
troop- and police-contributing countries and under its
unified command.
Thirdly, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
we welcome Mr. Shearer’s reference to returns from
protection-of-civilians sites. That is a positive and
encouraging indicator that gives hope for the continued
return of displaced persons and refugees in a safe,

19-0650519/23

S/PV.8480

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

dignified and voluntary manner, with the support of
the Mission and its partners and with the efforts of
Ms. Jial’s organization.
We condemn once again child recruitment and
sexual violence in conflict by any party, while stressing
again the need to achieve justice and support survivors
of such crimes. We are concerned at the continued
fighting in Central Equatoria. We hope that guarantees
will be forthcoming that will ensure the free movement
of the Mission, in keeping with the status-of-forces
agreement, thereby allowing it to fulfil its mandate.
Peace remains our only option. The current
Agreement represents an opportunity for South
Sudanese politicians to revive hopes in that young
country and to break the cycle of conflict and death.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Madam President, I, too,
should like to once again wish a happy International
Women’s Day to you and to our women Ambassadors
and Secretariat staff, as well as to all women around
the world.
I wish also to apologize on behalf of Vassily,
because I think that the Russian delegation forgot to
bring a bouquet to our dear Angelina; everyone but
her received flowers from that delegation. But she has
our flowers, and I think that Dmitry is also going to
send her flowers. I think that she deserves a bouquet
of tulips, not only because of International Women’s
Day but for the excellent work that she has done in this
regard, particularly through her organization’s work to
help the people of South Sudan. I also thank her for
her briefing.
I wish also to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General David Shearer for his important
briefing and to commend him for his tireless efforts
in ensuring the effective contribution of the United
Nations to peace and stability in South Sudan. I also
welcome my dear brother the Permanent Representative
of South Sudan.
My delegation is pleased to note that the South
Sudanese parties continue to make progress in
implementing the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. Most of the pre-transitional institutions are
in place and have commenced their work. The return
of senior opposition leaders to Juba to participate in
various meetings of those institutions is encouraging.
20/23

08/03/2019

Indonesia also draws reassurance from the
improvement in the security situation, as set out in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/191). The
permanent ceasefire has largely taken hold, and the
political violence is decreasing. This has been made
possible by a rapprochement between the parties,
facilitated by the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS).
I am happy to hear that returns of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) have also been reported across
the country, although many remain where they are, as
reported by the Special Representative. Nevertheless,
there are positive developments and trends, which
clearly reflects confidence in the Government of South
Sudan. We hope that many other IDPs will return, and
I think that this is an important fact that we also must
take into account.
My delegation is also cognizant of the many
challenges faced by our South Sudanese brothers and
sisters. In this regard, I wish to underline following
three points.
First, Indonesia agrees that the Revitalized
Agreement is the best and only option to ensure lasting
peace in South Sudan. We must make this work. I also
concur with what David mentioned, that there should
be no Plan B, only Plan A. The Council must therefore
work very hard to ensure that the momentum generated
by the signing of the Agreement does not dissipate,
especially as South Sudan is now more than over
halfway into the pre-transitional period.
There is still a great deal of work to be done,
including on transitional security arrangements, the
incorporation of the Agreement into the Transitional
Constitution, and the resolution of the issue of
boundaries and states. I was also glad to hear from
David that the Agreement is widely embraced by the
population. I think that this is an important factor that
we should work on.
My delegation takes note also of the reconstituted
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission’s
latest quarterly report, which found that funding and
technical expert support are major challenges in the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement. The need
for international support, including humanitarian and
development assistance, remains critical. We thank all
donors that have contributed. Hopefully, the expected
target of $1.5 billion will be reached, which will make it
19-06505

08/03/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8480

possible to help the more than 5 million people in need,
as noted in David’s briefing.

to convey to them our best wishes on International
Women’s Day.

We encourage the continued and proactive
engagement of the countries members of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the countries of the region, the African Union and
the United Nations in supporting the South Sudanese
peace process. And, of course, like others, we wish to
commend IGAD for its work.

Here I wish to highlight the importance of women
peacekeepers in community engagement. In our case,
we also have training on community-building and
community engagement. I think that this is an important
point that could also help with the development aspect
so as to benefit our South Sudanese brothers and sisters.

Secondly, as the peace process moves forward,
there must be commensurate positive developments
on the ground, where the dividends of peace are felt
by ordinary citizens. The presence and destabilizing
activities of non-signatory armed groups remain a
source of insecurity. My delegation is concerned at the
continued clashes involving such groups, including the
National Salvation Front, in Equatoria, and supports
continued outreach by the IGAD Special Envoy, whom
we support, to non-signatories to the Agreement.
As we celebrate International Women’s Day,
Indonesia is also deeply concerned at the widespread
sexual violence, particularly against women and girls.
It must be brought to an end. We call for further efforts
to strengthen the rule of law and accountability for
human rights violations. We call for the provision of
capacity-building and assistance, including in the
justice system. I think that the idea of having a mobile
court is quite innovative.
My delegation also devotes particular attention
to the needs of people who require humanitarian
assistance in South Sudan and stresses the need to
ensure its unhindered delivery.
Thirdly, Indonesia supports the renewal of
the mandate of UNMISS to include support for
the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement,
working in close cooperation with the South Sudanese
Government. We see a potential role for UNMISS in
the provision of good offices and technical expertise to
all parties, including the pre-transitional mechanisms.
My delegation wishes to see UNMISS further
explore the possibility of using community engagement
to accomplish its mandate, including enhancing its
ability to protect civilians. We have several Indonesian
military and police officers working on the ground
as part of the Mission, and we have women police
and peacekeepers on the ground. I would ask David

We also noted in the report of the Secretary-General
that UNMISS has been mitigating the violence against
civilians, which is commendable, and I believe that this
should continue.
I should like to close by commending the South
Sudanese Government for its perseverance and
statesmanship during this difficult time. I affirm once
again Indonesia’s long-standing support for peace
and stability in South Sudan, including through its
contribution to UNMISS.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.
I would like to start by thanking Special
Representative of the Secretary-General David Shearer
for his briefing, which is both encouraging and very
farsighted. I am also very pleased that we were able to
hear Ms. Angelina Jial, whose testimony from the field
and exceptional personal commitment are extremely
valuable. Her briefing in particular was very relevant
today, on International Women’s Day.
I also took note with interest of the historical
explanations provided by the Permanent Representative
of Russia on the subject of 8 March and his encouraging
comments on the efforts made by Russia in the area
of the empowerment of women and the promotion of
their rights. This is also an important national cause
in France.
The statements made by my colleagues were most
enlightening. My own will be limited and focused on
four priorities.
First, we should not lose the historic opportunity
offered by the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. As
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
made clear, South Sudan has experienced significant
developments since the signing of the Agreement. The
fighting has decreased, the ceasefire is generally being

19-0650521/23

S/PV.8480

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

respected, mutual trust among the parties is increasing
and their commitment is stronger than in 2015, and the
opposition is starting to return to Juba.
The Revitalized Agreement now represents
the only option for ending the conflict. France has
welcomed it since its signing and we continue to fully
support it. However, as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General eloquently said, much remains
to be done and the implementation of the Agreement’s
pre-transitional phase is lagging behind. But this historic
opportunity must not be missed. The more the parties
delay in addressing difficult issues, the more likely it is
that the process will run out of steam, especially as the
combatants on the ground become impatient.
There are three elements essential to speeding up
these efforts. First, the parties must focus on core issues
in the negotiations, particularly security arrangements
and the drawing of internal borders. Secondly, it is also
crucial to respect the quotas for women outlined in the
Agreement and to enable them to participate actively
and meaningfully in the peace process, at every level
and on every issue. We know that peace processes that
involve women are stronger, as the representative of
the United Kingdom pointed out just now. The Council
must also assess their success against that criterion.
Thirdly, the regional efforts aimed at convincing the
parties to make concessions must continue. The efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) remain crucial. The United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) has a role to play in supporting
those efforts, including, as Mr. Shearer suggested, by
providing expertise and advice and working in synergy
with and in support of IGAD’s efforts.
The second priority that I would like to underscore
is that the current level of violence, including sexual
violence, is unacceptable, and we must do everything we
can to end it. Despite the drop in the number of conflictrelated clashes, the intercommunal and sexual violence
has not diminished. In that regard, I want to remind
the Council that the Commission on Human Rights in
South Sudan mandated by the Human Rights Council
indicated in a very recent report (A/HRC/40/69) that
the nature and level of that violence could constitute
war crimes and crimes against humanity. We call for an
end to all forms of violence and for those responsible
to be brought to justice. The Special Representative
spoke about mobile courts, which we believe are very
useful, and we encourage him to continue to support
this kind of project. The too-long-awaited Hybrid
22/23

08/03/2019

Court for South Sudan should be established as soon
as possible with the support of the African Union. We
believe, lastly, that the Security Council should make
systematic use of sanctions to punish and deter those
who perpetrate sexual violence, especially as it is now
an autonomous criterion for the imposition of sanctions
and an effective deterrent.
Thirdly, we must intensify our efforts to meet the
people’s humanitarian needs as food security continues
to deteriorate. We must do everything possible to
meet the growing humanitarian needs and ensure
safe and unhindered humanitarian access throughout
the country. The reduction in the number of criminal
incidents is an encouraging development. We must
continue to stress the obligation to protect humanitarian
personnel and to reiterate that there is no alternative to
combating impunity.
Lastly, we should facilitate the return of displaced
persons, while taking all the necessary precautions. As
the Special Representative indicated, more and more
displaced people want to return home and the numbers
in the protection-of-civilians sites are beginning to
decline. That is obviously an encouraging development,
and we support his proposal to encourage UNMISS
to facilitate the return of the internally displaced, but
with precautions. We must ensure that people’s returns
are safe, well-informed, voluntary and dignified, and
that humanitarian actors and the displaced people
themselves are also closely involved in the process. In
that spirit, France encourages UNMISS to continue to
organize visits for displaced persons to their areas of
origin to enable them to decide in full understanding
whether it is safe for them to return.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): My delegation
congratulates you, Madam President, on your country’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of March. Our delegation will always
cooperate with you and with the Security Council
under your presidency. We thank the Secretary-General
(S/2019/191) for his most recent report on South Sudan.
I would also like to welcome Mr. David Shearer and to
thank him for his courageous presentation. And I thank
our sister Ms. Jial for her briefing.
19-06505

08/03/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I would like to take this opportunity to wish the
women of South Sudan, Africa and all around the globe
a happy and peaceful International Women’s Day. With
regard to the remarks by my friend the Ambassador of
Germany, one day we will reach 50 per cent, but 35 per
cent is better and far more progressive than much of
what is happening in many countries, including a
number of member States represented in this Chamber.
We will get there.
Since the signing of the Revitalized Agreement, the
overall situation in South Sudan on the security, peace
and economy fronts has improved noticeably. We are
seeing the effect of the confidence-building measures
between the signatories, which are a prerequisite for
implementing peace, in the return and presence of
many of the opposition leaders in Juba. Again with
regard to Mr. Heusgen’s comments, Riek Machar’s
absence from Juba still falls within the provisions of
the Peace Agreement. We have an eight-month period
that ends at the end of May. I think Mr. Shearer was the
last person to meet with Mr. Machar in Khartoum and
Mr. Machar assured him that he will be in Juba before
the end of May.
The peace implementation is progressing slowly
but surely. President Salva Kiir Mayardit, accompanied
by some of the opposition leaders who recently returned
to Juba, is currently touring greater Bahr El-Ghazal by
land, which is a sign that there is security. The national
dialogue regional conferences have started, and the first
concluded successfully in Wau just last week. The next
will be in Upper Nile in the next few days, and the final
national conference will be convened in the greater

S/PV. 8480

Equatoria region before the end of May. Refugees
are returning voluntarily in large numbers. Internally
displaced persons are leaving protection-of-civilians
sites in sizeable numbers. The economy is already
showing some early signs of recovery. Consumer goods
and commodities have become available, with prices
falling in Juba markets.
While these indications are good and positive
to announce, we cannot remain silent about the
challenges that continue to exist. We all know that
peace implementation is moving very slowly, due to
inadequate funding. Nevertheless, while we hope that
some in the international community will continue to
assist, the Government of the Republic of South Sudan
will carry on with the implementation process using
whatever means and resources are available to it.
In conclusion, the situation in South Sudan has
continued to improve since the signing of the Revitalized
Agreement, and the signatories are determined to
implement it in good faith. Accordingly, we urge the
Council, including those who are sceptical, to join with
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the African Union in convincing the few opposition
movements that opted out of signing the Agreement to
sign it and join the peace process in South Sudan.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

19-0650523/23
