THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR
tll

MEETING: 20 JULY 1977
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

.............................,

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , .

1

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning the
application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for admission to
membership in the United Nations (S/ 12367) , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agerida/2025)

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements of the Official Records

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

i

2025TH

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday,

20 July 1977, at 10.30 a.m.

PIesiden t: Mr. CHEN Chu (China).

(Mongo1ia), Mr. ReYeS (Philippines),Mr. Czarkowski(poland), Mr. Amerasinghe(Sri Lanka), Mr. Sibahi (Syrian
Arab Republic)and Mr. Mujezinovik ( y&os/avia) took the
P1aces
resewedfor themat the sideof the Council&amber.

fieserlr:
The representatives
of the following States:
Ber~iI~, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, U~lion of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
hited
States of America and Venezuela,

2. Tile PRESIDENT (translationfrom Chinese);1~1
addition, 1 have receiveda letter from the respresentative
of
Burundi in which he requeststo be invited to participatein
the discussionof the question011 the agenda.Therefore,in
accordancewith the provisionsof Article 31 of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisionalrulesof procedure,aswe11
as
with the usualpractice of the Council, 1 propose
to invite
him to participate in the discussionwithout the right to
vote.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2025)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam for admission to membership
in the United Nations (S/12367)

3. In view of the limited numberof placesavailableat the
Council table, I invite the representativeof Burundito take
the place reservedfor him at the side of the Council
chamber,on the usualunderstandingthat he wilt be invited
to take a placeat the Council table wheneverhe wishesto
addressthe Council.

Tile rtleetitlg was calleu’ to order at Il. 0.5 a.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Simbananiye
(Burundi) took the placereservedfor lzirnat the sideof the
Councilchamber.

Tfcc agenda was adopted.
Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee
on the Admission of New
Members concernixlg the application of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam for admission to membership in
the United Nations (S/12367)

4. The PRESIDENT(translationfrom Chinese):The first
speakeris the representativeof Jamaica.I invite her to take
a placeat the Counciltable and to makeher statement.
5, Ms.MAIR (Jamaica):Mr. President,I shouldlike first to
expressthe gratitude of my delegationto you andthe other
membersof the Councilfor affording US the opportunity to
participate in the debateon the questionnow before the
Council. I should also like to take this opportunity to
express our very great satisfaction at seeingYou, the
representativeof a very greatnation, the People’sRepublic
of China, a country for which our Governmentandpeople
have the highest esteemand with which Weenjoy most
warm and friendly relations, presidingover the dcliberations of the Council asit dealswith the applicationof the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for membershipin the
United Nations.

1. The PRESIDENT
(translation from Chinese): In accordance with the decisions taken yesterday, I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Angola, Bulgaria, Chad, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, the German Democratic Republic,
Guinea, Guyana, Hungary, Indonesia, Iraq, Jamaica, Japan,
the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mali, Mongolia, the Philippines, Poland, Sri
Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yugoslavia to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bouayad-A&a
[Algeria], Mr. de Figueiredo (Angola), Mr. Yankov (Bulgaria), Mr. Dessande (Chad), Mr. Gdnzcz Anzardo (Cuba),
or.
Rossides (oprus),
Mr. Jachek (Czechoslovakia),
Mr. ~achnzann (Germall Democratic Republic), Mr. M. S.
Cajnara (Guinea), Mr. Joseph (Guyana), Mr. Hollai (Hungary), Mr. Anwar Smi (Indonesia), Mr. Kubba (Iraq),
Ms. Mair (Jamaica), Mr. Kanazawa (Japan), Mr. Boulom
(Lao People’s Detnocratic Republic), Mr, Rabetafika (Madagascar), Mr, Yeo (Malaysia), Mr. Kant6 (Mali), Mr. Nyamdo

6. our delegation
would alsolike to jOin thosewho have
taken this opportu&y to congratulatemost vfarmlv our
colleague.AmbassadorConsalvi,on his recentappointmeyt
to the high post of Minister for External Relationsof his
country, Venezuela, one of the Member States of our
region.
7. we have requested permissionto take Part in the
discussionon this important questionin order to reaffirm
1

the most unreserved support of my Government for the
admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to
membership in the United Nations.

she has expressed towards the Chinese Government and
people. We have similar respect for the people and
Government of Jamaica.

8. The international community is aware, and my own
delegation is convinced, that the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam meets fully all the requirements for adrhission to the
Organization. In addition, we are equally convinced that as
a full Member it will make a most valuable and constructive
contribution towards fulfilling the goals and ideals of the
Charter.

15. The next speaker is the represent&tive of Cuba. 1 invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
16. Mr. GOMEZ ANZARDO (Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish): Mr. President, first of all, I should like to say to
you and to the other members of the Council how grateful
my delegation is for being allowed to participate in this
debate on the application for admission of the fraternal
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to United Nations membership. At the same time, I wish to extend to you our
congratulations on your accession to the presidency of the
Council for this month. Your esteemed qualities augur well
for success in your endeavours.

9. Members of the Council will recall that for 30 years the
Vietnamese people waged a long, arduous self-sacrificing
struggle against the forces of colonialism and imperialism;
they fought for justice, for freedom and for their legitimate
right to self-determination
and independence. Theirs was
one of the most heroic struggles of modern times. It won
the admiration of peoples all over the world, and in
particular of those peoples which have also had to struggle
for their own national liberation and sovereignty. The ideals
for which they fought so courageously are among those
basic principles which are enshrjned in the Charter of the
United Nations.

17. I sincerely endorse the words of those representatives
who have hailed the well-deserved promotion to the
important post of Minister for External Relations of the
Government of the fraternal people of Venezuela of
Ambassador Sim6n Albert0 Consalvi, who will surely
continue in his new important post to bring to the United
Nations his vast experience and recognized talent.

10. After these many years of great suffering and tragic
losses, they have won the right to live in freedom and in
peace, and now the Government of Viet Nam is engaged in
the process of rebuilding its country after the ravages of
war, with determination and dedication and with respect
for those principles which this Organization is committed
to uphold. These efforts deserved the full support of the
international community,
and without further delay it
should demonstrate this by embracing this great nation into
its membership.

18. Once again the Security Council is considering the
application for admission to the United Nations of the
heroic Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. It is incredible that
more than a year has gone by and we are still debating this
question, when we are all aware that we are not discussing
questions either of substance or of form, since Article 4 of
the Charter is clear, precise and explicit in stipulating as a
condition for admission to membership that the State be
peace-loving, that it accept the obligations contained in
the Charter, and that, in the judgement of the United
Nations, it be able and willing to carry out those obligations.

11, My delegation believes that the United Nations will be
enriched by the presence of Viet Nam as a full Member, for
that country brings with it into the international community an inspiring experience from which we have much
to learn as together we pursue the building of a world based
on peace, freedom and justice.

19. Both in the General Assembly and in the Security
Council, nearly all the Member States voted in favour of
Viet Nam’s admission because it manifestly meets all
requirements.

12. As a member of the non-aligned movement, my
country has already formed a valuable association with the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, and we foresee continuing
co-operation within that movement, as well as within the
context of membership in the United Nations. As deveIoping countries, we face similar problems and we share
the same overriding objectives of focusing the efforts of the
United Nations on building a world based on economic
justice and on peace.

20. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, by a rare set of
circumstances if we bear in mind its origins and history, has
no peer in its struggle for peace and as a peace-loving State.
As long ago as 1894, Jose Marti, in the midst of his
tenacious and selfless task of organizing the Cuban war of
independence, wrote with his fertile pen about the admirable heroism of the Annamese who were struggling for
their sovereignty and their country against colonialism.

13. My delegation welcomes the indications that the
application of Viet Nam for membership will receive the
unanimous approval of the Council. We arc most confident
that, as the Council accepts the draft resolution now before
it, it will be acting in accordance with the wishes of the
whole international community and ensuring implementation of the principle of universality.

21. Now, in this century, the people of Viet Nam have
remained faithful to its history and origins and have
astonished the world and won admiration by defending its
right to live in peace, fighting against its powerful aggressors
until they were defeated and banished from its soil. Viet
Nam, united now and institutionally consolidated as a State
by the democratic process of the ballot box in an
exemplary popular vote that built a socialist society, was
the vanguard trench where the battle was waged for all
peoples. Viet Nam was able to face aggression and sacrifice,

14. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): I thank
the representative of Jamaica for the congratulations she
extended to me, and in particular for the warm sentiments
2

defeating iItlpeJkhl1 in order to preserve its independence
and international
security and thus assisting in the strengthening of world peace and security.

the railways and even the rivers were totally destroyed or
paralysed.
26. The unforgettable
father of Viet Nam, 110 Cl&Minh
stated: “ Our People will win the final victory, and once we’
are at peace we shall build a far more beautiful Viet NXL”

22.

The SocidiSt

Republic of Viet

Nam is de facto andde

iurc

a peace-loving

State

applied

which

has

for

Inembers]<p

in the United Nations, accepting the obligations contained
in the Charter. It maintains relations with more than 1OO
htes

with

diffemt

Social

SyStemS

tllroUghoUt

the

27. Wet Nm is in urgent need of total reconstruction
because of the devastation brought by machine guns and the
most sophisticated weapons, which were tested in that
country for the first time. All peoples are indebted to the
Vietnamese people.
Hence world solidarity must be mohilized in that direction, to assist in the reconstruction of Viet
Nam. But, first and foremost, Viet Naul is entitled to just
and due payment as reparation for the incalculable damace
caused by the responsible country, namely, ttle IjnitLd
States of America.

length

and breadth of all continents, is m outstanding member of
the non-aligned movement and belong to the major
international
organizations
for
development and cooperation in various fields.
23. The Government

of the United States was unable to
ilrgUItlCnt
against the a&sSion
of
Viet Nani. On every occasion, it advanced false, irresponsible and hardly serious reasons which had no relation
tC) Wht
k l:lid
dOWI
in Article 4 of the Charter. It has made
improper and Wrongful use of the power of the veto,
thereby undermining the principles and prerogatives attaching
to that
power
and dalnaging the image of the
tlnited Nations in the eyes of the world.
IJrCSCIlt

IlIly

WOdl-While

28. MY delegation endorses and supports the draft resolution introduced by the representative of India which
several members of the Council have joined in sponsoring
and which recommends to the General Assembly that the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam should be admitted to the
United Nations. With its experience in struggling for peace
and for survival, Viet Nam, we are sure, will add to the
prestige of the Organization.

24. Following the unanimous decision in the Committee
on the Admission of New Members and the statement of
the representative of the 1Jnited States to the effect that it
would not bar the legitimate aspiration of the Vietnamese
pcoplc to membership in the United Nations, we wish to
emphnsize, since we now deem it appropriate, necessary
and just, that the wounds of the war of aggression against
Viet Nam cannot easily be henled. We were all witnesses to
that deplorable and uncivilizcd act, which can be justified
only by the essence of the imperialist institution, of
domination and expansion, destruction, exploitation and
death.

29. The PRESIDENT (translutiorz fhmz Clzirzuse): The
next speaker is the representative of Chad. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make a statement.
30. Mr. DESSANDE (Chad) (irlterpretatiow front Frmcf~):
Mr. President, I must, first of all, tell you and alI the other
members of the Council how grateful my delegation is for
the opportunity that you have just given US to speak today
in this august body on the important question of the
re-examination of the application of the Socialist Republjc
of Viet NBm for admission to the United Nations. We thank
you for this opportunity.

‘75
--. As a remembrance of and a tribute to the valiant
people of Viet Nam, to the millions of martyrs which made
possible, with international solidarity and the assitance of
the socialist States, the crushing defeat of imperialism and
its puppets, I shall read a press release from that recent past
which gives 311 account of an unpublished event of the
undeclared war that violated to the extreme the most basic
of human rights, namely, the right to live and to exist. The
press relcasc reads:

31. This is an apt occasion for me to congratulate you
warmly, you who represent the People’s Republic of China,
on your assumption of the lofty functions of President of
the Security Council for the month of July. It is also
appropriate for me to emphasize here the excellent cooperation which exists and is growing and developing so
harmoniously between your great country and mine, Chad.
The happy outcome of the last debate of the Council once
more confirmed your eminent virtues and your wealth of
experience as a seasoned diplomat. That outcome was
reassuring to my delegation and leads it to believe that the
debate that is now being held under your clear-sighted
direction will undoubtedly achieve the same resounding
success.

“Prom 18 to 30 December 1972, Yankee aviation
unleashed bestial attacks on Hanoi, the capital of the
Democr:ltic Republic of Viet Nam, and on Haiphong, the
second most important city of that country. During that
time, the Republic of Viet Nam was attacked by air with
Inore tllatl 1,000 sorties, and of these more than 5OOy
which included ~-52 aircraft, attacked Hanoi, the capital.
More thall 1,000 tons of bombs were dropped by the
ya&ee air force in the course of those days, which are
unjvcrs;~ly known as Nixon’s bloody Christmas.

32. In speaking at this stage of the discussion, my
delegation merely wished to emphasize the regret that it
voiced at the previous
session’of the General Assembly at
not seeing the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, an independent country, occupying its place among us. We were
particularly
anxious to reiterate the total SUppOrt of **lY
Government for the admission of that Country. The
laudable exploits
of its valiant people have won our
admiration and our respect.

“The genocide provoked during that period in Hanoi
and I-laipllong
by the Nixon Administration was indignantly condemned by all peoples throughout the world,
including the American pople.”
Accordi~~gly,

tllc hospitals,

the cities, the fields, the factories, the schools,
the parks, the bridges, the dams, the roads,
3

38. The next speaker is the representative of Cyprus. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

33. It would not be fitting for me to protract in any way
t.hiS discussion in the Council by dwelling on the long and
difficult pilgrimage undertaken by the valiant and courageous people of Viet Nam in search of independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity. As everyone knows,
that country was subjected to an unprecedented trial. I
mean the armed conflict that started in 194.5, was
interrupted in 1954 by the Geneva Agreements and finally
Calne to an end in 1973 as a result of the Paris Agreements.
The formula “Viet Nam is one; the Vietnamese people is
one; no force in the world can obliterate this truth” has
therefore not been simply a dream. For many years now it
has been a concrete fact. At the cost of a thousand
sacrifices, the people of Viet Nam have recovered their
freedom and founded an independent and unified nation
which aspires to justice, peace and international security,
for the strengthening of which it has expressed the ardent
desire to make its contribution in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

39. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): On behalf of the delegation
of Cyprus 1 thank the Council for allowing me to
participate in this debate on the admission of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations.
40. I take this opportunity to express to you, Mr. President, our heartiest congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council. I also heartily welcome you
as Permanent Representative of your country. Your diplomatic experience and political wisdom can be of great
service to the United Nations and to your country, which
we hold in particular esteem and respect for its ancient
wisdom and present achievements. With its long spiritual
tradition and its philosophical background, China can make
significant contributions to our world of today and also to
the necessary progress towards a simpler, less tortuous and
wider approach to life in relations among nations, an
approach more suited to the needs of an advanced
technological era.

34. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam already belongs to
a number of international
organizations, including the
non-aligned movement. Like Chad, it is a member of the
Co-ordinating Bureau of that movement, and it has devoted
itself fully to the work of that body, to the satisfaction of
all. As has been confirmed by a number of members of the
Council, it has signed a number of agreements on cooperation with several Member States of the Organization.
Its admission to the United Nations will enable it to
continue, in close co-operation with all peace-and justiceloving countries, the efforts it has already undertaken for
its national reconstruction
and, furthermore, will give a
greater opportunity
to our dear colleague, Ambassador
Dinh Ba Thi, to participate fully, on behalf of his country,
in the task of building international peace and security.

41. My delegation wishes to express its full support for the
admission of Viet Nam to the United Nations. It is for US a
source of satisfaction and optimism that the people of Viet
Nam, after long years of heroic struggle for freedom and
self-determination in circumstances of appalling vicissitude,
internal division and strife and continuing war and outside
intervention, have cast away with tenacity and determination the pernicious effects of partition, and now emerge
as a free and unified nation seeking its place in the sun.
42. We feel that, as a full Member of the United Nations,
Viet Nam will make an important contribution to the cause
of international understanding and peace. After having for
many years experienced the bitter taste of insecurity,
anarchy and war, the people of Viet Nam are in a better
position to understand the significance of freedom and
peace and therefore to contribute towards making the
United Nations an effective instrument of international
legal order, security and peace in the world. By the
admission of Viet Nam, the universality of the United
Nations will be further enhanced, and thereby progress will
be made towards rendering the Organization as effective as
it tnust be.

35. Listening yesterday to the statements made by members of the Council and other speakers who have preceded
us, my delegation has been led to believe that the obstacles
which have hitherto prevented the admission of Viet Nam
to the United Nations appear to have been removed and
that therefore the present debate, in view of the new
circumstances,
is taking place in auspicious conditions.
Therefore my delegation has every reason to think and to
hope that the wise decision of the Council will give us in
the near future the very pleasant opportunity and great
pleasure of addressing its warm and sincere congratulations
to the delegation of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on
its admission to the United Nations.

43. We consider that Viet Nam fully merits admission to
the United Nations, particularly having regard to its positive
conduct since the termination of the war. Among its other
merits, Viet Nam has shown humane understanding of the
difficulties involved in regard to the great number of
missing persbns whose fate remained undetermined after
the end of the war. We therefore commend the Government
of Viet Nam for the genuine efforts it is making to trace
those persons, efforts that have already resulted in the
remains of a number of American nationals being returned
to their country. This is a most satisfactory development
from the point of view of human rights. The tragedy
involved for the close relatives of the missing persons is
indescribable. Not knowing the fate of their dear ones
makes their life a continuous, unending daily agony. Are
they dead? Or are they suffering in dungeons? These are

36. I should not like to conclude my remarks without
requesting you, Mr. President, to be kind enough to convey
the warm congratulations of my delegation to Ambassador
Consalvi, who has been promoted by his country, Venezuela, to the very responsible position of Minister for
External Relations. We wish him every success in his new
office.
37. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): I thank
the representative
of Chad for the congratulations and
encouraging words he addressed to me. I share his gratification at the growing relations of co-operation and friendship between Chad and China.
4

eXCrUCiati&’

painful

questions

and

it

iS inhU,nan

to

allow

the111to 60 unanswered.

We are therefore gratified to note

that

Viet

the

GOV~rllllleIlt

Of

hJam

has

been

and

50* The question Of the admission of the Socialist RePublic Of Viet Nam is of prime importance to the
international community. It highlights One of the basic
Principles of the Charter, namely, the right of all peaceloving States to membership in the United Nations. lt also
k&lights the diffeP%CeS between practice and principle
which some are trying to introduce into our Organization.

iS exerting

genuine efforts towards putting an end to such inhuman
torment. Most regrettably, the same thing cannot be said
about the fate of over 2,000 nlissing persons in the case of
Cyprus,
Where
those
m&feStly
reSpOnSi&
for
accounting
for
those
miSShg
perSOnS
he
allowed
nothing t0 be done
t0
trace
them. That contrast should be bome in mind by
the Security Council.

51. The heroic and victorious people of Viet Nam have
long been denied the exercise of one of their basic
inaknable 6&t% namely, the right of their State to its
legitimate Place among Member States of the Orgdnization,
In Proclaiming the right of the Socialist Republic of Vict
Nam to membership in the United Nations, we are but
Putting forth a claim to the observance of a basic principle
of the Charter, something which cannot be denied to any
Peace-loving State. The international community is hound
by the Principles of the Charter because its Member States
have agreed to abide by its provisions and to implement
them.

44. It is FPer~lY a gratifying and hopeful sign that, in the
relations between the United States and Viet Nam, the
human element has prevailed. The American people in their
overwhelming majority had persistently manifested their
determination to put an end to the Viet Nam war and all
the inhumanity involved in it. That genuine feeling of the
American people played an irnportant role in the positive
development of the problem of Viet Nam towards peace.
Correspondingly,
the Vietnamese people are showing respect for the principles of humanism. That is a positive and
very hopeful development
towards international cooperation.

52. The glorious victory achieved by the people of Viet
Nam and the birth of their State, the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam, were acclaimed by the Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries at their fifth Summit Conference, held at Colombo in August 1976. This was
proclaimed to be a victory of militant solidarity and
effective co-operation among the peoples struggling for
independence and freedom, the non-aligned countries and
other progressive forces in the world. The Conference called
upon the Security Council to @ve prompt and positive
consideration to the application of the Socialist Kepuhlic of
Viet Nam for admission to membership in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 3366 (XXX).

45. We therefore strongly support the admission of Viet
Nam, as promising a constructive contribution to the world
Organization in its quest for international security and
peace and thus enhancing the achievement of the objectives
of the non-aligned movement-as
was so pertinently
pointed out yesterday by its current Chairman, and
President of the General Assembly, Ambassador Amerasinghe of Sri Lanka [2024th
meeting].
Among those
objectives is the promotion of the effective functioning of
the Organization, so as to ensure international security,
thereby making wars not only unnecessary but also
impossible. That is the way to peace. That is the way that
we hope will be chosen also by Viet Nam, which has
suffered so much from a lack of international security
which inevitably leads to war.

53. The Government of Iraq has always supported the
struggle for national liberation of all oppressed peoples and
condemned the aggressive forces of imperialism, racism and
all other forms of aggression. We have unswervingly upheld
the right of all people to self-determination, free of any
alien domination. In his statement before the C&era1
Assembly on 5 October 1976,’ Mr. Saadoon Hammadi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Iraq,
condemned the stand taken by the United States against
the admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet h’atll and
&led for the admission of the Republic to the IJnited
Nations.
The
United
States
position is a deClr Wam@e
of
the misuse of the veto power for political reasons.

46. Before concluding, I should like to convey, on behalf
of my Government and OIZ my own behalf, hearty
congratulations to Ambassador Consalvi on his assignment
to the post of Minister for External Relations of Venezuela,
a country with which we have most friendly and cordial
relations. Ambassador Consalvi’s high qualities of wisdom
and experience in the conduct of political affairs, as well as
the diplomatic skill with which he is endowed, vouch for
success in hisnew important office.

54. The Government
of
lraq hopes that the VictorioUS
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam will be allowed fully to
exercise its rights and will be admitted to membership in
the United Nations without any further delay, to enable it
to participate with other nations in PrOIIlOting international
peace and security.

47. The PRESIDENT (translation
from Chitzese): I thank
the representative of Cyprus for the congratulations he
extended to me. We regard his praise for China as very
important support and encouragement from a friend.

The
PRESIDENT
(trarlslatiun
from Chirwscl: Th
next speaker is the representative Of Mali. 1 invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

55.

48. The next speaker is the representative of Iraq. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

56v
Mr.
KANTE
(Mali)
(illterpretatiO?l
frOm Frctlclz):
Mr. President, allow me first of all to discharge the Pleasant

49. Mr. KUBBA (Iraq): I should like first to express mY
delegation’s pleasure, Mr. President, at seeing You, the
representative of a great arid friendly country, the People’s
Republic of C]lina, presiding over the Council while it is
discussing a very important issue.
5

istration of President Jimmy Carter. This evolution puts
and end to the negative attitude of its predecessor,which
on three occasionsimproperly opposedthe admissionof
Viet Nam to the United Nations although that country
fulfilled all the conditions required under the Charter and
had, what is more, solemnly committed itself to respectits
principles.Today, the monstrousfrustration that wasfelt by
the entire world is no more than a memory, albeit a bitter
one. In restoring the legitimate rights of heroic Viet Nam,
the Security Council will have restored its own authority
and credibility.

duty of congratulating you most cordially on behalf of my
delegation on your accession to the presidency of the
Security Council. This is a well deserved tribute which
through you is paid to your great country and to the great
people of China for the’historic role they have played in the
emancipation of peoples.
57. The great revolution started in 1949 by the Chinese
Communist Party under the firm leadership of its helmsman, President Mao Tsetung, an outstanding figure of
history, continues to inspire the struggles for political,
economic, social and cultural liberation being waged
throughout the world for the democratization of international relations and for the bringing into being of a new
international economic order, a juster world society based
upon interdependence and effective solidarity among
nations.

63. Now that the formality of admissionhasbeensettled,
it remainsfor the United Nations to devote itself to giving
substantialaid to the SocialistRepublic of Viet Nam in the
gigantic task of national reconstruction upon which it has
embarked.It is the duty of every Member State to makeits
contribution and to shoulder its responsibility for the
healingof the war wounds.

58. Here I should like to express our great satisfaction at
the exemplary relations the Government of the People’s
Republic of China has maintained with my country since it
acceded to independence in 1960.

64. My delegation urges the Government of the United
States,in the new spirit characteristicof it, to continue the
negotiations it has started with the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam with a view to finding appropriate solutions to
their differences in accordancewith the provisions of the
January 1973 ParisAgreements.

59. Need I recall here that your first act as President was
to recommend to the General Assembly, on 7 July, the
admission to the United Nations of the Republic of
Djibouti, that ancient colonial Territory for whose indcpendence your great country, displaying the strict consistency that has characterized its international policy,
spared no effort and no resource?

65. At the conclusion of this debate, a new State will be
joining the community of nations. The principle of universality, although under attack for sometime, has endured
and today hasbeenfully upheld.

60. That the admission to the United Nations of the
heroic Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is being considered
by the Security Council under your presidency is far more
than a mere coincidence. This is a historic event which
confirms the community of destiny of the two peoples of
China and Viet Nam, who remained in solidarity at all
stages of the total war imposed by the imperial colonialist
forces upon the country of that other great and venerated
master of global revolution, Ho Chi-Minh.

66. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, with its 50
million inhabitants and its long tradition of struggle to
preservepeaceand freedom, will, we have no doubt, bring a
wealth of experience to our Organization. The world, and
in particular the countries of the Association of South-East
Asian Nations, which, at their recent conference, emphasizedthe highly peaceful role of that country in their
region,cannot fail to rejoice.

61. The unanimous recommendation of the Committee on
the Admission of New Members for the admission of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is but an act of justice fully
deserved by that country, which has paid the heaviest of
tributes in defence of its freedom and to bring about
fulfilment of the ideals of the Charter. Furthermore, this
decision accords with the profound aspirations of the
peoples of the entire world, which were forcefully expressed in General Assembly resolution 31/21 of 26
November 1976. That resolution strongly urged the Security Council to reconsiderfavourably the admissionof the
SocialistRepublicof Viet Namto the United Nations.This
decisionis a just tribute to the peopleof Viet Nam, who,
with indomitable courage and adamant determination,
defeated the over-equipped armies of aggression.The
longest colonial war of our time thus ended to the
advantageof Viet Nam. My delegationwould like to avail
itself of this opportunity to hail the memory of all the
Vietnamesepatriots who died heroically to defend the
independenceand unity of their country.

67. My delegation hails the sister delegation of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, led by its eminent
Ambassador,our brother Dinh Ba Thi, becauseof the new
victory its country hasjust won on the battlefront for the
reaffirmation of its national identity. My delegationwishes
to assureit of the total support of the Government and
people of Mali and their active solidarity with the Government and heroic and valiant people of Viet Nam. We have
no doubt that the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam will also
win the battle for national reconstruction it has embarked
upon since the reunification of the country. The United
Nations, our Organization, will, we are certain, assumeits
shareof responsibility.
68. Before concluding, I should like to express the
gratitude of my delegationto the membersof the Security
Council for extending to us the privilege of participating in
this debate.
69. I further wish to avail myself of this opportunity to
express, through the delegation of Venezuela, our most
friendly and fraternal congratulations to Ambassador
Sim6n Albert0 Consalvi, the representative of Venezuela,

62. My delegation cannot fail to rejoice at the spirit of
understandingso far evincedby the new AmericanAdmin6

who will shortly leave us to assume the lofty functions of
Minister for External Relations of his country, the post to
which he has just been appointed. We can only rejoice at
that choice and at the confidence which the President and
Government of Venezuela have once again shown in him.
Ambassador Con&vi, courteous and skilled in international
question, is a seasoned militant for the cause of the third
world, and thus has all the qualifications for success in the
new and lofty post which will crown his rich <andbrilliant
career at the service of mankind and democracy.

to the other members of the Council my sincerethanks for
allowing the delegation of Burundi to participate in this
discussion,without the right to vote.
7.5. The people of Burundi had a long experience of the
oppression of colonialism and foreign domination. On a
number of occasions,imperialism has tried to undermine
the national unity and independenceof our country. Under
the enlightened leadership of Colonel Jean-BaptisteBagaza,
President of the Supreme Revolutionary Council and
President of the Republic, the people and Government of
Burundi are more than ever committed to the struggle
againstimperialism,racismand colonialism.

70. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): I thank
the representative of Mali for the friendly congratulations
he addressed to me. China and Mali enjoy very friendly
relations. I believe that his praise for China will encourage
China to exert even greater efforts in its socialist revolution
and construction.

76. The savage aggressionperpetrated against the Vietnamesepeople wasregarded by the people of Burundi as an
attack against ‘all those peoples that are determined to
protect their independence and their dignity, despite the
problems of development and the very few means of
defence available to the countries that have only recently
won their international sovereignty. The arsenalof mass
destruction and annihilation which was used against an
entire peoplestruggling against foreign occupation indicates
the force with which imperialism is prepared to strike.
Furthermore, the entire world witnesseda struggle carried
out with unparalleled courage. Mankind lived through the
glorious
events in which a people won n crushing victory
over a most formidable enemy. That victory offers encouragement to those peoples that are fighting for equality,
dignity, freedom and survival, such asthe peoplesof Azania,
Namibia, Zimbabwe and Palestineand others that are still
suppressedand that have risen up against the oppressor.
Following that example we can say without any risk of
error that the future belongs to those that take up armsto
wage the struggle and that many victories have to bc won
againstthe enemy before one can negotiate with him. The
triumph of the Vietnamese people is tangible proof that a
united and revolutionary people cannot be vanquishedand
that it can thwart any plots directed againstits unity and
personality. The reunification of Viet Nam, which is in
accordance with the profound aspirations of the Vietnamesepeople and the wishesexpressedby President Ho
Chi-Minh, indicates the path we should take in solving the
thorny problem of the peaceful reunification and independence of the Korean State. That processclearly shows
that one of the essential prerequisites is the withdrawal
from South Korea of all the occupying armedforces.

71. The next speaker is the representative of Burundi. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
72. Mr. SIMBANANIYE
(Burundi) (interpretation from
French): The heroic and victorious struggle of the Vietnamese people has created in South-East Asia conditions
for international peace and security. That is why the
Security Council, under the relevant provisions of Article 4
of the Charter and in the context of General Assembly
resolution 3 l/2 1, is called upon to take this opportunity to
pay a well-deserved and heartfelt tribute to that peaceful
and united people and to render justice to that invincible
nation.
73. What could be more moving and more encouraging
than to see the Council presided over by the representative
of a country which has constantly displayed both sympathy
for and solidarity with not only the Vietnamese people
during its long and arduous liberation struggle but also all
those peoples of the world that are fighting against
colonialism, imperialism and racism. The delegation of
Burundi would like to take this opportunity to express its
pleasure at the excellent relations of friendship and active
solidarity existing between the People’s Republic of China
and the Republic of Burundi. The people of Burundi will
always appreciate the objective support and assistance of
the Chinese people in their struggle against colonialism and
foreign domination. We are pleased to state that the
teachings of the late Chairman Mao Tsetung that countries
want independence, peoples want revolution and nations
want liberation are now being put into effect throughout
the world, because that is an inevitable historical process. It
is also encouraging to see that, in this last quarter of llx
twentieth century, the eight principles of co-operation of
the late Prime Minister Chou En-lai have enlightened the
international community about the new horizons and the
new dimensionsof co-operationbetweenpeoples.

77. Furthermore, the fact that the Vietnamesepeople has
scored such spectacular successes
is due not only primarily
to its own genius and the most sublime sacrifices of its
martyrs but also to the active solidarity of all the socialist
countries and all peace and justice-loving peoples. This
unity in the battle against oppressiverCgimessuch as the
systems of apartheid,
colonialism and racism in South
Africa, Namibia and Zimbabwe should light the path of the
peoplesthat have always supported the liberation struggle,
such as those of the People’s Republic of China and the
Soviet Union. The confrontation taking place on the
African continent, for example, would only reinforce the
criminal action of those regimesand delay the final victory
of those militant peoples. The example of Viet Nam has
proved right the great Western statesmen such as, to cite
but two, General de Gaulle and Prime Minister Palme, who

74. Thus, Mr. President,you representa great peoplewith
revolutionary traditions, a people whose solidarity with
oppressedpeoplesis an international duty. Your eminent
qualities as a statesmanas well as your commitment to
defending and ensuring the triumph of the ideals and
purposesof our Organization augur well for the successof
this important debate. I shouldlike to expressto you and
7

saw things as they were and did not hesitate to discourage
or even to condemn intervention
or, more precisely,
intolerable aggression against the Vietnamese people.
78. The present discussion should also enable the permanent members of the Security Council to refrain from
improper use of the right of veto, a privilege to which they
can lay claim only in cases involving the maintenance of
international
peace and security and by no means, in the
spirit of the Charter, to exert pressure on any State with
which negotiations must be entered into on an equal
footing in order to settle disputes. The Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam could have become a Member of our Organization when it first applied for admission, if these considerations had not stood in the way of the application of
the relevant provisions of the Charter..
79. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is a peaceful State
which has never harboured any warlike designs or perpetrated
any aggression against another State. On the
contrary,
the Vietnamese people, although the victims of
imperialist aggression, have, through their authentic representatives, stated their readiness to accept the obligations
contained in the Charter. Furthermore, no State can claim
that the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is unable to carry
out these obligations or that it is unwilling to do so. In spite
of the colossal toll in human lives and the massive
destruction
of its economy, Viet Nam has proved to the
world its ability to defend its sovereignty and its territorial
integrity.
It has guaranteed with exemplary courage respect
for the rights of individuals and for international treaties,
reflecting the ideals and the purposes of our Organization.
We are entitled to conclude that only the policy of
hegemony has until now prevented the admission to our
Organization
of a State enjoying all the attributes of a
sovereign State and which has resolved to contribute
effectively to the realization of the aims and purposes of
the United Nations.
80. In the light of this glorious page in the history of the
twentieth
century, all States should embark upon the
course of establishing democratic relations in international
affairs. Non-interference
in the internal affairs of other
States should henceforth be the golden rule for Member
States, particularly those which have been granted significant powers and privileges under the Charter.
81. It is the duty of the international community to make
a substantiJ
contribution
to the reconstruction of Viet
Nam. A particular obligation falls upon those States which,
directly or indirectly, made themselves responsible for the
aggression committed against Viet Nam, which resulted in a
colossal toll in human lives and massive destruction of
property.
The time has come for all States to refrain from
embarking upon such criminal ventures either against the
people of Viet Nam, who have won the admiration of us all,
or against any other State whatever its socio-economic
system or its defence capability.
82. in conclusion, I wish, on behalf of my Government, to
reiterate our unreserved support for the application of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for admission to mcmbership in the United Nations. 1 wish this friendly country
great success in the reconstruction of its unified land and in
the building of a new society.

83. Finally, I should like, on behalf of the delegation of
Burundi, to welcome the appointment of Ambassador
Consalvi, representative of Venezuela, to the post of
Minister for External Relations. On behalf of my Government, I wish him happiness and every success in his new
important functions.
84. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): I thank
the representative of Burundi for the friendly encouragement which he directed to me in his statement. China and
Burundi enjoy relations of friendship and co-operation. We
also share the view that all just struggles in the world will
support each other. In this regard China has not done quite
enough. We are grateful to Burundi for its support.
85. There being no further speakers, I shall now make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of CHINA.
86. On 10 August 1976, the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam submitted its application for admission to membership
in the United Nations /see S/12183]. Between September
and November of the same year, the Security Council
considered that application. At the time, the Chinese
delegation pointed out in unequivocal terms that, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam was qualified for membership in the United Nations and that it therefore firmly
supported its application and opposed the use of any
pretext by any country to obstruct its admission to
membership in the United Nations. It was only because of
the unreasonable obstruction raised by a permanent member under a certain pretext that the Security Council was
unable to recommend the admission of Viet Nam. Thereafter, the General Assembly, at its thirty-first session, by an
overwhelming majority of 124 votes, adopted a resolution
by which it considered that the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam should be admitted to membership in the United
Nations and recommended that the Security Council should
reconsider the application of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam /resolution 31/21/. This was a most explicit expression of the common will of the overwhelming majority
of States Members of the United Nations. On 11 July this
year, the representative of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam addressed a letter to the Secretary-General [see
S/12361], requesting the Security Council to reconsider its
application in accordance with the aforesaid General
Assembly resolution.
87. The Chinese delegation firmly supports the abovementioned legitimate request of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam and holds that the Security Council should now
adopt a resolution, immediately and without any delay,
recommending to the General Assembly the admission of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to membership in the
United Nations.
88. Under the leadership of their great leader, President
l-10 Chi-Minh, and the Community Party of Viet Nam, the
Vietnamese people, who have a glorious revolutionary
tradition, won complete victory in the national liberation
war after waging protracted arduous struggles. Following
the thorough defeat of the United States imperialist
aggression, the fraternal Vietnamese people speedily
brought to fruition the great cause of reunifying the

94. Vict Nam and China are fraternal countries which are
closeb linked in the glorious revolutionary
gruggle of their
two peoples. During our people’s two wars of resistance
wi*lst foreign aggression, as well as in the task of post-war
reconstruction,
the fraternal Chinese Communist Party
Government and people have given US powerful support ani
valuable assistance. The support and brotherly assistance of
die Chinese People, as Well as of other fraternal socialist
Countries and the Peoples of the entire world, constituted
an important contribution to the fmal victory of the long
and difficult stmg& of our people for national tidepcndence and the reunification of our country, aswell asto
our great successin the socialist construction of our
country. The Vietnamesepeople constantly bear in their
hearts profound gratitude for the noble support
of tile
frliternId

Chinese

people.

It iS our

firIn

conviction

that

the

Nam and China, based on the
pri*lCipkS
Of
prO~etaI’iarl
internationalism and tempered
during the severe trials of our long revolutionary
struggle,
continuesto grow stronger andto develop.
solidarity

between

Viet

‘3. For 30 years the Vietnamesepeoplewageda struggle
requiring suffering and sacrifice to regain its national
independenceand reunite its country. The Governmentand
people of Vict Nam pursue a foreign policy of peace,
friendship and co-operationwith all peoples,on the basisof
mutual respect, independence, sovereignty, equality and
mutual interest. We arc pleasedto note that the peoplesof
the entire world have placed great value on the struggleof
the Vietnamese people and on its foreign policy, which
they consider to be an important contribution to the
common struggleof peoplesin the defenceof international
peaceandsecurity, f’or natidnalliberation, for the safeguard
of the independenceand sovereignty of peoples,and thus
for the achievement of the objectivesof the Charter of the
United Nations. That is the reason why almost all the
Member States have affirmed that Viet Nam is fully
qualified to be a Member of the United Nations,and, by an
overwhelming majority, have expressed,in the courseof
severalmeetingsof the Security Council andat the thirtieth
and thirty-first sessionsof the General Assembly, their
support for the admissionof Viet Nam to membershipin
the United Nations. It is public knowledgethat, but for the
improper use of the right of veto by the United Stateson
unwarranted pretexts, Viet Nam would have becomea
Memberof the United Nationsin 197.5.
96. Today, after three meetings,the Council has ananimclusly adopted the draft resolution sponsoredby 11
countriesrecommendingthat the GeneralAssemblyshould
admit the Socialist Republic of Viet Namto membershipin
the United Nations. Thus, the Council wasable to adopt a
resolution that was in conformity with the Charter and
wit11 the wis]les of a.Imost all the Members of the
Organization.
97. I take this opportunity to express,on behalf Of Our
Government, our most sinceregratitude to You, Mr. President to aI1 former and present membersof the Security
CouI;cil and to aI1 the representativesof StatesMembersof
the United Nations which have, since 1975, supportedOur
legitimate right to be admitted to the United Nations.We
alsOexpress our most sincere gratitude to aI the. repre.
scntatives of the socialist countries, to the Co-ord’natlng

Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries and its Chairman, to
the working group for the admission of Viet Nam and of
Angola and to other friendly countries which spared no
effort in supporting our just cause and actively participated
in this debate. We sincerely thank all those representatives
who have been so good as to speak in the Council to
demand of the Government of the United States that it
should fulfil its obligation to contribute to the healing of
the wounds of war and to the post-war reconstruction of
Viet Nam. It is perfectly clear that world public opinion is
and always will be on the side of Viet Nam in demanding of
the Government of the United States that it should live up
to the commitments laid down in article 21 of the Paris
Agreements on Viet Nam.3 It is a matter of honour, of
conscience and of responsibility which the United States
Government cannot under any pretext shirk.
3 United

Nations,

98. I should like to join preceding speakers in congratu.
lating Ambassador Con&i on his appointment as Minister
for External Relations of Venezuela.
gg. TO conclude, I wish to express’ my thanks to you,
Mr. President, and to all the other members of the Security
Council for having given me the opportunity to speak in
this important body.
100. The PRESIDENT (translation from Cluhese): On
behalf of the Chinese delegation, I wish to extend warm
congratulations to the delegation of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam on the adoption by the Security Council of
the resolution recommending the admission of their
country to the United Nations.
The meetingrose at 12.40 p.m

Treaty Series, vol. 935, p. 2.

.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-7oooi-April

1978-2,200
