S/2018/76

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 January 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
I. Introduction and Mission priorities
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), by which the Council established the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and requested me to report at regular intervals on the
implementation of its mandate. The report covers the activities of UNMIK, and
developments related thereto, from 16 October 2017 to 16 January 2018.
2.
The priorities of the Mission remain to promote security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and in the region. In furtherance of its goals, UNMIK
continues its constructive engagement with Pristina and Belgrade, all communities in
Kosovo and regional and international actors. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Kosovo Force continue to perform their roles
within the framework of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). The European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continues its presence in Kosovo,
in line with the statement by the President of the Security Council of 26 November
2008 (S/PRST/2008/44) and my report of 24 November 2008 (S/2008/692). The
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes work closely with the Mission.

II. Key political and security developments
3.
On 22 October 2017, municipal elections were held in all 38 municipalities in
Kosovo. It was the second time that local elections were held throughout Kosovo
since the signing of the 19 April 2013 First Agreement of Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations between Belgrade and Pristina. Voter turnout was
relatively high, especially in the Serb-majority municipalities, reaching up to 46 per
cent in some municipalities. Around 7,000 candidates competed for mayoral and
municipal assembly positions across Kosovo. Many of the mayoral elections were
close, resulting in run-offs on 19 November in 19 of the 38 municipalities. The
Serbian List won mayoral races in 10 municipalities; the Democratic League of
Kosovo won in 8; the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo won in 7; the Democratic
Party of Kosovo won in 5; the Movement for Self-Determination, or Vetëvendosje,
won in 3; and the Initiative for Kosovo and the New Kosovo Alliance each won in 1
municipality. Following the trend seen in the legislative elections of June 2017, a
general diversification in voting emerged in the local elections, resulting in a
weakening of traditional party strongholds.

18-01182 (E)

010218

*1801182*

S/2018/76

4.
The European Union deployed an electoral observation mission consisting of
109 observers, while OSCE facilitated voting procedures in the northern
municipalities, in line with past practices. The European Union election observation
mission, in a report issued on 24 October, noted that in Kosovo Albanian
municipalities the election was genuinely competitive, while in many Kosovo Serb
communities the campaign was marred by intimidation, targeting in particular
non-Serbian List political entities and their candidates. The Serbian List secured all
10 Serb-majority municipalities.
5.
The participation of women was low, with only 8 women running for the
position of mayor, out of a total of 204 candidates. None of the 38 elected mayors are
women (compared with 1 elected in 2013). The quota for the participation for women,
however, contributed to ensuring that at least 30 per cent of municipal assembly
members are women.
6.
During the reporting period, the government and the Assembly of Kosovo took
up the issue of ratification of the agreement on territorial delineation signed with
Montenegro in 2015, which remained pending. On 14 November, the State
Commission on Border Demarcation reported before the Committee on European
Integration of the Assembly of Kosovo that it had identified irregularities in the work
of the previous Commission. The President of Kosovo, Hashim Thaçi, speaking at an
international conference in Pristina on 14 November stated, however, that the
agreement on territorial delineation with Montenegro was good, clear, accurate,
professionally elaborated and supported by the international community, adding that
any further delays in its ratification would be detrimental for Kosovo’s future. On
4 December, the government of Kosovo approved a preliminary report by the State
Commission on Border Demarcation that, according to a government communiqué,
assessed the documentation and findings from the past Commission’s work and found
many factual and scientific deficiencies and omissions. The government also voted to
submit the draft law on ratification of the agreement with Montenegro to the
Assembly, with caveats. At the end of the reporting period, the Assembly was still
reviewing the matter.
7.
Discussions on a long-standing proposal to transform the Kosovo Security Force
into an armed force continued at the highest level. At an international conference in
Pristina on 14 November, the President of Kosovo said that any future transformation
of the Kosovo Security Force would take place only through a constitutional
amendment.
8.
On 22 December, 43 members of the Assembly of Kosovo from the ruling
coalition, and without the participation of the Serbian List, signed a request to hold
an extraordinary session of the Assembly to revoke a law adopted in August 2015 in
support of the work of the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and the Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office. The request, however, failed because of the lack of a quorum in
the Assembly. Within 24 hours of the request, the Assembly went into its winter
recess, postponing any further discussion of the matter until at least mid-January. The
effort to revoke the law was strongly condemned by opposition parties and by
international and regional partners of Kosovo. In a joint statement issued on
12 January 2018, the European Union Special Representative for Kosovo and the
heads of European Union missions in Kosovo noted that the initiative to abrogate the
law on the Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office was still pending
before the Assembly of Kosovo and was of extreme concern to the European Union
and its member States. They urged the sponsors of the initiative to withdraw the
request, indicating that any attempt to repeal or amend the mandate of the Specialist
Chambers would have an adverse effect on the relations between Kosovo and the
European Union.

2/18

18-01182

S/2018/76

9.
Some steps were taken towards ensuring faster and more consistent progress in
fulfilling the European Reform Agenda of Kosovo. On 10 November, the government
of Kosovo approved the key priorities of the European Agenda for 2018 and declared
its commitment to fulfilling its duties and moving the agenda forward. On
17 November, the High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy, Federica Mogherini, and the Prime Minister of Kosovo, Ramush
Haradinaj, co-chaired the second meeting of the European Union-Kosovo
Stabilization and Association Council in Brussels. Following the meeting, the Office
of Prime Minister Haradinaj issued a communiqué, in which the firm commitment of
Kosovo to deliver swiftly on key Stabilization and Association Agreement reforms
was reaffirmed, with a view to continued progress on its path to joining the European
Union. Subsequently, on 18 December, the Prime Minister of Kosovo attended a
working dinner for prime ministers from the Western Balkans, hosted in Brussels by
the High Representative of the European Union. On 31 October, Kosovo officials
attended the first meeting of coordinators of the Regional Cooperation Council
multi-action plan, in Brussels, to discuss the implementation of agreements reached
at the Western Balkans Summit, held in Trieste, Italy, in July 2017.
10. On 5 December, however, the President of Kosovo, speaking at the headquarters
of the Kosovo Security Force in Pristina, noted that an unjustified number of
international missions were still functioning in Kosovo and called upon international
missions to leave. He also expressed dissatisfaction with the European integration
process, questioning whether Kosovo enjoyed a European perspective, and criticized
the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office. Some of these
concerns were echoed by other political leaders in Pristina.

III. Northern Kosovo
11. A total of 24,095 (approximately 42 per cent) registered voters from the four
northern municipalities cast ballots in the municipal elections held in Kosovo on
22 October. This represents a significant increase compared with the 2013 municipal
elections, in which approximately 13,000 Kosovo Serbs cast their votes amid calls
for a boycott by local politicians opposing the 2013 Agreement between Belgrade and
Pristina.
12. The OSCE mission in Kosovo provided technical support in the conduct of the
elections in the four northern municipalities. The support included technical advice
to the four municipal election commissions and technical support to polling station
committees on the day of the election, including the deployment of more than 220
OSCE observers to the northern municipalities.
13. The Serbian List won all four northern municipalities in the first round,
obtaining a large majority of seats in the municipal assemblies and all four mayoral
positions. The four northern municipal assemblies held their respective constitutive
sessions on 14 December, as convened by the newly elected mayors.
14. The overall security situation in northern Kosovo remained fragile, with a
number of incidents reported. On 16 January, in an incident with potential
implications far beyond northern Kosovo, a prominent Kosovo Serb politician and
leader of the Civic Initiative “Serbia, Democracy, Justice”, Oliver Ivanović, was shot
dead by unidentified assailants outside his party’s offices in North Mitrovica.
Mr. Ivanović had recently run, unsuccessfully, for mayor of North Mitrovica in the
October elections. My Special Representative, Zahir Tanin, condemned the murder of
Mr. Ivanović, calling for swift and decisive work by investigative authorities as well
as for calm on all sides. Political leaders in Belgrade and Pristina, as well as the
European Union, OSCE and some Member States also issued statements condemning
18-01182

3/18

S/2018/76

the murder. The President of Serbia, Aleksandar Vučić, convened a special session of
the National Security Council, at which he described the murder of Mr. Ivanović as a
terrorist attack against Serbs in Kosovo, and demanded that Serbia be directly
involved in the investigation of the murder. The Prime Minister of Kosovo also called
for an emergency session of the Kosovo Security Council. Despite some initial
rhetorically charged statements from both sides, the authorities from Belgrade and
Pristina subsequently appeared ready to agree upon practical modes of cooperation to
help solve the crime as soon as possible.
15. In an earlier incident, on 22 October, three persons of Serbian nationality were
arrested at Gate 1 of the Administrative Boundary Line for possession of explosive
devices found by Kosovo police officers in a bus transporting Kosovo Serb voters
from Serbia. The suspects were released on bail at the end of November. On
11 November, a group of young Kosovo Serbs were allegedly assaulted by
unidentified assailants in Bosniak Mahalla, an ethnically mixed neighbourhood in
North Mitrovica. In a separate incident on 26 November, Kosovo police officers
reported that unknown perpetrators threw explosive devices, including hand grenades
and Molotov cocktails, in the yards of two Kosovo Serb members of the Kosovo
Security Force in different locations in Zubin Potok, causing material damage.

IV. Normalization of relations between Belgrade and Pristina
16. During the final months of 2017, there was little formal or substantive
interaction between Belgrade and Pristina. However, on 12 January 2018, the Prime
Minister of Kosovo appointed his Chief of Staff, Avni Arifi, as the new coordinator
to lead the Kosovo delegation to the European Union-facilitated dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina at the technical level.
17. On 15 January, the spokesperson of the High Representative of the European
Union announced that a new round of the technical-level dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina would be held in Brussels from 16 to 18 January. She also indicated that
the technical negotiation teams from Belgrade and Pristina, led by the Director of the
Office for Kosovo and Metohija of the Government of Serbia, Marko Đurić, and by
Avni Arifi, respectively, had confirmed their participation in the dialogue. However,
following the murder of Mr. Ivanović in the early morning of 16 January, Marko Đurić
announced that his delegation had left the technical dialogue session to return to
Serbia.
18. In Belgrade, progress was made in the implementation of the internal dialogue
on the Kosovo issue launched by the President of Serbia. Further to a decision adopted
by the Government of Serbia on 16 October, a working group was established, led by
Marko Đurić, and tasked with providing logistical support to and coordinating
the internal dialogue. Several sessions of the internal dialogue were held during the
reporting period, involving representatives from civil society, academia and the
political, social, economic and cultural spheres.
19. Some concrete steps were taken towards further implementation of the
agreements reached within the framework of the European Union-facilitated dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina. On 24 October, 40 judges and 13 prosecutors, mainly
Kosovo Serbs, were sworn into the Kosovo judiciary, marking the full implementation
of an agreement on the issue of the judiciary in northern Kosovo reached by the two
sides on 10 February 2015.
20. In addition, on 19 December, the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Kosovo adopted
a decision allowing residents of Kosovo holding a driving licence issued by the
Government of Serbia before 14 September 2016, to obtain a Kosovo driving licence

4/18

18-01182

S/2018/76

without the need to pass a driving test. The decision follows an agreement reached on
14 September 2016 in the framework of the 2011 agreement on freedom of movement
signed between Belgrade and Pristina.
21. There was no progress towards the establishment of the community/association
of Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo, agreed to in the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations. No indications were provided
about when and how steps towards the establishment of the community/association
might be taken.

V. Returns, reconciliation and cultural heritage and
community relations
22. During the reporting period, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) recorded 95 voluntary returns to Kosovo by
members of non-majority communities. UNHCR estimates that, at the end of
December 2017, the total number of internally displaced persons living in Kosovo
stood at 16,417 (7,595 female and 8,822 male). UNHCR records that, in 2017, 498
persons voluntarily returned to Kosovo, the lowest number of returns since 2000 in
any comparable period. Twenty individuals sought asylum in Kosovo during the
reporting period, bringing the total to 143 for 2017.
23. On 16 October, the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology of Kosovo
awarded 506 scholarships to secondary school and university students from Roma,
Ashkali, and Egyptian communities across Kosovo, in order to promote school and
university attendance by members of those communities. Several municipalities also
began to put in place measures to address the high dropout rates among high school
students from Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian communities.
24. On 25 November, OSCE, in cooperation with UNHCR and the Ministry for
Communities and Return of Kosovo, organized a forum in Montenegro within the
framework of the Skopje Process, a joint OSCE-UNHCR regional initiative launched
in November 2014 in order to find durable solutions for displaced persons from
Kosovo. At the forum, representatives from OSCE and UNHCR met with counterparts
from Belgrade, Podgorica, Pristina and Skopje to review progress in the
implementation of agreements reached in order to tackle obstacles to the displacement
from Kosovo.
25. UNMIK continued to monitor developments related to the promotion and
protection of religious and cultural heritage. On 29 November, the Assembly of
Kosovo passed the draft law on freedom of religion, which aims to regulate the legal
status of religious communities and incorporates a number of key provisions related
to the status and rights of the Serbian Orthodox Church in Kosovo. The law will be
sent to parliamentary committees for review prior to proceeding to a second reading
in the Assembly, scheduled for the first half of 2018.
26. On 1 December 2017, the government of Kosovo allocated €285,484 to the
Serbian Orthodox Church for rent payments owed by the Kosovo Anti-Corruption
Agency, but relations between the Kosovo authorities and the Serbian Orthodox
Church remained strained. Non-payment had been a source of tension between the
Kosovo authorities and the Serbian Orthodox Church since 2014, when rent payments
ceased. This was largely as a result of continued lack of progress in implementing the
May 2016 ruling of the Constitutional Court of Kosovo in favour of the Visoki Dečani
Monastery in a case of disputed land ownership, and to a dispute over the land and
the unfinished building of the Christ the Saviour church located within the campus of
the University of Pristina. During the reporting period, no meetings were held by the
18-01182

5/18

S/2018/76

Implementation and Monitoring Council, a special body established to monitor and
facilitate the implementation of the Law on Special Protective Zones and comprising
representatives from the Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning; the Ministry
of Culture, Youth and Sport; the European Union; OSCE; and the Serbian Orthodox
Church.
27. Damage to, and illegal demolition of, historical buildings located within the
protected area of the Prizren historic centre continued, with two cases recorded during
the reporting period. On 16 October, damage was caused to the Kosovo Red Cross
office building, and, on 18 December, the Myftiu House, built in 1859 and listed as a
cultural heritage site, was demolished without the permission of the authorities.

VI. Rule of law and human rights
28. On 24 October, in line with the agreements reached within the framework of the
European Union-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, 149 judicial
support staff from non-majority communities signed their employment contracts. Of
these, 118 will be assigned to justice institutions in northern Kosovo. On 31 October,
the Kosovo Judicial Council appointed a Kosovo Serb judge and the former President
of the Serbian-run Higher Court in Mitrovica as the new President of the Basic Court
of Mitrovica. On 1 November, the new Basic Prosecution Office of Mitrovica, located
in North Mitrovica, became operational. However, judicial officials highlighted a
number of outstanding challenges to integration, including a considerable backlog of
cases, a lack of interpreters, non-existent, incomplete or inaccurate translations of
laws and legal documents into Serbian and inadequate training on the applicable laws
in Kosovo.
29. On 17 November, the Basic Court of Pristina found four supporters of the
opposition party Vetëvendosje guilty of terrorism-related offences and sentenced
them to 21 years’ imprisonment. According to the indictment, the four Vetëvendosje
activists acted as an organized group and attacked the Kosovo Assembly building with
an explosive device on 4 August 2016. In a separate development, on 24 November
Kosovo police officers arrested four Vetëvendosje Assembly members, including its
founder, Albin Kurti, after they failed to appear for their trial on charges of releasing
tear gas in the Assembly of Kosovo in October 2015. Subsequently, on 3 January
2018, the Basic Court of Pristina found the four Vetëvendosje Assembly members
guilty and gave each of them suspended sentences, meaning that they will not serve
time in jail but will face a two-year probation period.
30. On 24 November, the Basic Court of Pristina, presided over by a EULEX judge,
acquitted the Deputy Prime Minister of Kosovo, Fatmir Limaj, and his co-defendants
of organized crime, abuse of an official position of authority and accepting bribes.
The prosecution alleged that Mr. Limaj, in his former capacity as Minister of
Transport, Post and Telecommunications, manipulated tender procedures, gave and
received bribes and tampered with evidence in relation to three tenders published by
the Ministry between 2008 and 2010.
31. On 20 December, a trial session was held at the Basic Court of Pristina for the
nine individuals accused of planning attacks at a football match in Albania against
the visiting Israeli team and its fans in November 2016. Two of the defendants pleaded
guilty.
32. On 29 December, the President of Kosovo pardoned three former members of
the Kosovo Liberation Army convicted of killing a family near Gllogoc/Glogovac in
August 2001. The three pardoned individuals had been sentenced to 30 years in jail.
A joint statement issued on 4 January by the embassies of France, Germany, Italy, the

6/18

18-01182

S/2018/76

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America in Pristina expressed deep concern about the pardons.
33. In a welcome development, on 15 November the Prime Minister of Kosovo
appointed Negovan Mavric as Deputy Chair of the Commission on Missing Persons
of the government of Kosovo. The appointment of a member of a non-majority
community to the Commission, which had been a long-awaited development, is
envisaged under the Law on Missing Persons, adopted on 28 August 2011.
34. Also on 15 November 2017, the government of Kosovo announced the
establishment of the secretariat of the government Commission on Recognition and
Verification of the Status of Victims of Sexual Violence, and the decision to allocate
a monthly pension of €230 for survivors of conflict-related sexual violence. The
establishment of the secretariat will help make the government Commission fully
operational. While some civil society actors had previously advocated for a higher
pension amount, the budget allocation is regarded as a historic move forward for
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence. Notwithstanding this positive
development, lack of inclusiveness of the Kosovo Serb and other communities in the
process and the limited progress in ensuring access to justice for survivors of conflictrelated sexual violence are of significant concern.
35. On 23 November, the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment and punishment, Nils Melzer, concluded his two-day visit to
Kosovo. Prior to his arrival, from 13 to 20 November, he conducted a field visit to
Serbia. In a public statement issued after his visit, he encouraged the authorities in
Belgrade and Pristina to further strengthen their ongoing efforts to provide medical
and psychological support and rehabilitation to all victims of torture and other illtreatment.
36. Following a visit to Kosovo from 14 to 16 November 2016, the Advisory
Committee on the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities
of the Council of Europe published its fourth opinion on Kosovo on 2 January 2018.
The opinion included comments by UNMIK, in accordance with the agreement
between UNMIK and the Council of Europe on technical arrangements related to the
Framework Convention. In the opinion, it was noted that while the legal framework
on equality had improved, and the independence of the Office of the Ombudsperson
Institution had been strengthened, the legal framework for the protection of minorities
needed to be better implemented.
37. On 13 December, the President of Kosovo officially launched the preparatory
team for the establishment of the truth and reconciliation commission, in the presence
of ambassadors, international organizations and representatives of civil society. The
preparatory team will review the challenges faced in establishing the commission and
develop a road map to support the implementation of its mandate. The preparatory
team has one year to establish the commission. Despite concerns expressed by
the international and diplomatic community with regard to the mandate of the
Commission, the President of Kosovo urged international partners to support the
process.

VII. Women and peace and security
38. The Regional Women’s Lobby for Peace, Security and Justice in Southeast
Europe, composed of women from throughout the region, met in Pristina on 8 and
9 December to discuss the political and security situation in the region and to identify
ways to enhance the role of women in peacebuilding and in stability initiatives at the
regional and municipal levels.

18-01182

7/18

S/2018/76

39. The United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN-Women) continued to support survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence through a project on supporting women survivors of sexual violence,
implemented by the Kosovo Women’s Network. In total, 177 women survivors
received psychosocial support and microgrants through the project, which ended in
December 2017. UN-Women also supported case-based mentoring for local war crime
prosecutors and investigators.
40. On 11 December, the non-governmental organizations Women’s Rights, in
North Mitrovica, and Mundësia, in South Mitrovica, held their first dialogue session,
under the auspices of Mitrovica women’s trust building, a confidence-building
measure supported by UNMIK. At the event, panellists emphasized the central role
of women in supporting trust building in Mitrovica and the need to introduce
participation quotas for women in institutions and decision-making bodies.
41. The annual international campaign 16 Days of Activism against Gender-based
Violence took place throughout Kosovo from 25 November to 10 December.
Increased partnerships and joint actions between international, governmental and
civil society actors forged during the campaign contributed to greater public
awareness about the drivers and consequences of violence against women and girls.
As part of the campaign, the dance production One Day was performed in four cities
throughout Kosovo, drawing over 600 spectators. The performance brought to life
real stories of 30 Kosovo women relating to sexual violence, property rights and
patriarchal norms. Also as part of the campaign, on 7 December, the Council of
Europe and UNMIK, in cooperation with the European Union Office in Kosovo and
OSCE, organized a living library event where Kosovars recounted their personal
experiences facing gender stereotypes and obstacles to gender equality. The event
helped to increase awareness of the importance of gender equality and of changing
social and cultural norms in order to prevent gender-based violence.

VIII. Partnerships and cooperation
42. During the reporting period, UNMIK launched 12 confidence-building
measures to promote inter-ethnic cooperation in various parts of Kosovo, working in
close cooperation with local partners. Those measures included projects to support
multi-ethnic women’s groups in the area of income generation, to foster community
integration through sports and to promote multi-ethnic cultural activities. UNMIK
also began the implementation of a number of small-scale projects in the areas of
human rights, rule of law and trust building, in close cooperation with United Nations
Kosovo team partners.
43. On 21 December, the Missing Persons Resource Centre in Pristina, with support
from UNMIK, organized a round table in Pristina to discuss the implementation of
the conclusions of the June 2017 Geneva round table on missing persons and of the
recommendations of the 2015 report of the Working Group on Enforced or
Involuntary Disappearances. The Pristina round table brought together the Belgrade
and Pristina delegations at the Working Group on Missing Persons, members of the
Commissions on Missing Persons of the government of Kosovo and the Government
of Serbia as well as representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
the International Commission on Missing Persons, EULEX, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and UNMIK.
44. UNMIK continued its efforts to support the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2250 (2015) on youth, peace and security. From 1 to 8 December 2017,
participants from the June 2017 youth assembly in Kosovo worked together with the
Ministry of Culture, Youth and Sport of Kosovo on the drafting of the youth strategy
8/18

18-01182

S/2018/76

and youth action plan for 2018–2022. On 5 December, the multi-ethnic youth art
exhibition entitled “Breaking borders through art” was held in Gračanica/Graçanicё,
with support from UNMIK. Twenty young artists from diverse communities across
Kosovo participated in the event.
45. At the 23 November meeting of the Central European Free Trade Agreement
Joint Committee (CEFTA), the Kosovo delegation was unsuccessful in its call for the
adoption of an amendment to the rules of procedure that exclude UNMIK from
CEFTA meetings. The Kosovo delegation asked for the amendment for full
compliance with the 2012 Arrangements on Regional Representation and Cooperation
agreed between Belgrade and Pristina within the framework of the European Unionfacilitated dialogue. The participation of UNMIK in CEFTA meetings continued to
the extent required by CEFTA parties to ensure the Agreement’s functionality. Kosovo
is the 2018 CEFTA Chair in Office.
46. UNMIK continued to provide document certification services. A total of 741
documents were processed, including 441 relating to pensions and 300 to civil status,
such as high school documents, university diplomas and marriage, birth and death
certificates. UNMIK also continued to facilitate communication between the Kosovo
authorities and the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL). During
the reporting period, UNMIK processed the issuance of 30 international wanted
notices. On 1 December, INTERPOL removed from its database red notices for 18
residents of Kosovo, including Prime Minister Haradinaj, who are wanted by Serbia
for allegedly committing war crimes in Kosovo.

IX. Observations
47. I welcome the peaceful conduct of free and fair municipal elections throughout
Kosovo. The United Nations will continue to be a steadfast partner in advancing the
interests of all communities throughout Kosovo. In addition, in the period ahead, the
Mission will continue its efforts to promote intercommunal trust building in Kosovo,
through the implementation of various discussion forums and local-level initiatives.
48. The murder in broad daylight of Oliver Ivanović, head of the Civic Initiative
“Serbia, Democracy, Justice”, caused shock and outrage in Kosovo and the broader
region and the international community. The swift identification of those responsible
and their appearance before justice are essential for maintaining the momentum
towards lasting peace. I appreciated the restraint shown by political leaders in the
aftermath of this heinous crime as well as the commitment demonstrated by Belgrade
and Pristina to cooperate and avoid a fuelling of political tensions.
49. UNMIK and the entire United Nations family continue to support the efforts of
the European Union to advance peace, progress and stability in Kosovo. The steps
towards full integration of the Kosovo judiciary, according to the terms agreed during
the European Union-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, as well as the
steps taken towards Kosovo having a successful term as Chair in Office of CEFTA,
are indicators of real progress. I call upon leaders in Belgrade and Pristina to continue
to advance their mutual engagement during 2018, including towards the full
implementation of the agreements reached within the framework of the European
Union-facilitated dialogue.
50. In this light, I have observed with concern some recent setbacks in key areas,
primarily in the impartial application of the rule of law. The establishment of the
Kosovo Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office has been a key step
demonstrating the sincere intent of Kosovo to uphold the rule of law. This major
achievement was the result of close collaboration between Kosovo and the

18-01182

9/18

S/2018/76

international community. The recent attempt by certain members of the Assembly of
Kosovo to repeal the law on the Specialist Chambers and to undermine the credibility
of the institution is deeply disappointing. I strongly urge the political leaders of
Kosovo to continue to demonstrate their full commitment to justice and the rule of
law.
51. I reiterate my own call on Member States to support the trust fund which was
established in follow-up to the recommendations of the UNMIK Human Rights
Advisory Panel. More than ever, it is important for Member States to support this
initiative.
52. I am particularly grateful to my Special Representative, Zahir Tanin, and to the
Mission at large for their continued engagement with key leaders and stakeholders in
a coordinated effort to build greater trust among communities, and to promote
progress and long-term stability in Kosovo and the region. The capacities of UNMIK
remain at the service of all partners contributing to those objectives.
53. I conclude by reiterating my gratitude to the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes on the ground for their valuable collaboration with UNMIK, and to
longstanding partners of the United Nations in Kosovo, including the Kosovo Force,
the European Union and OSCE.

10/18

18-01182

S/2018/76

Annex I
Report of the European Union High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy to the Secretary-General on the
activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
from 16 October 2017 to 16 January 2018
1.

Summary
On 22 December 2017, the governing coalition attempted to organize an
extraordinary plenary session in the Assembly to abrogate the law on the Specialist
Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office. This failed since the Assembly could
not get a quorum in the Presidency of the Assembly. This attempt was widely
condemned by the European Union Special Representative and Head of the European
Union Office and the heads of European Union missions, as well as the international
partners of the European Union.
In the context of the European Union-facilitated dialogue, the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) made a significant contribution to the final
stage of judicial integration. By supporting the Kosovo Judicial Council and
the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council in complying with the obligations stemming from
the Justice Agreement, the Mission had a positive impact on the judiciary and the
stabilization process. EULEX further assisted the Ministry of Internal Affairs in
drafting administrative instructions related to the implementation of the agreement on
freedom of movement.
The Mission continued to monitor the adjudication of sensitive high-profile
criminal cases already handed over to Kosovo counterparts. As a general trend, the
Mission observed an increased reluctance on the part of the Kosovo judiciary to start
or move ahead with those cases.

2.

Activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo

2.1.

Executive
Organized crime and corruption
On 2 November, a panel of EULEX judges at the Basic Court of Mitrovica
announced its verdict in a case against two defendants charged with abuse of official
position or authority and fraud while in office. The defendants were acquitted of all
charges.
On 14 November, a panel of two local judges and one EULEX judge at the Court
of Appeals granted the appeal by one defendant and sent the case back for retrial. This
was a majority decision, with a dissenting opinion by the EULEX judge included in
the written ruling. Previously, on 6 October 2016, the defendant had been sentenced
by the Basic Court of Ferizaj/Uroševac to seven years of imprisonment for abuse of
official position, accepting bribes, trading in influence, providing assistance to
perpetrators after the commission of the offence and failure to report criminal
offences.
On 24 November 2017, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at
the Basic Court of Pristina announced its verdict in the Ministry of Transport, Post
and Telecommunications case related to, inter alia, organized crime, abuse of official
position or authority, and accepting and giving bribes. All five defendants were
acquitted of all charges.

18-01182

11/18

S/2018/76

Other serious crimes
On 19 October, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the Court
of Appeals pronounced its judgment in the case against one defendant. The panel
acquitted the defendant of the charge of extortion and sent the case regarding the
charge of incitement to commit aggravated murder to the Basic Court of Pristina for
retrial. The defendant had been sentenced by the Basic Court of Pristina to 37 years
of imprisonment on both charges.
Capacity-building
EULEX provided training on dark Internet markets and organized crime, aimed
at promoting the capacities of Kosovo prosecutors to investigate and prosecute
organized crime and terrorism. EULEX also provided training to enhance the
capacities of legal officers in the Kosovo prosecutorial system to take part in legal
drafting, as delegated by prosecutors. Furthermore, EULEX, in cooperation with the
Kosovo Special Prosecution Office, held a two-day training session for local
prosecutors and Kosovo police officers to raise their awareness regarding evidence
collected from Facebook and other online social media platforms.
Justice integration
On 24 October, 40 Kosovo Serb judges and 13 Kosovo Serb prosecutors were
appointed by decree of the President of Kosovo, Hashim Thaçi. This appointment will
allow them to work as judges and prosecutors at all levels within the Kosovo judiciary.
On the same day, around 140 support staff signed employment contracts.
Subsequently, the new Kosovo Serb President of the Basic Court of Mitrovica and the
Kosovo Serb Head of the Court of Appeals in Mitrovica were selected and nominated.
EULEX provided support and assistance in making this important step in a long and
difficult process, opening a new chapter in Kosovo’s judicial system.
Institute of Forensic Medicine
EULEX forensic experts conducted site assessments in Podujevë/Podujevo,
Kaçanik/Kačanik, Prizren and Rahovec/Orahovac. In addition, exhumations were
carried out in Suvi Do/Suhodoll (Mitrovica) and Gjakovë/Ðakovica. Four bodies were
found and identified. A total of 6 individual and 24 sets of re-associated human
remains were handed over to families. Progress continued to be made in reducing the
backlog of autopsy and clinical examination reports. Two local doctors continued with
the online training in forensic anthropology, provided by the University of Leicester.
Property rights
The Property Agency Appeals Panel of Kosovo adjudicated 35 cases, with 210
pending (33 of which are being translated). The Special Chamber of the Supreme
Court for privatization matters rendered 343 decisions in first-instance trial panel
cases and finalized 127 cases at the Appeals Panel level. As at 31 December, the
Special Chamber of the Supreme Court had 21,016 cases pending.
2.2.

Strengthening
Case monitoring
EULEX noted that a high percentage of scheduled court hearings — around 50
per cent over the last months — end up as “unproductive” hearings, that is, hearings
in which nothing substantial occurred and which are often adjourned based on
procedural grounds. EULEX raised this issue with the Chief State Prosecutor and the
Chairs of both the Kosovo Judicial Council and the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council.

12/18

18-01182

S/2018/76

EULEX agreed to draft jointly, but with the local institutions in the lead, specific
performance criteria and an inspection protocol in order to identify the reasons for
the high percentage of unproductive hearings and produce a set of recommendations.
There is also a trend whereby some court cases have to restart from the
beginning after the appointed judge has been reassigned. This has a negative impact
on effective court proceedings and fair trial procedures.
In monitoring the selection process for supervisory judges of court branches,
EULEX noted that not only the candidates, but also the evaluation committee chairs
and members were well prepared. The latest interviews indicated a step forward
compared with the previous interviews for court presidents. Hence, it can be
concluded that not only have members of the Kosovo Judicial Council learned from
previous experience, but also that the court presidents who serve on the evaluation
committees have a real interest in selecting the best candidates. The selection
procedures for Presidents of the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeals have also
been also completed, and EULEX has observed that there is already an improvement
in the performance of judges at the Court of Appeals.
Kosovo Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils
The Kosovo Judicial Council made progress in the drafting and adoption of
important regulations. On 22 November, the Kosovo Judicial Council adopted the
regulation on the training of judges and the regulation on the organization and
functioning of the assembly of presidents of courts and supervisory judges. The
Kosovo Judicial Council also selected the President and Deputy President of the Basic
Court of Mitrovica, in compliance with the applicable legislation. EULEX observed
that the interviews by the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council of 50 candidates for 18
vacant positions of State Prosecutors were held in a professional manner, treating
candidates fairly and equally. In the end, 21 candidates were selected who will be
proposed to the President of Kosovo for appointment as State Prosecutors.
The response by civil society to nominate candidates for the position on the
Kosovo Prosecutorial Council reserved for a member of civil society was
disappointing, especially since civil society has always claimed to be interested in the
functioning of the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council.
Kosovo Correctional Service
On 18 November, 130 prisoners in Dubrava Correctional Centre Block 6 started
to boycott work, joined by 157 prisoners from Block 3 two days later. This marked
the second boycott of work by prisoners, protesting the removal of their privilege to
receive food parcels and the reduction of leave days outside prison, in line with the
new Law on the Execution of Penal Sanctions. On 11 December, all prisoners at the
Dubrava Correctional Centre ended their boycott. EULEX closely monitored the
boycott and provided recommendations to the working group of the Kosovo
Correctional Service on amendments to the Law on the Execution of Penal Sanctions
as well as to the Dubrava Correctional Centre on its processing of prisoners’ leave
and privileges.
On 29 December, to the concern of EULEX, the President of Kosovo signed a
decree to pardon three high-profile inmates who were jailed for murdering five
members of the Hajra family in a vehicle ambush in 2001. Only one young daughter
survived the attack. It should be noted that the prison inmates enjoyed preferential
treatment all along and were notoriously known for misconduct. The inmates were
serving sentences ranging from 11 to 30 years.

18-01182

13/18

S/2018/76

Kosovo police
Regarding the 19 November run-off of the municipal elections in Kosovo,
EULEX closely monitored the preparation and response of the Kosovo police and
concluded that it performed well, followed all appropriate rules and procedures and
aptly handled cases of election violation.
On 13 December, 16 vacancies within the Special Operations Unit PristinaMitrovica were opened to police officers belonging to minority groups within the
organization. EULEX had suggested this option to Kosovo police senior commanders
for consideration, highlighting its potential value.
Police Inspectorate of Kosovo
Of the 23 new positions in the Kosovo Police Inspectorate, 6 administrative
positions were filled in September. With regard to the selection of the remaining 17
investigator and inspector positions, on 6 November the Minister of Internal Affairs
suspended the signing of contracts after numerous complaints by candidates, and
initiated an internal audit by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Kosovo Police
Inspectorate. The findings of the audit are currently being discussed. EULEX has
recommended re-advertising the positions.
On 21 November, a new Integrated Border Management National Coordinator
and Deputy Minister of Internal Affairs was designated, but his appointment is still
pending. There has thus been no progress in the implementation of the integrated
border management action plan or the development of the Centre for Border
Management.
European Union-facilitated dialogue
With regard to the European Union-facilitated dialogue, in particular the
implementation of the integrated border management technical protocol, the bridge
at the common crossing point at Merdare was demolished on 5 November, removing
the last obstacle to the construction of the new common crossing point. In addition,
the construction of the common crossing Point at Mutivodë/Mutivode is ongoing with
an expected construction period of 12 months. No progress has been made with regard
to establishing the three common crossing points to be hosted by Belgrade.
There has been no progress in the implementation of the licence plate sticker
regime, the registration of vehicles or the integration of 39 municipal civil status
officers in the northern municipalities.
The Minister of Internal Affairs of Kosovo signed a decision to recognize
driving licences issued by parallel structures and to allow for their replacement with
Kosovo driving licences on 15 December. This is an important step forward in the
implementation of the provisions stipulated in the agreement on freedom of
movement. Moreover, the implementation of the administrative instruction on the
criteria of citizenship has slowly started. Notwithstanding further clarification
provided by the Civil Registration Agency and by UNHCR, it is being implemented
differently by the various civil status offices, causing obstacles for applicants and
resulting in unequal treatment. EULEX is closely monitoring the situation and liaising
with the Civil Registration Agency, the Ministry of Internal Affairs, OSCE and
UNMIK on the issue.

3.

Other key issues
Nothing significant to report.

14/18

18-01182

S/2018/76

Annex II
Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office
On 24 October, the President of the Specialist Chambers, following
consultations with the judges of the Specialist Chambers, approved the directive on
counsel, leading to its subsequent adoption by the Registrar of the Specialist
Chambers on 6 November. The directive sets out the eligibility requirements for
counsel to practice before the Specialist Chambers and the rules for assignment and
appointment of counsel to suspects and accused, as well as to victims. In conjunction
with the adoption of the directive on counsel, the application process for counsel for
the list of Specialist Defence Counsel and of Victims’ Counsel of the Specialist
Chambers was opened on 6 November. The Specialist Chambers began to receive
applications immediately and the application process is ongoing. Applications are
available in all three official languages of the court (Albanian, English and Serbian),
with the application form and guidelines posted online.
The Registry of the Specialist Chambers continues to engage in close
collaboration with the host State in order to facilitate the work of the Specialist
Chambers, including in relation to the renovation of the future court premises in The
Hague. On 1 November, the Registrar met with representatives at the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, including the Ambassador for International
Organizations. On 2 November, the Registrar met with the Director of Legal and
Operational Affairs at the Ministry of Security and Justice. On 9 November, the
Deputy Registrar attended the meeting of the steering committee for the renovation
of the future court premises.
From 22 to 25 November, the President of the Specialist Chambers, joined by
the Registrar, undertook her first official visit to Kosovo. Meetings were held with
the Kosovo Minister of Justice, the Head of the Kosovo Bar Association and the
Ombudsperson, as well as representatives of international organizations, European
Union member States and donor countries. The President and the Registrar provided
updates on developments related to the Specialist Chambers in 2017 and the President
emphasized the need to ensure fair, independent, expeditious, safe and transparent
proceedings before the Specialist Chambers.
On 23 November, as part of the Specialist Chambers’ ongoing communication
and outreach activities, and integral to the first official visit to Kosovo by the
President of the Chambers, the President and Registrar held an information session
for Kosovo civil society in Pristina, providing information on the developments and
activities of the Specialist Chambers. The event was well attended and included
representatives from the Kosovo Serb community. It attracted significant media
coverage, with the entire session broadcast live on the primary Kosovo television
station. At this event, the President of the Specialist Chambers announced a pledge
by the Government of Switzerland for funding outreach activities, which will support
direct communication with relevant audiences in Kosovo and the region. During and
since her visit to Kosovo, the President has conducted numerous media interviews, in
Kosovo, throughout the region and in The Hague.
On 9 December, as part of the Specialist Chambers’ ongoing communication
and outreach activities, the Registrar presented the work of the Specialist Chambers,
at the annual conference of the Association of Defence Counsel Practicing before the
International Courts and Tribunals. The Registry of the Specialist Chambers has also
produced factsheets concerning defence at the Specialist Chambers as well as victims’
participation before the Specialist Chambers, and has continued to share such
materials and guidance directly with the Kosovo Bar Association.

18-01182

15/18

S/2018/76

On 19 December, the President, Registrar and Specialist Prosecutor briefed
European Union member States and ambassadors from contributing States in The
Hague on the current activities of the Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s
Office, and the three principals continued to engage with diplomatic representatives
in The Hague on potential future cooperation in the areas of witness protection and
the enforcement of sentences.
The Specialist Prosecutor’s Office is continuing its investigation into the
allegations contained in the January 2011 report by the Parliamentary Assembly of
the Council of Europe entitled “Inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking in
human organs in Kosovo”, in accordance with its mandate set out in the special law
adopted by the Assembly of Kosovo in August 2015. Irrespective of attempts to
revoke or amend the special law, the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office remains focused
on discharging its responsibilities. Among other things, the special law gives the
Specialist Prosecutor the authority to call upon Kosovo institutions to assist him.
When it has been in the interest of the investigation, assistance has been requested
and that assistance has been provided thus far. The Specialist Prosecutor will continue
to seek assistance from any person and any institution, domestic or international, to
advance the investigation and to ensure that it is done objectively, professionally,
impartially, thoroughly and well. Assistance from authorities in Belgrade and Pristina,
as well as from the European Union and the wider international community, is
essential. The Specialist Prosecutor’s Office requires the continued engagement and
full support of the international community and individual States in all its activities.
The Specialist Prosecutor’s Office is committed to fulfilling its mandate as efficiently
and in as short a time as possible without compromising the quality or credibility of
its work.

16/18

18-01182

S/2018/76

Annex III
Composition and strength of the police component of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 January 2018)
Country

Number

Austria

1

Bulgaria

1

Finland

1

Germany

2

Hungary

2

Russian Federation

2

Turkey

1

Total

10

Composition and strength of the military liaison component of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 January 2018)

18-01182

Country

Number

Czechia

2

Poland

1

Republic of Moldova

1

Romania

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

2

Total

8

17/18

S/2018/76

18/18

18-01182
