Friday,

FlFTH

EMERG

E

into account the views of France, a permanent member
of the Security Council-would require another round
of consultations among the co-sponsors and a very
large number of other delegations at a time when the
crisis precipitated by Israel over Jerusalem is most
pressing and when every moment is precious, the ccsponsors have auehcrized me to ask that draft resolution A/L.528/Rev.l
be put to the vote without operative
paragraph 4, its last paragraph. The co-sponsors are
confident that they reflect the views of the cverwhelming majority of Member States in this Assembly
when they express their belief that the Security Council
would, in fulfilment of its primary responsibility,
examine the Secretary-General’s report on the implementation of the resolution and the situation that
would arise from any new refusal by Israel to comply
with resolution 2253 (ES-V) and the present draft
resolution, and would take the necessary action to
ensure its implementation,

CONTENTS
Pa&?
Agenda item 5’:
Letter dated 13 June 1967 from the Minister
for Foreign Affairs cf the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics (A/671 7) (continued). . .

President:

Mr. Abdu.1 Rahman
(Afghanistan).
AGENDA

ITEM

14 July 1967,
at 3 p.m.

1

PAZHWAK

5

Letter
dated 13 June 1967 from the Minister
for
Foreign
Affairs
of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics (A/671 7) (continued)

1. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): The Assembly has. heard
the statements of a number of representatives on the
draft resolution ccntainedindccumentA/L,528/Rev.l,
Co-tiponscred by Afghanistan, Guinea, Iran, Mali,
Somalia and Turkey, as well as Pakistan.These statements give expression to the sense of very deep ccntern universally felt at the non-compliance by Israel
with resolution 2253 (ES-V),

6. For many weeks we have engaged incessantly in
negotiations which have so far proved barren. We
have not been able to agree on the solution of even a
single one of the many grave issues that must be
resolved if the Middle East is not to be plunged into
war again, It is only on Jerusalem that we have been
able to act, and act unanimously. Why? It is because
the General Assembly has taken into account on this
question- the moral issues at stake. It has heeded the
still, small voice of conscience, That is why, when
introducing the draft resolution, I asked the Assembly
for a vote of conscience, not of policy [ 1550th meeting].
It may well be that the adoption qf the present draft
resolution and the response that Israel makes to cur
call will mark the beginning of a movement towards
peace in the Middle East.

2. The defiance of Israel must be met as a matter
of the utmost urgency. It would defeat the very purpose
of resolution 2253 (ES-V), adopted by the Assembly
without dissent, and also of the draft resolution now
before us, if we were to afford more time to Israel
to continue its attempt to alter the status of the City
of Jerusalem, For this reason, I would, on behalf Of
the cc-sponsors of draft resolution A/L.528/Rev.l,
propose that the draft resolution be voted upon at this
meeting of the Assembly, I would hdpe that the
Assembly will agree to fhis suggestion.
3. The sponsors have been approached by some
delegations regarding the present wording of operative
paragraph 4 of the draft resolution. Several of them
expressed the view that the substance of this paragraph is implied and covered in operative paragraph 3,
which calls upon the Secretary-General to repqrt to
the Security Ccunoil on the implementation Of the
resolution.

7. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Assembly have
heard the statement just made by the representative Of
Pakistan. During that statement he prcpcsed.that draft
resolution A/L.528/Rev.l
be put to the vote at this
meeting of the Assembly.
8. In order that cur procedure may be clear, I wish
t’o consult the Assembly on this point, before I go on
to give Members some information about other aspects
of our work. I should therefore like to ask whether
there is any objection to the request of the delegation
of Pakistan that draft resolution A/L.528/Rev.lbeput
to the vote at this meeting of the Assembly. If there,
is no objection, I shall take it that the Assembly
agrees that the draft resolution should be put to the
vote at this meeting of the General Assembly.

4. The representative of France, Mr. Seydoux, stated
this morning [1553rd meeting] that he would like
operative paragraph 4 to be drafted in sucha way that
the Security Council would be called upon toconsider,
as a matter of urgency, the situation which would be
created by a further refusal on the part of Israel tc
implement resolution 2253 (ES-V), and to deal with
this question in the framework of the broader problem
which exists in Jerusalem,

IC was so decided.

5, The cc-sponsors have given due consideration tc
this appeal. However, since a reformulation
of
operative paragraph 4 of the draft resolution-taking

9. The PRESIDENT: Our programme of work for
this afternoon has therefore been decided upon unanimously by the Members of the Assembly.
ApV.1554

1
.\

2

General Assembly

I

- Fifth Emergency
.

10,. In order to give the Assembly an idea of the next
order of business-that
is, after we have completed
our work this afternoon-I
should like, with your
permission,
to read out a letter which I sent earlier
this afternoon to various groups of the membership.
THe first two lines of the letter mention the particular
gr’oup to which it is addressed. The rest of the letter
reads as follows:
the General
Assembly
“As you are aware,
adjourned on 5 July 1967 in order to allow time
for further consultations
in the interest of the work
of the Assembly.
When the Assembly
reconvened
on 12 July, I stated that I had not been formally
informed of the result of the consultations
forwhich
the General Assembly decided to adjourn on 5 July.
I went on to say the following:
“1 should like to think, therefore,
that these consultations
are still going on; and, while I fully
understand-as
I am sure all Members
do-that
such serious consultations
take time, if I may be
permitted
to do so, I should like to request all
representatives
engaged in these consultations
to
inform the Assembly,
directly or through the Chair,
about the result of their continuing efforts, and to do
this as soon as possible, keeping in mind that this
is an emergency session on a veryimportantmatter
of war and peace. No unnecessary
delay should be
allowed, while at the same time every desirable
opportunity
should be given for serious and hopeid
efforts in the interest of peace.”
“We are almost at the end of our consideration
of
the draft resolution ihich is before the Assembly,
and considerable
time has elapsed since the time
agreed upon for further consultations.
After the draft
resolution
has been, voted vpon, the Assembly will
proceed to the other phase of the agenda of the
emergency special session, As the eventual decision
is a matter for the entire membershipof
the Organization, it is necessary that I draw the attention of the
various groups to the fact that the Assembly should
be formally informed about the outcome of the oonsultations.
Judging frog
the list of speakers,
I
expect that the Assembly will need this information
at the beginning of the meeting on Monday morning,
“If thie representatives
may see Pit to inform the
Assembly
through the Chair, I would appreciate
receiving
the result of the consultations
not later
than 10.30 on Monday morning, 17 July-along
with
other views,
if any, that the Member States may
wish to express,
“Once again, I appeal for the exertion
of every
effort $0 bring the work of this ‘emergency spec;al
session of the Assembly to a fruitful conclusion.”
The-letter

way,

of course,

signed by me,

11. Therefore,
on Monday morning,
17 July, I hope
that the Assembly will be informed about the outcome
of the consultations,
before we take up the next phase
of the item before the emergency special session. We
also have the report of the Credentials
Committee
[A/6742 and Corr.11 pending on our agenda.
12. I have on my list thenames of two representatives
who wish to speak in the general debate. After that, I
have on my list the names of eight representatives

Special Session - Plenary
who wisli
taken,

to explain

Meetings

..~

their votes before

the vote is

13. I shall now call on the representatives
to speak in the general debate.

who wish

14. Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulgaria)
(translated
from
French): Before adjourning its work for a week, the
General Assembly unanimously adopted resolution 2253
(ES-V), on the measures taken by the Government of
Israel to change the status of the City of Jerusalem.
In that resolution,
the Assembly
declared that those
measures were invalid and it called upon the Government of Israel to rescind them and to desist from any
action which would alter the status of the City,
15. Instead of complying with the General Assembly%
requests, Israel declared at once that it had not the
* slightest intention of taking them into consideration.
16. This resolution-conceived
and adopted as a result
Of the measures taken by the Israel authorities
on 27
June with a view to annexing the city of Jerusalem
to
the territory
of Israel-was
a unanimous expression of
international
opinion. Not one voice-not
even that of
Israel-was
raised in the Assembly in opposition to Lt.
1’7. During the debates in the Assembly
and in the
Security Council on thequestion of Israel’s aggression,
the representatives
of Israel have often used such
terms as “international
conscience”,
“international
public opinion” and so on, to try to show that Israel’s
aggression
and its annexationist
activities
had met
with approval,
Mr. Csatorday
Chair.

(Hungary),

Vice-President,

teak the

18. To seek to present a particular
Press and other
propaganda media, admittedly
very
powerful
but
orchestrated
by imperialist circles and the emissaries
of the aggressor
as the expression
of international
opinion, when they are simply means of trying to form
it, is to try to make use of a hired claque and to
identify this with the international
conscience
in the
face of and in defiance of a unanimous vote by the
General Assembly,
where even the representative
Of
Israel did not dare to raise his voice against a resolution in fact condemning Israel,
and is, it must be
admitted, the height of cynicism, However, the aggreesor, like all aggressors-and
history has furnishedus
with some striking
examples-follows
a logic too
different from that of ordinary people for us to dwell
on this matter.
19. In his letter to the Secretary-General
in which
he tries to justify the annexation of Jerusalem,
the
Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Israel tries to use
the same arguments as those he had presented previously to the General Assembly,
In this reply, as in
those he made in the Assembly, he adduces arguments
in favour of the attack on the Arabcountries.
Aocording to him “during the previous nineteen years there
has been no such legislation to protect the Holy Places
in Jerusalem”
[see A/6753]. Providing protection
for
the Holy Places has been an excuse for many aggressors
in the past. But it cannot excuse the death
and destruction dealt by the Israel troops, the thOUSandS
of victims and the terrible suffering
of the civilian
population, still less the annexation.

1554th-meeting
20. The protection of the Holy Places supposedly
represents, however, only part of Israel’s effort to
secure respect for universal interests in Jerusalem,
we are told from Israel’s side. If Mr. Eban is to be
believed, Israel occupied Jerusalem and annexed it to
its territory in order to bring the Arabs freedom “to
renew or initiate contacts with their Jewish neighbours in Jerusalem and elsewhere in Israel” [i&&l.],
to be able to provide them with a regular water supply,
to give them maternal and child welfare clinics, and
to extend to them the social rights enjoyed by the inhabitants of Israel. This is, a list of the benefits
promised to the Arabs which Israel thinks it can
present to the international
community as an excuse
for occupying their territory. In such circumstances,
marvels the Foreign Minister of Israel how can anyone use the term “annexation”, which is quite out of
place? According to him, the measures taken in no
way constitute annexation but are concerned purely
and simply with “the integration of Jerusalem in the
administrative
and municipal spheres”. [im.]
21. How, grumble the Tel Aviv leaders, can integration at the municipal and administrative
spheres be
confused with annexation? That they sent aircraft and
used napalm bombs to achieve their ends and destroy
the population is of little importance. The theory which
they seek to introduce into international relations, after
of course succeeding in imposing their rule by fire and
sword on certain Arab territories,
is not a new one.
It is fabricated solely to allow them to proceed, they
hope, to consolidation and annexation, and, what is
more important,
to the annexation of, other Arab
territories.
22. Again, it matters little that themethod being used
by the present occupier has been used by other conquerors and oppressors, by Hitler’s hordes which
invaded countries near and far in search of living
space and to bring German order to them, and by the
imperialists
and colonialists on the pretext of bringing
the subjugated peoples the fruits of western civilization.
23. All these theories, no matter how new they pretend to be, serve only to promote and instal colonialism
pure and simple in a new form. Moreover, they have
been used in the past by the spokesmen of the leaders
in Tel Aviv. There is nothing new in these theories,
therefore, to astonish the world, nothing save the aggressor itself, a small State, a State brought into
being by the United Nations. All the rest is old and
classic. I say again, in all imperialist
aggressions we
have first the violation of signed agreements, devastation, famine and death, and then the annexation of the
occupied territories,
oppression of the people of those
territories,
and all that follows from these,
24. The case of Jerusalem is merely the first link in
the chain of the policy of aggression, annexation and
colonisation practised by the leaders of Tel Aviv. It
was even announced in a statement by one of the
Israel’s
leaders and summarized as follows in the
News of the Week in Review of ‘The New York Times
of Sunday last:
“What is becoming increasingly clear is that Israel
is settling in for an extended occupation of its Arab
lands and that she intends this time to pursue her
policies in her own way.” y
y Quoted in Englieh by thq speaker.

- 14 July 1967

3

25. Thus, Israel’s
new form of expansionism and
aggressive policy is justified by old imperialist
and
colonialist
arguments,
presented under cover of
bringing peace and social justice to the victims of the
aggression,
26. Upheld by his friends and backers the representative of Israel has confined himself tojdeclaring
that the aim of Israel in committing
aggression in the
Middle East was simply to ensure peace in that region.
Starting and waging a war is a strong way of ensuring
peace! Once again the old imperialist
adage has been
applied by Israel to justify its aggression against its
neighbours. All the statements of the Israel leaders
and their champions in the imperialist
countries onthe
so-called policy of peace are for the sole purpose of
trying to show that itwas notIsraelbut
the Arab countries which were the aggressors.
2’7. It has been demonstrated,
however, that these
statements of peaceful intentions on the part of Israel
could not stand up ta the facts. While the statements
of the Arab Heads of State, in particular
President
Nasser, that they would not taketheinitiative
of direct
military
action have been cornoborated by the facts,
those of Israel have been given the lie. All the explanations painstakingly
built up by Israel’s Minister for
Foreign Affairs in his intervention of 21 June [1529th
meeting], taken separately and together, are proved
false in the face of the statements of more responsible
leaders of Israel, as reported in TheNew York Times
of 6 July, where it says:
“Mr. Eshkol acknowledged that he had put off
military
action at the request of President Johnson
. , .n and goes on:
“But after the President
of the United States
requested whatever he requested,”
Mr. Eshkol
said, nit was decided by an inner Cabinet group
after consultation with leaders of Gahal and Rafi,
who were then in opposition, to give him the requested
respite,
“After I explained the President’s
request, all
agreed that if President Johnson asked US to wait
a few days, we should wait.”
28. Thus, Israel’s
leaders were waiting to strike
two days before the date on which President Johnson
and the Vice-President
of the United Arab Republic
were to meet to find a Folution to the question. It
would be pointless to seek a better demonstration
of their intentions
and their deliberate
plans of
aggression.
29. At the present moment, Israel troops are attaoking along various sectors of the front, in violation of
the cease-fire ordered by the Security Council and
accepted by the parties. These actions are beingundertaken to spread panic and if possible to consolidate
the occupying fcrce’s
positions.
Through
local
manoeuvres at one part of the front or another they
are trying to impose their territorialdemands
founded
on aggression-as
is the case now in Jerusalem-and
to make the international
community accept them.
30. Israel’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs hhs also
informed us that the Israel authorities have started
talks with certain international
religious inStitUtibJS.
with a view to granting them facilities in Jerusalem:

4

General Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

This has been done in order to spread the belief that
these institutions
have no objection to the annexation
of Jerusalem
by Israel’s
leading circles. This tactic
is not new; although it has been used in the past, we
are sure that it will hang fire now. It is doing a disservice to the religious institutions
concerned to use
the conversations
with them as an argument, before
the General Assembly
and before the international
community, favour of annexation. It is not the religious
institutions
or the conversations
with them which will
determine to which State a particular
piece of territory should belong; the decision lies with the people
who have lived on that territory
for centuries.
31. All the conflicting
statements
and theories invented by Israel’s
representatives
have but one aim:
to force the seizure of another State’s territory
on
the Arab peoples and have it accepted by the international community,
32, The United Nations must not allow aggression to
be used as a means of settling international disputes,
thus opening the way for a new kind of colonialism
practised by small States as proxies for their imperialist protectors.

33. The case of Jerusalem is important, because it
is the first step taken in this direction by those leading
circles in Tel Aviv with an eye to the annexation of
the Arab territories.
The aggressors must not be
allowed to enjoy the fruits of their aggression;
otherwise, the United Nations would be rewarding
aggression and encouraging future aggression.
34. The delegation of the People’s Republic of
Bulgaria considers that it is absolutely necessary to
force the leading circles of Israel to comply with the
provisions of the resolution adopted on 4 July 1967,
calling for the annulment of all measures connected
with the annexation of Jerusalem, For this reason it
will support the draft resolution submitted by the
delegation of Pakistan and co-sponsored by a number
of other Asian and African delegations [A/L.528/
Rev.11, a draft resolution whioh aims at barring the
way to future acts of aggression which might occur
in the world.
Mr.
BEAULIEU
(Canada) (translated
from
French): Canada has made it quite plain that it regards
the withdrawal of forces as one of thecardinal factors
in any lasting settlement in the Middle East, As the
Canadian Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs said
in the Assembly on 23 June [1533rd meeting], respect
for the territorial
integrity of the nations of the
Middle East, including steps to ensure the security
and international supervision of frontiers, is one of
the principles that Canada believes must be adhered
to if a just and lasting settlement is to be found for the
present crisis, The Secretary of State emphasized,
however,, that the withdrawal of forces could not be
considered in isolation but must be linked with the
other fundamental questions involved,
35.

36. This is the context in which Canada has studied
the draft resolution of Pakistan [A/L.528/Rev.l]
on
the measures taken by Israel to change the status of
the City of Jerusalem, From the outset we have
opposed any precipitate action which might prejudice
the preservation of the special spiritual and religious
interests in Jerusalem and have suggested that inter-

Special Session - Plenary

Meetings

--

national responsibility for safeguarding those interests
might be entrusted to the United Nations, Paragraph2
of draft resolution A/L.523/kev.l,
submitted by a
group of Latin American countries-aresolutionwhich
Canada supported-is equally relevant to these considerations, In fact, this draft resolution, had it been
adopted, would have reaffirmed the conviction of this
Assembly, that “no stable international order can be
based on the threat or use of force” and would have
declared that “the validity of the occupation or acquisition of territories brought about by suchmeans should
not be recognized”.
3’7. My delegation thinks that, inconsidering thedraft
resolution submitted by the delegation of Pakistan,
the Assembly should be guided both by the principles
quoted earlier and by a considered estimate of the
practioal means which the Assembly and the Security
Council can adopt in order to work out a settlement
for the dangerous and unstable situation in the Middle
East,
38. We must stress, however,’ that the future Of
Jerusalem and the protection of the Holy Places are
a matter of special concern to all Members of the
United Nations and that this Organization has alegitimate interest in any ‘step which is taken, an interest
deriving both from the profound importance Of
Jerusalem to many countries and religious communities and from the historic responsibility of this
Organization for measures on behalf of peace in this
region.
39. The draft resolution submittedby PakistanClearlY
establishes the principle embodied in the earlier
resolution on this subject [2253 (ES-V)], to the effect
that there must be no unilateral action regarding
Jerusalem ,,which might prejudice the international
interest in that city. In the light of this principle, mY
delegation can support the first three operative paragraphs of the resolution. We recognize theefforts that
Israel has made, as described in document A/6753
of 10 July 1967, tosatisfy international anxiety Over
Jerusalem and the Holy Places, but we do not think
that this should be the last word on the matter or that
the international interest can be satisfied by measures
of that kind, There is an obvious needfor further Consultations and discussions at the international level
on this matter within the United Nations framework and
we hope that the Governmeht of Israel will be ready to
pursue further the study of practical measures which
might prevent the status of Jerusalem and the Holy
Places from becoming a permanent source ofgrievances and complaints.
40. We listened with interest to the statement of the
representative of Pakistan informing the Assembly,
on behalf of all the sponsors of the draft resolution,
that paragraph 4 will not be put to the vote. In view
of the fact that it had reservations on that paragraph,
my delegation is glad that this difficulty has been
smoothed out,
41. Before ending my remarks, I should like to stress
the need to take up the problem of Jerusalem and the
Holy Places in the context of the other measures
required to bring about a just and balanced settlement.
We cannot consider any international measure which
might be required to bring about a practical and fair
settlement of the question of Jerusalem without, for

1554th meeting - 14 July 1967
example, taking into account arrangements
in the
adjacent territories,
The danger of letting thepresent
situation linger on is clear and considerable. We mus t
therefore in all urgency bend our efforts
to finding
the ,means to enable the consultations
necessary
for
the establishment
of a just and lasting peace to open.
According to my delegation, the General Assembly
should ask the Security Council, which already has
the whole question before it, to continue its study of
means of eliminating the dangers and instability
in
the Near East, in the light of anybroad outlines which
might emerge from the Assembly,
In our view, that
is the best and most promising method of proceeding,
in the present circumstances,
42. Mr. GURINOVICH (Byelorussian
Soviet SOCialiSt
Republic) (translated from Russian): ThroughIsrael’s
fault, a tense situation, which is a cause of alarm t0
all peace-loving peoples, continues in the MiddleEast.
Israelis
ruling circles,
with the support of the ‘imperialist
forces of a number of Western
countries,
especially the United States, are doing their utmost to
consolidate the results of their treacherous
aggression.
43. The Israel aggressors,
who are acting in the
Middle East as the shock troops for United StatesUnited Kingdom imperialism,
are anxious to deal from
a position of strength, They are brazenly trampling
underfoot the lawful rights and interests
of the Arab
peoples, The imperialists,
of the United States, United
Kingdom and Western Germany are covering up and
trying to justify these acts of the Israel militarists.
With every passing day we see more clearly that the
design of the aggressive
Israel forces and their imperialist
protectors
is to strike a blow against the
national liberation movement in the Middle East and
to bring to their knees the peoples of the Arab
countries
which in recent years have made great
progress in their fight for independence.
44. The United Nations must frustrate these insidious
designs of the imperialists
and help the Arab States
to defend their freedom and independence.
45. Thanks to the energetic action of the socialist
countries
and other peace-loving
States, military
operations in the Middle East have been halted, However, the reckless conduct of the Israel military
may
at any time give rise to a new conflict. The main task
of all Members of the United Nations now is to secure
the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal
of all
Israel
troops from the captured territories
of the
United Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan. The Members
of the United Nations cannot permit the aggressor
to
benefit with impunity from his perfidious
attack.
46. It is precisely
the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal
of the aggressor’s
troops from the captured
territories
that can stop the annexation of Jerusalem
by Israel and put an end to this latest act of brigandage
on the part of Tel Aviv.
47. As we all know, on 4 July 1967 the United Nations
General Assembly adopted a resolution [ 2253 (ES-V)]
which expressed deep concern at the situation prevailing. in Jerusalem as a result of the annexation of that
City by Israel. As can be seen from the text of the
resolution,
the United Nations %onsiders
that these
measures are invalid” and calls for the rescinding
of
all measures taken by Israel to annex Jerusalem.

/

6

48. Not even themost vehement supporters
of Israel’s
aggression
dared to vote against that resolution, Each
“Yes” that resounded in this hallduring thevote on the
draft
resolution
submitted
by Pakistan
and other
countries
was a demand for the elimination
of the
consequences
of the annexation of Jerusalem by Israel,
But Israel,
which did not participate
in the voting,
bluntly and insolently
rejected this demand, thereby
displaying
its complete contempt for the General
Assembly’s
decision. It is perfectly obvious that such
defiant conduct on the part of the Israel leaders,
who have run amok, can be explained by the support
they receive from ruling circles in the United States.
It is no accident that the United States delegation
abstained
in the vote on the resolution
regarding
Jerusalem,
although twenty-four
hours previously
the
United States representative,
referring to highgovernmental sources,
declared from this rostrum
that the
United States did not recognize the unilateral acts of
Israel designed to alter the status of Jerusalem.
In
this case, as in others, the aggressor
and its patrons
acted in concert, completely failing to take into consideration
the will of the ninety-nine States Members
of the United Nations which hadsupported the Pakistan
draft resolution [A/L.527/Rev.l].
49. The Foreign Minister of Israel so firmly believed
that his country’s
aggressive acts wouldgo unpunished
that he even had the audacity to inform the SecretaryGeneral
officially
of Israelfs
intention [A/6753] not
to carry out this resolution. He referred
to his statements of 21 and 29 June [1529th and 1541st meetings]
which were rejected by the overwhelming
majority of
representatives
who spoke from this rostrum
and
who on 4 July voted for the adoption of a resolution
calling
for the rescission
of the annexation
of
Jerusalem,
50. At the same time, the Prime Minister of Israel
openly advocated the seizure
of Arab lands. In an
interview
published in the West German magazine
Der Spiegel he referred directly to the final annexation
of all Jerusalem
and the alienation of other territories of the Arab countries, l’hus ,.the Prime Minister
brazenly
declared-I
quote--The
Gaza Strip must
remain in Israel’s
hands.”
51. My delegation cannot remain indifferent to such
annexationist
statements,
especially
when made by
no less a person than the Prime Minister of Israel.
The Prime Minister
advances a programme
and the
military
authorities
in the occupied Arab territories
are taking steps to “legalize” the seizure of the Arab
lands. Even now they are considering the question of
the future of the western
provinces
of fordan. How
much longer can the Israel aggressor
be permitted
flagrantly
to disregard
the resolutions
of the United
Nations and to proceed with its annexationist policies?
It is time to take decisive measures
to terminate
Israel’s
shameless aggression
and compel it to withdraw its troops from Arab territories.
52. The Israel representative
has spoken ProfnSelY
about the so-called
problem
of free access
to
Jerusalem.
In this respect, we should like to emphasize
that Israel is not showing concern for the religious
feelings of the faithful, but is adopting a purely Cornmercial
approach and wants only to line its pockets.

’

6

General

Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

According to Le Monde of 18-19 June 1967, the Israel
tourist office announced that it would begin receiving
organized tourist
groups in Jerusalem from 25 June,
that is, even before Israel passed the illegal bill on
the annexation of Jerusalem.
The Israel tourist
officials are now carefully computing the tens of millions
of dollars they hope to receive as a result of Israel’s
annexation of Jerusalem.
This fact alone reveals the
real aims of the aggressor:
to obtain, withthe support
of the imperialist
Powers,
territorial,
political,
economic and other advantages
by maintaining its
illegal occupation of foreign territories.
53. The facts also show that the Israel military are
not complying with the General Assembly% resolution
[2252 (ES-V)] on humane treatment
of prisoners
of
war and the civilian population in the Arab territories
occupied by Israel.
Can such acts by the Israel
invaders as compelling tens of thousands of Arabs to
leave the places of their birth on the west bank of the
River Jordan be termed humane? According
to the
Press, more than 150,000 refugees have crossed the
Jordan and are now in exile, Such a mass eviction of
the Arabs
is part of the implementation
by Israel
extremists
of a pre-conceived
plan, not only to seize
the very rich and fertile land in this part of Jordan,
hut also to drive out the Arab populati,on, for racists
as well as other reasons, This is clearly illustrated
by the statement of the Defence Minister of Israel on
11 June, to the effect that the presence of Arabs on
the west bank of the River Jordan creates social and
economic problems because-and
I quote--“The
people
of Israel would run the risk of becoming a Jewish-,
Arab people”. What course, then, has been taken by
the Israel
militarists,
those staunch defenders
of
racial purity? Israel is driving the Arabs from the
land they had owned for centuries
and making it
impossible
for them to live where their ancestors
lived. On 24 June Le Monde reportedin this connexion:
” . . . .the occupying troops deliberately
created an
atmosphere of terror and insecurity,
firing at regUhr
intervals and encouraging the Arabs to flee along the
Jerusalem. road to Amman. , .I.
54. On 11 July the United States newspaper The New
York Times said that the refugees were continuing to
cross the River Jordan eastwards,
being driven by
fear of the numerous searches and by food shortages.
The same newspaper
pointed out that the Israel guards
on the cease-fire
line refused passage to Arab refugees
who were trying
to return
to the west bank of the
Jordan.
Hundreds
of people cannot rejoin
their
families,
even despite
the efforts
of Red Cross
representatives,
Again according
to The New York
Times Israel has declared that the more than 150,000
person’s
who fled into Jordan
during
the Israel
aggression
must, in order to return home, present
identity documents
and health and customs clearanae
certificates,
and undergo a so-called reliablility
chedk.
But how can identity cards be requested of people
who fled for their lives, leaving their homes in flames7
Is it not amookerytoaskhingryand
exhausted people,
who are returning
home, for documents concerning
their health? It is sheer blasphemy,
It is perfectly
obvious that by setting such conditions for the refugees,
the Israel
authorities
can prevent any one of them
from returning home.

Special Session - Plenary

Meetings

55. The mass expulsion of the Arabs is a weighty
indictment
of the Israel militarists,
Moreover, as
Le Monde reported on 7 July:
n. . . according
to a recent Israel decision, no
. Arabs who leave the west bank starting Wednesday
(5 July), will be able to return”.
56. These facts testify to the inhuman treatment of
the peaceable civilian population by the Israel invaders,
to the implementation by Israel of its monstrous plans
to expel the Arabs from the west bank of the Jordan,
to the failure of Israel to comply with the General
Assembly resolution and to its violation of the United
Nations Charter and the generally recognized rules
of international law.
57. The height of cynicism is.reached.by
the Israel
Government’s
statement that it is sure it enjoys the
support of world opinion, Israel is supported only
by the ruling circles of those countl;ies which prepared and encouraged
its aggression
against the
neighbouring Arab States. We can confidently say
that these imperialist
forces not only do not reflect
world opinion, but do not even reflect the opinion of
their own peoples or that of decent people within
Israel itself.
58. Genuine world opinion has been expressed at this
session of the General Assembly and in the Press Of
various countries,
and it calls for the condemnation
of Israel’s
aggression
and the immediate and unconditional withdrawal
of the occupation foroes from
all the seized territories.
We are confident that the
peoples of the world will achieve’ this aim and will
frustrate
the predatory
designs of Israel
and its
patrons.
59. My delegation considers
that the General Assembly must condemn Israel for its failure to comply
with Assembly resolutions
and must call upon it to
carry them out to the letter, including the resolution
on Jerusalem;
the Assembly
must also prescribe
action to ensure the removal of the aggressor’s
trOOp8
from all the occupied territories
of the United Arab
Republic, Syria and Jordan, Such a decision, and it
alone, would promote the restoration
of peace and
tranquillity in the Middle East,
60. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
Of
Israel, who has expressed a wish to make a statement
in exercise of his right of reply.
61. Mr. EBAN (Israel):
It is not intention ijo answer
in detail all the virulent attacks made on my country
by Arab and Soviet representatives
and those closely
associated with them, These representatives
have all
but monopolized several meetings on this debate,
62. The range of misrepresentation
was broad. For
example, the Byelorussian
representative
totallymisrepresented
both the policy and the practice of Israel
in relation to population movements, The opposite Of
what he said is the truth. Steps have been taken both
to stem the eastward movement and also to organize
the implementation of the Israel Government’s
decision
to allow the westward
movement, of which information
was given to the General Assembly.
63. Similarly, it is lamentable that the Syrianrepresentative should have exploited deep religious emotions

1554th meeting
in order to bring totally false charges about the situation in certain of the Holy Places. The security and
peace of those Places are open to the contemplation
of all interested
to come and see. Indeed, the testimony of authoritative
religious
leaders is available
for all who wish to arrive at truthful appraisals.
, 64. Nor will I argue with the Syrian representative
about his personal references.
There was a time
when personal
denigration
was, by convention,
renounced in the General Assembly, where we appear as
the spokesmen of our sovereign States.
65. To Arab and Soviet spokesmen, I would only say
that aggressive
oratory is not the path to peaceful
settlement,
The intemperate
tone of utterances
in
United Nations organs can only diminish the public
respect in which the international discourse
shouldbe
held, It would be well for all of us to remind ourselves
what the United Nations is intended to be. It is intended
to be an instrument for solving conflicts, not an arena
for waging them.
66, I refer especially to the charges repeated this
morning and this afternoon by the representatives
of
Bulgaria
and the Byelorussian
SSR and others who
have spoken of Israel aggression.
Here is a State
which was encircled, blockaded and openly threatened
with extermination,
which was in a situation in which
multitudes
throughout the world thought that its days
were numbered, which defended itself successfully.
Tsrael is now denounced for having refused to die,

-

14 July 1967

7

manent need for a just and final peace, This prospect
would be fatally prejudiced by restoring the conditions
and situations
out of which the conflict arose. That
is why so many representatives
have understood and
affirmed
that ‘the total renunciation
and abandonment
of all claims and forms of belligerency
is an essential
condition of any movement towards a better future.
72. The cease-fire
agreements
are the first stage
in the transition
to a peaceful Middle East, but it is
of course an interim stage ‘to be followed by a negotiated settlement
designed to ensure peaceful coexistence
between the States of the Middle East. The
final peace settlement should be a mutuallynegotiated
and mutually agreed settlement
in which truce lines
are replaced by recognized boundaries, in which there
are agreed security
arrangements,
mutual recognition of rights, co-operative
solutions of humanitarian
problems,
and the satisfaction
of universal
spiritual
interests
through
an effort
to concert definitive
arrangements
with those directly concerned.
73. Every Arab State that embarks with us upon a
peace discussion
will find Israel willing to exchange
ideas and proposals,
taking account of the mutual
rights of the parties. Tt is in that spirit that we shall
approach the task of attaining reciprocal
peace and
security.
It is urgent that this matter be transferred
from the realm of public denunciation to frameworks
and circumstances
conducive to fruitful discussions.

67. The question whether Israel is an aggressor
is
not even an open question in the viewpoint of the United
Nations organs, for twice-once
in the Security Council
11360th meeting] and once in the General Assembly
11548th meeting]-has
this question been put, and on
both occasions this monstrous
charge of Israel aggression
has been overwhelmingly
rejected by the
majority of Member States.
.
68. Instead of lingering on, all the speeches on which
a right of reply could be exercised,
I take this opportunity
of briefly restating my Government’s
views
on central issues raised in’ this debate.

74. Tn Jerusalem,
the objective
is to achieve a
situation giving an effective and acceptable expression
to universal
spiritual
interests.
We hope that the
status of a peaceful Jerusalem,
in which theuniversal
spiritual
concerns of mankind are effectively
safeguarded, will gain ultimate recognition. Wehavemade
it clear that measures of an administrative
nature do
not prejudice our readiness and our intention to work
towards
the goal of safeguarding
those universal
spiritual
interests.
In fact, we have in recent days
pursued an intensive dialogue over a wide field in an
effort to give effective expression
to,universal
conIn this process,
we have examined and are
cerns.
examining, various proposals,

69. First,
I refer to the general situation in our
region, to which many speakers have made reference.
A few weeks ago, Israel faced perils so great that it
is still difficult to contemplate them without emotion.
The survival of our State and the physical existence
of its individual citizens were in acute and imminent
danger. We had to meet this perilwithout
any prospect
of physical assistance.
We were strongly
supported
by the opinion of peace-loving
Governments
and
Peoples, but we faced the issue of collective
and
individual survival in solitude.

75. We have a deep and respectful understanding
of
the concern
of Moslems
for their Holy Places. It
goes without saying that the custody’ of the Moslem
Holy Places in Jerusalem
should be in the hands of
authoritative
representatives
of Islam,
with free
aocess fully ensured for all Moslems.
Accordingly,
we shall welcome consultations
with Moslem representatives
in the vicinity of our contry and throughout
the world,

79. The. gravity of this experience has deeply affected the national mood. It explains why we oannot
be asked to put ourselves in so precarious
a situation
again. The proceedings of the General Assembly
last
week revealed a wide measure of understanding
of
this position, as well as a general desire to construct
a peaceful and stable situation in the Middle East,
based on the total renunciation
and abandonment of
belligerent claims ‘“and actions,
71. The fact that we have emerged from immediate
danger does not affect our ardent wish and our per-

76. Jerusalem
is a word which stirs the deepest
emotions
of our people. In ancient times this nation
converted
a barren hill into a spiritual
metropolis
which has never ceased to communicate a message of
nobility and grandeur to all mankind. But Jerusalem,
which so poignantly touches the national memory and
the national hope, is also the focus of a UniVerSal
reverenoe
whioh commands our scrupulous
respect.
For this reason we have proposed to replace the assertion of exclusive and unilateral control of the Holy
Places by arrangements
giving effective expression
to the universal
interest.
This is the positive and
salient innovation in the statement which my Govern-

8

General

Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

ment conveyed to the General Assembly
a few days
ago [see A/6753].
It ,is because the Pakistani
draft
resolution
[A/L.528/Rev.l]
ignores this affirmative
aspect, as well as because it does not describe the
factual situation with accuracy,
and also because of
its juridical
weakness,
that we have taken a negative
attitude towards
it and refuse to participate
in the
vote upon it.
77. However,
we believe that further
and deeper
examination
of the ideas and the proposals contained
in the communication
that I submitted to the General
Assembly earlier will increasingly
come to bear upon
world public opinion. I hope that, on closer and more
deliberate consideration,
Israel’s proposal for replacing unilateral
and exclusive
control by effective
arrangements
for expressing the international
concern
will be more perceptively
seized for its significance
within the total Middle Eastern context and that the
effective
satisfaction
of universal
interests
in the
Holy City may inaugurate
an era of progress
and
peace for the historic region atwhose centre Jerusalem
stands.

Special Session - Plenary

Meetings

of Jerusalem
and the question of a peaceful settlement in the, Middle East are inseparable, and in this
context my delegation has maintained that the first
priority
should be concentrated
on achieving the
withdrawal
of the occupying forces. My delegation
has also maintained that direct negotiations between
the parties concerned will help in bringing about an
enduring peace in the Middle East, failing which an
effective United Nations action should be agreed upon
and undertaken.
84. My delegation believes that although a separate
decision by the General Assembly
on the City of
Jerusalem cannot by itself help in solving the whole
question of the Middle East, it can at least focus
world public opinion on the necessity
of protecting
the rights of all peoples belonging to the Judaic,
Christian
and Islamic faiths to free and unrestricted
access to their Holy Places, With that understanding
in view, my delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution contained in document A/L.528/Rev,l,
as
further revised by the representative
of Pakistan.
Mr. Pazhwak

(Rfghanistan)

resumed

the Chair.

78. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call upon representatives who wish to explain their votes before the
voting begins,

85. The PRESIDENT:
The representative
of Nepal
was the last who wished to speak in explanation of
his vote before the voting.

79. Mr. SCHUURMANS
(Belgium)
(translated
from
,French): The Belgian delegation is one of those which
voted in favour
of the recommendation
adopted by
this Assembly
on 4 July in regard to the status of
Jerusalem [resolution
2253 (ES-V)],

86. I should like to draw the attention of Members
to document A/L.528/Rev.2,
whichcontains
the second
revised text of the draft resolution before the Assembly
and which has now been distributed.
I now put that
draft resolution to the vote. A roll-call
vote has been

80. It was not that we found the text completely
satisfactory.
On the contrary,
we had certain reservations in regard
to its formulation
which we made
known to the sponsors
at the time, However,
we
wished to stress
by our vote our refusal
to accept
any unilateral alteration in the status of the Holy City.

The Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic, having
been drawn by lot by the President, was called UPan
to vote first.

81. These considerations
are just as valid today, We
are particularly
grateful to the sponsors
of the new
text for agreeing to drop paragraph 4, the wording
of which, in our view, was open to serious objections.
As it stands now, the text of the draft resolution is
more acceptable to the Belgian delegation,
although
it would have liked other amendments,
taking more
into account the essential distinction,
according to
the provisions
of the Charter, between the resolutions
of the Security
Council, which have executive force
and the recommendations
of the
in themselves,
General Assembly
which are not strict0 jure binding
on the Members of the Organization.
82. Despite these reservations,
the Belgian delegation will again vote in favour of the draft resolution,
In doing so, it wishes to emphazise once again its
devotion to, the principle
that military
operations
cannot justify
territorial
oonquests,
whatever
the
circumstances.
83. Mr; DEVENDRA
(Nepal): When the entire question
of the crisis
in the Middle East was being discussed
by the General
Assembly,
‘it was not proper fcr
Israel,
on its part, to take a unilateral
action in
changing the status of the City of Jerusalem.
In an
earlier
intervention
[ 1546th meeting] my delegation
expressed
its strong disapproval
of that action of
Israel. The question of the changed status of the City

In favour:
Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Ceylon, Chad, Chile,
China, Congo (Brazzaville),
CostaRica, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czechoslovakia,
Dahomey, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador,
Ethiopia,
Finland,
France, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia,
Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Ivory #Coast, Japan, Jordan,
Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Luxembourg,
Mali, Mauritania, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Sudan, Sweden,
Syria, Thailand, Togo, ‘Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia.
Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United’Arab
Republic, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta,
Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zambia, Afghanistan,
Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burma, Burundi.
Against:

None.

Abstaining:
Central African Republic,
Colombia,
Congo (Democratic
Republic of) p Iceland,
Jamaica,
Kenya, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Malta, PortugaI,
Rwanda, South Africa, United States of America,
Uruguay, Australia,
Barbados, Bolivia,

c
1554th meeting
Thk draft resolution
with 18 abstentions.Z/

was adoptedby

votes to none,

87.

The PRESIDENT:
I shall now Call on reprewho wished to explain their vote after the
voting.
sentatives

88. Mr, VINCI (Italy): Allow mefirstof all to express
my sincere appreciation to the co-sponsors of the
resolution we have just adopted for the spirit of goodwill, understanding and conciliation they have shown
in meeting our views on the wording of’the text they
submitted to the General Assembly this evening. In
fact, by accepting to strike out paragraph 4 of the
draft resolution containedindocumentA/L.528/Ilev.l,
they made it possible for a number of delegations,
including my own, to vote in favour of the draft
resolution itself, As a matter of fact, we had some
doubts about the formulation of that paragraph, which
appeared to my delegation to be not fully consistent
with the provisions of the Charter.
89. The Assembly had already given strong support
to the very idea that nothing should be done to alter
the present status of Jerusalem, and in spite of our
abstention from voting on resolution 2253 (ES-V), my
delegation shared the spirit of that resolution. The
amount of support given to that idea has thus been
not only confirmed, but indeed also increased, enlarged and strengthened by the resolution now adopted.
90. I would like to put on record that my delegation
also had some reservations and misgivings about the
words used in the last preambular paragraph and
operative paragraph of the draft resolution [A/L.528/
Rev.21. In addition, we felt that the last,preambular
paragraph was actually not necessary as it stressed
a concept which was also stated in the ensuing
operative paragraph 1. In our view, one or the other
of the two paragraphs is really redundant, and we
would have liked only for reasons of logic and balance
to see it omitted, Nevertheless, if it is an unnecessary
repetition, it does not, from a constitutional point of
View,
run counter to any relevant provison of the
Charter, as was the case with operative paragraph 4.
I was very glad, therefore, that my delegation was
finally able to join the great majority of the Members
in supporting the draft resolution.
91. Mr, GOLDBERG (United States of America):
The goal of the United States in the Middle East, one
which is shared, we believe, by the great preponderance
of the world community,, is a durable peace and an
enduring settlement. We conceive of this goal as requiring throughout the area far more than a return to
the temporary and fragile truce which erupted into
tragic conflict on 5 June. We are convinced, both
by logic and the unforgettable experience of a tragic
history, that there can be progress towards a durable
peace in the entire area only if certainessential steps
are taken, One immediate, obvious ,and imperative
step is the disengagement of all forces and the withdrawal of Israeli forces to their own territory.
A
second and equally immediate, obvious andimperative
step is the termination of any claims tba state of war
or belligerency on the part of Arab States in the area.
?I The representative of Malaysia subsequently stated that if he had

beenpresentwhen the vote was taken he would have voted in favour of
the draft resolution [see below, para. 1191.
.’
^

-

14 July 1967

9

92. These two steps are essential to progress towards
a durable peace. They are equally essentialif there is
to be substance and concrete meaning to the basic
Charter right of every State in the area-a right to
which the United States remains firmly committedthe right to have its territorial integrity and political
independence respected by all and to be free from
the threat or use of force by all. The United States _
stands ready to give its full support to practical
measures to help bring a.bout these steps: withdrawal
of forces and termination of belligerent acts or claims
as soon as possible.
93. But if our goalis adurablepeace, it is imperative
that there be greater vision bothfrom this Organization
and from the parties themselves, It is imperative
that all look beyond the immediate causes and effects
of the recent conflict. Attention must also be focused,
and urgently, on reaching a just andpermanent settlement of the refugee problem, whichhas beenaccentuated by recent events; on means to ensure respect fox
the right of every Member of the United Nations in
the area to live in peace and security as an independent .national State; on arrangements so that respect
for the territorial integrity and politicalindependence
of all States in the area is assured; on measures to
ensure respect for the rights of allnations to freedom
of navigation and of innocent passage through international waterways; on reaching agreement, both
among those in the area and those outside, that
economic development and the improvement of living
standards should be given precedence over a wasteful
arms race in the area.
94. In each and every one of the separate but related
imperatives of peace we recognize fully that agreement cannot be imposed upon thepartiesfromoutside.
At the same time, we also believe that the machinery,
experience and resources of the United Nations canbe
of immeasurable help in facilitating and implementing
agreements acceptable to the parties. The offer of such
assistance by this Organization is dictated not onlyby
the roots of United Nations responsibility and involvement in the Middle East which have grown deep and
strong over two decades, but also by our common
determination, even duty, under the Charter to save
succeeding generations in the Middle East from the
scourge of another war.
95. It is against the background of this over-all policy
that my Government has developed its attitude toward
the question of Jerusalem, and I wish to make that
attitude very explicit,
96. The views of my Government on Jerusalem have
been expressed by the President of the United States
and other high-level officials. On 28 June the White
House made the following statement:
“The President said on 19 June that in our view
‘there must be adequate recognition of the Special
interest of three great religions in the Holy Places
of Jerusalem.’
“On this principle, he assumes that before any
unilateral action is taken on the status of Jerusalem,
there will be appropriate consultation with religious
leaders and others who are deeply concerned.
tlJerusalem is’ holy to Christians, to Jews, and to
Moslems, It is one of the great continuing tragedies

,

.
General

Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

of history that a city which is so much the centre
of man’s highest values has also been, over and
over, a centre of conflict. Repeatedly the passionate
beliefs of one element have led to exclusion or
unfairness fqr others. It has been so, unfortunately,
in the last, twenty years.,
“Men of all religions will agree that we must now
do better, The world must find an answer that is
fair and recognized to be fair.=
97. The second statement, released
by the Department of State, read:

on the same day

“The hasty administrative
action taken today cannot be regarded as determining
the future of the
Holy Places or the status of Jerusalem
in relation
to them.
“The United States has never recognized such
unilateral action by any State in the area as governing the international status of Jerusalem.”
98. During my own statement to the General Assembly
on 3 July, I said that “the safeguarding
of the Holy
Places,
and freedom
of access to them for all,
should be internationally
guaranteed,
and the status
of Jerusalem in relation to them should be decided
not unilaterally but in consultation with all concerned.”
[ 1546th meeting, para. 3.1
I
99. These statements
represent
the considered and
continuing policy of the United States Government.
LOO. With regard to the specific measures taken by
the Government of Israel on 28 June, I wish to make
it clear that the United States does not accept or
recognize
these measures
as altering the status of
Jerusalem, My Government does not recognize that
the administrative measures taken by the Government
of Israel on 28 June can be regarded as the last word
on the matter, and we regret that theywere taken, We
insist that the measures taken cannot be considered
as other than interim and provisional, and not as prejudging the final and permanent status of Jerusalem.
101. Unfortunately, and regrettably,
the statements
of the Government of Israel on this matter have thus
far, in our view, not adequately dealt with this
situation.
102. Many delegations are aware that we were prepared to vote for a separate resolution on Jerusalem
which would declare that the Assembly would not
accept any unilateral action as determining the status
of Jerusalem, and which would call on theGovernment
of Israel to desist from any action purporting to define
permanently the status of Jerusalem. However, the
sponsors made clear then, as was their right, that
they preferred to proceed with their own text in
document A/L.527/Rev.l,
and now with their draft
resolution in document A/L.528/Rev.2.
The latter
draft doesinclude changeswhich we consider represent
a marked improvement over the original version,
particularly
in that it no longer tends to prejudge
action in the Security Council. Nevertheless, since
the resolution just adopted I2254 (ES-V)] expressly
builds on resolution 2263 (ES-V), on whichwe abstained
for reasons which we stated publicly, consistent with
that vote we also abstained today. Even’ as revised,
the resolution does not fully correspond to our views,

Special Session - Plenary

Meetings

particularly
since it appears to accept, by its call
for rescission of measures, that the administrative
measures which were taken constitute annexation of
Jerusalem by Israel, and because we do not believe
that the problem of Jerusalem can realistically be
solved apart from the other ‘related aspects of
Jerusalem
and of the Middle Eastern situation. Therefore, the United States abstained.
103. We have, of course, recently expressed ourselves in a more formal sense by voting for a draft
resolution dealing with the question of Jerusalem;
this was the Latin-American draft resolution [ A/L.523/
Rev.11 which dealt with Jerusalem as one Of the
elements involved in a peaceful settlement in the .
Middle East,
104. It is because of the treatment of one aspect Of
the problem of Jerusalem as an isolated iSSUe separate
from the other elements of Jerusalem and of a Peaceful
settlement in the Middle East that we were unable t0
support resolution 2253 (ES-V).
165. Certainly, Jerusalem, as has been pointed out
universally, I think by every speaker! is an important
issue, and, in our opinion, one which must necessarily be considered in the context of a settlement Of
all the problems arising out of the recent conflict,
106. In Jerusalem there are transcendent Spiritual
interests, but there are also’other important issues,
We believe that the most fruitful approach to a discussion of the future of Jerusalem lies in dealing
with the entire problem as one aspect of the broader
arrangements that must be made to restore a just
and durable peace in the area.
107. We believe, consistent with the draft XesOlUtiOn
we were ready to sponsor, that this Assembly should
have dealt with the problem by declaring itself against
any unilateral change in the status of Jerusalem.
108. Since we are approaching the end of the session
on this important subject, in which remarks were
made not relating specifically to Jerusalem but ranging very broadly on other subjects, I cannot let this
occasion pass without referenae to some of the allegations made regarding my Government’s role in the
recent conflict in the Middle East,
109. The charges that the United States instigated,
encouraged, or in any way.partioipated in this tragic
struggle are too unfounded to dignify by individual
comment. I dealt explicitly with many of these falsehoods in the Security Council, and will not take the
time of the Assembly to go over the same ground
here, I reaffirm what I said to the Security Council
with respect to each and every one of these charges.
110. I shall merely say that one positive development in this session has been the abandonment of the
most vicious falsehood of all, which could have been
Productive of the most disastrous consequences: that
United States planes and military
personnel par- .
ticipated in the war on the side of Israel. Before the
war broke out, we had sought to prevent it by all
means at our command, and once it began we did
everything in our power to bring it to an early end,
The record of our diplomacy is very clear in this
matter, despite comments that have been read from
newspapers, which scarcely characterize that diplo-

1554th meeting
macy. And the record of the Security Council is plain
and clear for everyone to read, as to the actions we
took, supported and initiated in the Security Council
to bring the conflict to an end.
111, There is one charge about our position towhich,
I believe, no nation in this hall faithful to the Charter
would feel any necessity
to plead: that is the charge
that we support the right of every sovereign State
Member
of the United Nations to an independent
national existence,
its right to live in a spirit of
peaceful coexistence
and good neighbourliness
with
all in the area. That is a charge which the Charter
of the United Nations places on us all and which we
should all readily accept and acknowledge.
112. Our view has remained steadfast, before, during, and now after the conflict: we extend the hand of
friendship to all States in the MiddleEast and express
the ferveht hope that as time heals the scars of war
we can soon again join our common efforts in helping
build a better, more enduring order in every State
and throughout the area, with peace, justice, security
and liberty for all.
113, So much vituperation has taken place in this
Assembly, so unseemingly in a great world forum,
that I could not help recallmg today a statement made
by my predecessor, who died two years ago today in
the cause of peace, Adlai Stevenson, Adlai Stevenson,
speaking about our beloved Eleanor Roosevelt, said:
“She would rather light a candle than curse the
darkness”. And I share that spirit, I do not see that
anything is gained in the cause of peace in the Middle
East by the vituperation which has taken place-not
Only against my country, but against other, small
Countries-vituperation
which has no place in this
forum.
114. The time has come-indeed, the time is long
overdue-for vituperation and bitterness to be tempered by sober realization of the difficulties ahead
and the willingness to face them squarely and to do
something about them. What is needed is the wisdom
and statesmanship of all those directly concerned,
and of the Members of the United Nations, so that
condiditions of hate, too much ventilated in this hall,

LithoIn UN.

-

11

14 July 1967
can be eventually
neighbourliness.

replaced by conditions of good

115. What is needed, above all, in the area is a
spirit of reconciliation, which will, some day-hopefully soon-make possible a peace of reconciliation.
I fervently hope that all in the area, and all in this
hall, will approach the days ahead in this spirit.
116. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the
United States was the last speaker in explanation of
vote after the voting had taken place, However, the
representative of Malaysia has asked to speak. Since
he was not present at the time of the voting, I think
that he may wish to make some point of clarification,
rather than an explanation of vote. We are strictly
at the stage of explanation of votes, But, if there is
no objection, with .the consent of the Assembly I
now call upon him to speak on a point of clarification.
117, Raja AZNAM (Malaysia): Before I proceed, may
I seek clarification
from you, Mr,. President. The
point of my intervention in the proceedings of our
meeting this afternoon is merely to explain how my
delegation would have voted had I not, unfortunately,
been absent at the time of voting. May I proceed?
118. The PRESIDENT: You may proceed on apointof
clal(ification of the situation, but you obviously cannot
explain a vote you have not cast.
119. Raja AZNAM (Malaysia): As is known, my
delegation voted in favour of the earlier draft resolution [A/L,527/Rev.l]
on 4 July, sponsoredbyPakistan
and various other countries, concerning the attempt
by Israel to change the status of Jerusalem. ‘The
purpose of my intervention this afternoon is to explain
that, had I been present today, my delegation would
certainly have voted in favour of draft resolution A/
L.528/Rev.2,
since, as the document makes clear,
my delegation was one of its co-sponsors.
120. The PRESIDENT: The statement just made by
the representative of Malaysia will appear in the
record of the proceedings of this meeting.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

17868-June
1970-2.400
