A /71/PV.90

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

90th plenary meeting

Thursday, 6 July 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda items 19 and 73 (continued)
Sustainable development
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft resolution (A/71/L.74)
The President: Last month, United Nations
Headquarters in New York experienced the
extraordinary energies of the Ocean Conference.
Thousands of participants from across science, civil
society, Government, multilateral organizations and
the private sector gathered to forge a global movement
in support of Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
14 — the ocean Goal. Global consciousness has now
been raised about the oceans’ problems to such a degree
that none of us can say any longer that we are unaware
of the extent of the trouble we have brought upon the
ocean. With the many solutions and remedial actions
identified at the Conference, a breakthrough has
come in the form of a long-sought turning point in the
restoration to humankind of a relationship of respect
and balance with the ocean.
The Conference proved to be an affirmation of our
deep concern about the effects of human activity on
our shared environment. It served as further proof that
the great mass of humankind and the Governments that
lead us remain united in support of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Paris Climate
Change Agreement and that we are determined to see

them implemented in fidelity to the fundament that
sustains us.
The Ocean Conference produced three ambitious
key outcomes. First, the seven partnership dialogues
outlined every detail of the truth about the current state
of the ocean by presenting the best available scientific
evidence. Participants in the dialogues responded by
putting forward effective solutions to those problems,
and we have captured those solutions.
Secondly, nearly 1,400 voluntary commitments
were made by Governments, the United Nations system,
the private sector, non-governmental organizations
and other stakeholders, notifying us of the practical
remedial actions they will be taking to realize the
targets of SDG 14.
Thirdly, the Conference adopted the “Our ocean,
our future: call for action” document that we have
before us today (A/71/L.74). By that call for action,
Governments reaffirm their commitment to conserving
and sustainably using the ocean and its resources. We
have highlighted the actions needed to achieve the SDG
14 targets and made a firm call for appropriate followup on the implementation of our ocean commitments.
Taken together, those three outcomes constitute a
massive work plan for us all if we are to ensure that the
ocean Goal is successfully implemented. As we move
forward together in this great task, we are fortified by
the global energy and resources generated by the Ocean
Conference. Where the ocean is concerned, there is no
them and us, no division between the public and the
private sector, North and South, East and West. The

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-19228 (E)

*1719228*

A/71/PV.90

ocean unites us. Is it the common heritage of humankind
and our ultimate home.
In a welcome development at the Conference,
Kenya and Portugal offered to host a second United
Nations Ocean Conference in 2020, to serve as the next
key moment for assessing and adjusting our progress
towards the full implementation of SDG 14 in time for
the Goal’s targets to reach maturity by 2030.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank and
congratulate the Governments of Sweden and Fiji, as
co-Presidents of the Conference; the Secretary-General
of the Conference, Mr. Wu Hongbo; the Special
Adviser to the co-Presidents, Mr. Serpa Soares; the
United Nations system, which so ably supported them
all; and all those who made the Conference such a
success. I would like to express special thanks to the
Permanent Representatives of Portugal and Singapore,
who were instrumental in finalizing the document
that is presented here this morning for the General
Assembly’s endorsement.
Through the Ocean Conference, we have truly
begun the process of reversing the cycle of decline
that human activity has brought upon the ocean. By
adopting the call for action today we will signal our
determination to maintain the momentum launched
at the Ocean Conference. From here we must move to
the High-level Political Forum, where these outcomes
will be discussed in further detail next week. We move
forward with the dogged determination required of
us to achieve the targets of SDG 14. We must restore
humankind’s relationship of respect and balance with
the Ocean.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/71/L.74, entitled “ Our ocean, our future:
call for action”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/71/L.74?
Draft resolution A/71/L.74 was adopted (resolution
71/312).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position, may I remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by representatives from their seats.
Mr. Daunivalu (Fiji): I would like to make a brief
statement following the adoption of the call for action
document. In making this statement, I align myself with
2/6

30/06/2017

the statement to be delivered shortly by the Permanent
Representative of Solomon Islands on behalf of the
Pacific small island developing States.
My delegation commends the General Assembly
for its consensus adoption of the Ocean Conference call
for action (resolution 71/312). That political declaration
is an important outcome of the high-level United
Nations Ocean Conference. It represents our leaders’
political commitment to the full implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 14. It outlines for
the international community the actions to be taken in
order to make a reality of the aims of SDG 14 of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. With it, we
have in our hands a political mandate and road map for
fleshing out the various targets under the ocean Goal.
The adoption today of the call for action also
represents a significant step forward for humankind in
preserving our planet’s ecosystem. Together with the
thousands of voluntary commitments pledged, we are
well on our way to restoring the ocean’s health and in
turn increasing humankind’s chances of surviving and
maintaining its livelihood for both the immediate and
the long term.
As a co-President of the Ocean Conference with the
Deputy Prime Minister of Sweden, Fiji’s Prime Minister
was very pleased with the high level of engagement
and active participation in the Conference by States
Members of the United Nations and other non-State
participants. My delegation would therefore like to
echo my Prime Minister’s words of appreciation to all
delegations and stakeholders for the very positive and
constructive spirit in which our work was carried out
over the past year so as to enable us to achieve such great
results. We also want to thank the facilitators of the callfor-action document, the Permanent Representatives
of Singapore and Portugal, for their sterling efforts to
hold true to the mandates of the modalities resolution
for the Conference (resolution 70/303). They helped us
to produce what is indeed a consensus, concise, focused
and intergovernmentally agreed declaration to support
the implementation of Goal 14.
On behalf of the Presidents of the Conference,
we would also like to express our appreciation for the
invaluable support from the United Nations system and
the advisory group during the past year. Needless to say,
the Presidents’ ability to discharge their responsibility
for the Conference would not have been so successful
without a well-oiled, cohesive, supportive Secretariat
17-19228

30/06/2017

team. We therefore wish to convey our Government’s
special thanks to the Secretariat staff for all the
guidance and support provided throughout.
I have one final point to make. It was pointed
out by the Presidents during the closing of the Ocean
Conference that our work regarding the implementation
of Sustainable Development Goal 14 has only just
begun, and we echo those sentiments here and
therefore welcome the Assembly’s adoption today of
the call-for-action document. In that regard, we also
welcome the announcement by the Governments of
Kenya and Portugal that they will be hosting the next
Ocean Conference, as we press on to fully implement
Sustainable Development Goal 14 by 2030. For the
immediate term, we look forward to following up and
reviewing the progress of our work on Goal 14 at the
High-level Political Forum later this month and in
future sessions.
Mr. Sisilo (Solomon Islands): I have the honour
to deliver this explanation of position following the
adoption of the United Nations Oceans Conference call
for action (resolution 71/312) on behalf of the 12 Pacific
small island developing States.
At the outset, I would like to offer our congratulations
and heartfelt thanks to the Presidents of the United
Nations Ocean Conference, the Prime Minister of Fiji
and the Deputy Prime Minister of Sweden, as well as
to the facilitators of the consultations on the call for
action, the Permanent Representatives of Singapore
and Portugal.
The call for action represents an important
accomplishment for all of us, especially the Pacific
small island developing States. As we have said
repeatedly throughout the process, and take this
opportunity to reiterate once again, our group’s
geographic composition is more than 98 per cent ocean.
The ocean is therefore the indispensable foundation of
our very existence and sustainable development. Given
the importance of the ocean to our islands, we are
heartened by the fact that the call for action contains
appropriate references to small island developing States
and least-developed countries. We are also heartened
by the level of ambition that this document reflects. As
the mounting threats to the health of our ocean reach
critical tipping points, the actions that world leaders
have committed to could not be more timely.
Furthermore, given the increasing impact of climate
change on the ocean, we also welcome the recognition in

A/71/PV.90

the call for action of the importance of the Paris Climate
Change Agreement to ensuring the health, productivity
and resilience of our ocean. But we stress that the call
for action is a catalyst for our work, not a conclusion
to it. Together with the 1,400 volunteer commitments
made at the Ocean Conference, we must undertake the
necessary actions to ensure that the political ambition it
represents is not lost. This moment is a launching point
to ensure that we move towards the full and timely
implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14.
We look forward to following up and reviewing the
progress that has been made at the High-level Political
Forum later this month. Furthermore, we welcome and
support Kenya and Portugal’s commitment to hosting a
successful Ocean Conference.
Ms. Pierce (United States of America): The
United States joined the consensus on resolution
71/312, which endorses the call-for-action outcome
document adopted on 9 June at the close of the United
Nations Conference to Support the Implementation
of Sustainable Development Goal 14. In doing so,
we reaffirm the statements and clarifications made
by Ambassador Bolton at the adoption of the call
for action and stress that the United States does not
support the reference to the transfer of technology in
paragraph 12 and dissociates itself from the language
of sub-paragraph (p) of paragraph 13, which refers to
World Trade Organization negotiations and special and
differential treatment.
Ms. Elgarf (Egypt): Egypt wishes to thank the
facilitators of the intergovernmental negotiation of the
outcome document of the United Nations Conference to
Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development
Goal 14 on the commendable efforts they exerted in
trying to forge consensus on this outcome document,
known as the call for action (resolution 71/312).
Egypt was pleased to join the consensus on
this important document, for we know full well
the importance of our joint action to take steps to
implement Sustainable Development Goal 14, just as we
must make similar efforts to implement the entire 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Nonetheless,
Egypt would like to note that, in order to proceed
effectively with the call for action, we must ensure
that we do so on a solid basis of fact. In that regard,
we note regretfully that the language in sub-paragraph
(g) of paragraph 13 of the outcome document before us
does not meet that standard of factual accuracy. We are
concerned about the language in sub-paragraph (g) that

17-192283/6

A/71/PV.90

implies that invasions of alien species result only from
human-related activities in the ocean and on marine
life. That is factually incorrect when there are other,
equally widespread and more chronic causes, chief of
which is the adverse effect of climate change on the
marine environment.
With that in mind, Egypt would like to express its
full reservations about sub-paragraph (g) of paragraph
13 of the call for action. We do not consider its language
factually correct, and it does not reflect our consent to
working on its basis in future. We would also like to
request that this reservation be part of the official record.
Ms. Melikbekyan (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation would like to express
its gratitude to the organizers of the Conference and
its Presidents for their efforts in convening such a
large-scale event on such an important topic. We
would also like to highlight the contributions of the
President of the General Assembly and his Office, as
well as the coordinators of the negotiation process, the
Permanent Representatives of Portugal and Singapore.
The discussions during the Conference enabled us
to address a range of issues on the preservation and
good use of oceans, seas and marine resources for
sustainable development.
We would like to comment on sub-paragraph (p)
of paragraph 13 of the call to action, which has to do
with fisheries subsidies. We do not fully agree with the
approach set forth. In our view, we should consider the
fact that the issue is sensitive and multifaceted, and that
there are no easy solutions that can apply in all cases.
A discussion among experts on the issue should be
conducted within the World Trade Organization, which
is the relevant body for that topic. We can discuss this
issue further in the appropriate forum. Our delegation
will therefore take a step back from that particular
wording in that sub-paragraph.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position on this item. May I take it that it
is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration
of sub-item (a) of agenda item 73?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 19.
4/6

30/06/2017

Agenda items 13 and 117 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit
Draft resolution (A/71/L.75)
The President: The draft resolution before
us (A/71/L.75), entitled “Work of the Statistical
Commission pertaining to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, presented by the delegation
of Brazil, is another critical milestone on the road
to 2030. The development of the global indicator
framework was mandated under the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development as a means of monitoring
the implementation of the Agenda’s 17 Goals and 169
Targets. On behalf of the entire General Assembly, I
commend the United Nations Statistical Commission,
the Inter-Agency and Expert Group on Sustainable
Development Goals Indicators and the Statistics Division
of the United Nations Department of Economic and
Social Affairs for their mammoth efforts in preparing
the framework. Aided by international organizations,
civil society, academia and the private sector, they
succeeded in developing a robust, comprehensive and
flexible indicator framework. The framework was
agreed to by the Statistical Commission in March and
subsequently adopted by the Economic and Social
Council in early June.
The framework will greatly assist decision makers
in understanding which interventions are working and
which are falling short. It will help the international
community to determine which countries or regions are
pressing ahead under the 2030 Agenda and which require
additional support. It will also help all of us to measure
what we truly value, to keep our promise to leave no one
behind and, most important, to ensure accountability
for the lofty commitments made in September 2015. To
be of maximum value, the framework will have to be
accompanied by an ambitious programme of capacitybuilding and by the embracing of new, innovative tools
to support data collection and dissemination. Let us set
our minds and muscle to what lies ahead.
With the adoption of draft resolution A/71/L.75,
the issue last week of the Secretary-General’s report
on reforming the United Nations development system,
17-19228

30/06/2017

the ongoing consultations aimed at aligning the work
of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council with the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) and the holding next week of the High-level
Political Forum, the global architecture required to
support SDG implementation appears to be progressing
in the right direction. I commend the draft resolution to
the Assembly for its adoption.
I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil
to introduce draft resolution A/71/L.75.
Mr. De Azevedo Araujo Filho (Brazil): Brazil
is proud and pleased to present, for adoption by the
General Assembly, draft resolution A/71/L.75, entitled
“Work of the Statistical Commission pertaining to the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”. Its main
objective is to formally adopt the global indicator
framework for the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), a voluntary country-led structure for following
up and reviewing the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Brazil has long been an active player in discussions
about sustainable development in the multilateral
arena. In 1992, our country hosted a United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development — the
Earth Summit. Its seminal outcomes gave birth, among
other things, to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change and the United Nations
Convention on Biological Diversity. Two decades later,
189 Member States and more than 30,000 civil society
representatives met again in Rio de Janeiro to discuss
the future of sustainable development.
In the outcome document (resolution 66/288)
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, entitled “The future we want”, we agreed
that achieving sustainable development is a universal
undertaking. Developing and developed countries
alike would have to follow a specific road map with a
view to attaining sustainable development in its three
dimensions. That road map became the Sustainable
Development Goals, and the SDGs were agreed on two
years later, in 2014, after an inclusive and transparent
intergovernmental process. One year after that, the
SDGs were integrated into the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development to form its core.
The adoption of the SDG global indicator framework
can be considered the last step in the construction of the
first universal development framework in the history
of the United Nations. It provides Member States and

A/71/PV.90

the United Nations development system with complete
metrics and methodologies for gathering and analysing
data on the implementation of the SDGs. It is flexible
in nature and its content will be updated periodically to
reflect our changing world.
Brazil is proud to have chaired the United Nations
Statistical Commission during the formulation of the
global indicator framework. We are deeply grateful for
the constructive engagement of all delegations, which
made this breakthrough possible. The positive impact
of the SDGs, which can already be felt in our societies
as well as our Governments, gives us reason to believe
that a sustainable world can be achieved in the coming
years. Brazil will do its utmost to continue to contribute
to make our economies, societies and ecosystems
sustainable for present and future generations.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/71/L.75.
May I take it that the General Assembly decides to
adopt draft resolution A/71/L.75?
Draft resolution A/71/L.75 was adopted (resolution
71/313).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position, may I remind delegations
that, in accordance with decision 34/40, explanations
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Arrieta Munguia (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We would like to welcome today’s adoption of
resolution 71/313, because its global indicator framework
is a major step forward in our efforts to implement the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. As you
rightly said, Mr. President, we want to commend the
United Nations Statistical Commission for its work
and that of all the experts involved. We salute Brazil’s
leadership and would particularly like to request that,
when future such issues are being negotiated in this
Hall, enough time is always allowed for consultations
with Member States. We had Brazil’s flexibility to
help ensure that the resolution could be adopted in the
same form in the Assembly as it was in the Statistical
Commission and the Economic and Social Council.
We support this extremely important event and simply
wish to state formally that it is important that Member
States have sufficient lead time to ensure that in future
they can familiarize themselves with the draft texts in

17-192285/6

A/71/PV.90

advance so as to be able to discuss them and adopt them
by consensus.
Ms. Messmer Mokhtar (Switzerland) (spoke in
French): Switzerland welcomes and fully supports
today’s adoption of resolution 71/313, entitled “Work
of the Statistical Commission pertaining to the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development”. The resolution
gives the United Nations Statistical Commission a
clear mandate until the year 2030. Switzerland views
it as an important step in the implementation of the
2030 Agenda, since its adoption of the global indicator
framework is crucial to the global follow-up to the 2030
Agenda. However, the Statistical Commission should
refine the indicators every year and subject them to a
comprehensive review in 2020 and 2025.
Today’s resolution covers not only the global
indicator framework but other necessary elements for
collecting the data needed to produce all the indicators.
First, the Cape Town Global Action Plan for Sustainable
Development Data defines the areas where additional
investment is required, and thereby enables statisticians
to establish priorities. Secondly, the resolution also
emphasizes the fact that national statistical systems’
official statistics and data represent an essential
foundation for the global indicator framework. It also
acknowledges the need to use unofficial data when
nothing else is available. In our view, a third important
element is the relationship it describes between the
statistical and political communities, which regularly
exchange information every year at the High-level
Political Forum on Sustainable Development.
In conclusion, with our adoption of today’s
resolution, we are assigning to the official statistical
community and the United Nations Statistical
Commission, which represents it, the leadership role
needed for the global coordination of all the relevant
activities. The second United Nations World Data
Forum, to be held in October 2018, is the next phase of
that process. Switzerland welcomes the opportunity to
work with the General Assembly on this important issue.

6/6

30/06/2017

The President: We have heard the last speaker
in explanation of position following the adoption of
resolution 71/313.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda items 13
and 117. Agenda item 115 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(k) Confirmation of the appointment of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development
Note by the Secretary-General (A/71/936)
The President: Members will recall that, by its
decision 67/419, of 10 June 2013, the General Assembly,
on the proposal of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, confirmed the appointment of Mr. Mukhisa
Kituyi as Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development for a term of
office of four years, beginning on 1 September 2013
and ending on 31 August 2017. In paragraph 2 of his
note, the Secretary-General proposes to confirm the
appointment of Mr. Mukhisa Kituyi as SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development for a further four-year term of
office, beginning on 1 September 2017 and ending on
31 August 2021.
May I take it that the General Assembly, on the
proposal of the Secretary-General, wishes to confirm
the appointment of Mr. Mukhisa Kituyi as SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development for a further four-year term of
office, beginning on 1 September 2017 and ending on
31 August 2021?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item
(k) of agenda item 115?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

17-19228
