S/2004/537

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 July 2004
Original: English

Letter dated 6 July 2004 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 21 June 2004,
which I received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

04-41508 (E) 080704

*0441508*

S/2004/537

Annex
Letter dated 21 June 2004 from the Secretary-General of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization to the Secretary-General
In accordance with Security Council resolutions 1386 (2001) and 1510 (2003),
I attach a report on ISAF operations covering the period from 11 February to
11 May 2004. I would appreciate your making this report available to the Security
Council.
(Signed) Jaap de Hoop Scheffer

2

S/2004/537

Enclosure
Quarterly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan
1.
The report covers the period from 11 February to 11 May 2004. As at 6 May
2004, the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) numbered 6,265 personnel,
including troops from non-NATO countries.
2.
As reported, ISAF assumed command and control of its first provincial
reconstruction team at Konduz on 30 December 2003. Work continues towards
NATO assumption of command of additional provincial reconstruction teams in the
north and the west of the country. With the establishment of additional teams and the
assumption of responsibilities for Kabul International Airport, changes are expected
regarding States represented in the ISAF mission and regarding associated numbers
of national troops.
Status of partner/non-NATO contributing countries
3.
As at 6 May 2004, a total of 26 NATO countries and 11 non-NATO countries
are contributing to the ISAF mission.
Security
4.
The security situation across Afghanistan remains fragile; while security in the
area of operations around both Kabul and Konduz is expected to improve in the
medium and long term, there remains a significant risk of unrest, outbreak of
factional violence and attacks by opposing militia forces; this is especially the case
ahead of the forthcoming elections.
5.
In the area of operations around Kabul, the overall security situation over the
last three months has been relatively calm but unstable, with continual threat
warnings. ISAF has been able to pursue its framework security tasks in association
with the Afghan National Army and the Kabul City Police. Recent initiatives by
ISAF to engage the National Directorate for Security have been successful and they
may lead to an increase in intelligence-sharing and cooperation.
6.
In the area of operations of the Konduz provincial reconstruction team, the
security situation has hardly changed in the last three months. It remains calm but
instability prevails, resulting from the presence of warlords and narcotics. The
opposing militia forces have no organized presence in the province but the area is of
interest to them as a centre of narcotics production. Frictions between factions and
between tribes continue to undermine security; they are often related to trafficking
in narcotics. The provincial reconstruction team has gradually extended its patrol
presence beyond Konduz to other towns and villages in its area of operations. These
patrols have not led to any increase in tensions or to reactions against personnel of
the team.
7.
In support of the Bonn Declaration and of security sector reform, ISAF has
continued to take active steps to assist the Afghan Transitional Authority in the
improvement of the security situation in its area of operation, including by assisting:
(a) The Afghan Transitional Authority in providing area security presence
during voter registration in the Kabul and Konduz areas of operation and beyond;

3

S/2004/537

(b) The Transitional Authority in providing security for anti-terrorist
operations within Kabul;
(c) The Transitional Authority in providing security support during the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and heavy weapon cantonment and
survey processes in the Kabul and Konduz areas of operation and in areas beyond
the current areas of operation;
(d) The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
the Transitional Authority in providing security by conducting force protection
assessments of United Nations facilities and by securing ceremonial and meeting
locations as well as various visits and events.
Support to the Afghan Transitional Authority and UNAMA
8.
The implementation of the Bonn Agreement was thoroughly reviewed at the
March 2004 Berlin Conference. During the conference, the Afghan Transitional
Authority/Government of Afghanistan published its road map for the near future,
committing Afghanistan to free and fair elections and asking NATO and the
Coalition to deploy international military forces in support of the national police and
the Afghan National Army in numbers large enough to protect the integrity of the
electoral process against terrorism, factionalism and lawlessness. The Bonn
Agreement will remain on track with the successful conduct of free and fair
elections across the country.
9.
ISAF remains fully engaged, in its supportive role, in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, both in Kabul and more generally in
Afghanistan. Recent initiatives have sought to re-energize that process and in
particular to achieve the disbandment of entire units. However, progress is proving
to be extremely slow, owing to the continuing delays by Afghan commanders and
warlords who remain reluctant to engage meaningfully in the process.
10. ISAF is strongly committed in its supporting role to the cantonment of heavy
weapons and has successfully completed phase three of that process in Kabul. The
cantonment of the remaining heavy weapons in and around the capital recommenced
on 27 March 2004, marking the final phase of the programme. However, the most
difficult cantonments have yet to be negotiated. ISAF envisages that heavy weapon
cantonment in the capital will be completed prior to the elections. In the northern
region, heavy weapon cantonment and the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process are strained by the tension between supporters of Generals
Dostum and Atta.
11. While the United States is the lead nation for the training and equipping of the
Afghan National Army (with the participation of France and the United Kingdom in
leading support roles), ISAF continues to coordinate some training and development
opportunities. Embedded training teams and a “mentor” programme will assist the
leadership and professional development of Afghan National Army headquarters and
counterpart units.
12. The further enhancement of the capability and authority of the Afghan national
police forces, particularly outside Kabul, remains critical to both the rule of law and
the authority of the central government. The German police continues to assist with
the reconstitution and training of the Kabul City Police at the Afghan Police
Academy. Some 8,000 policemen have been trained so far but this number remains

4

S/2004/537

insufficient to ensure nationwide coverage. ISAF continues to support the police
development programme through joint patrolling. Challenges remain regarding
recruitment of suitable personnel and retention when higher salaries can be gained
outside the police. The United States continues to support the German Afghan
National Police programme with the establishment of six regional police training
centres, which have graduated over 10,000 national police officers, and have the
goal of training 20,000 police by the end of June.
13. Building on the work by the United Kingdom with the Central Narcotics
Directorate of the Ministry of the Interior and with the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the Government of Afghanistan held its first international
conference on drugs on 8 and 9 February 2004. The Afghan Transitional Authority,
including President Karzai, took the opportunity to express its commitment to
implement the Afghan National Drug Control Strategy, which the Transitional
Authority had adopted in May 2003. This five-year national strategy envisages a
70 per cent reduction in the production of poppy by 2007 and complete elimination
by 2012. NATO has included guidance and direction for counter-narcotics
operations in its new operational plan.
14. Judicial reform efforts present significant challenges to the Afghan
Transitional Authority and to the international community as both work to extend
the influence of the Authority outside Kabul. Current reform efforts appear to be
fragmented and greater coordination and increased involvement by the international
community is urgently required. Particular focus must be made on infrastructure
improvements (including prisons), training of judges and attorneys, and codification
and enforcement of the law. ISAF continues to work closely with government
ministries to identify and address issues that impact directly upon the rule of law
and to provide security.
Future ISAF operations
15. Provincial reconstruction teams are the central element of ISAF plans to
expand its mission. ISAF intends to field additional teams in Afghanistan backed up
by the necessary operational enablers and supporting infrastructure. Although
provincial reconstruction teams do not represent significant military combat power
in the conventional sense, the Coalition members consider them to be an appropriate
vehicle for meeting the United Nations mandate of assisting the Afghan Transitional
Authority/Government of Afghanistan and UNAMA in extending its authority and
security to the provinces. The expanded presence of ISAF through provincial
reconstruction teams will be an important element of ISAF support to the upcoming
election process.
16. The relationship among ISAF, the Operation Enduring Freedom Coalition, the
Afghan Transitional Authority and UNAMA in Kabul has allowed for a better
coordination of the efforts undertaken to achieve the Transitional Authority’s
desired end state. The emphasis now will be on achieving a similar outcome outside
the Kabul area in conjunction with other active participants of the international
community.
17. Concerning Kabul International Airport, while the objective remains to pass
control and management of the airport back to national authorities, it is recognized
that this will not happen for at least two years, particularly as there are more urgent
demands on the resources of the Afghan Transitional Authority. A common

5

S/2004/537

approach of the international community with respect to the rehabilitation of the
airport is therefore crucial. In order to expedite this process, the International Civil
Aviation Organization, the World Bank and NATO have created a framework
document that was approved by the Afghan Transitional Authority on 27 February
2004. This document paves the ground for the medium- and long-term development
of the airport towards established international standards. In the meantime,
preparations are under way to enable NATO to take over the airport from Germany
on 1 June 2004. Civilian and military use of the airport continues to expand. As
usable space is critical for the expansion of facilities and the improvement of ramps,
ISAF is currently engaged in considerable construction work.
Conclusions
18. ISAF is continuing to fulfil its United Nations mandate, the provision of
security assistance to the Afghan Transitional Authority, within its area of
operations. Framework and responsive security operations have been conducted
successfully and without significant incident. It is noteworthy that security
operations are increasingly being conducted jointly with Transitional Authority
security forces, enabling ISAF to underline its role as an assistance force.
19. The lack of substantive progress with the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process continues to impede efforts to extend central government
authority beyond Kabul and presents a risk to the security and viability of elections.
In addition to framework and reactive security operations, ISAF continues to
execute a supporting role in security sector reforms, principally in respect to
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and the associated heavy weapon
cantonment programmes, but also in respect to other pillars, within means and
capabilities.
20. With the benefit of continuity under NATO command, ISAF is strengthening
the foundations of its operations in Afghanistan and continuing to develop the
breadth of its capabilities, including support to the election process. While there
remains room for further progress, engagement and coordination with the Coalition
and with both government and non-governmental agencies are increasing steadily,
permitting greater coherence and efficiency.

6
