JbD LIBRARY

lllllll

UNITED NATIONS

i89
___I__-

th
MEETING:

11 APRIL 1980

’

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

I

, . ,. , . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

of the agenda . , . . , . . . . . . . , , . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . .

1

Complaint by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 8 April 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13878) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..a.. . . . . . . . . . . a.......

I

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2211)

S/PV.2211

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ , . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the Official Recods of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions
of the Security Council,
numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutiorzs and
Decisiorzs of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively
to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2211th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 11 April 1980, at 4 p.m.
President:

Mr. Porfirio

MUfiOZ

LED0

(Mexico).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2211)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. Complaint by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 8. Apri1’1980,from the Permanent
Representative of Zambia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13878)

accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure,
At the invitation of the President, Mr. B. C. Mishra
(India) took the place reservedfor him at the side of the
Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
The members of the Council have before them document S/13887, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of consultations
which have just been held.
4. Mr.

ESSAAFI
(Tunisia) (interpretation
from
The alternation of our debates can teach us
a great deal, if we wish to learn. The series of acts
of aggression against Zambia by the racist rtgime of
South Africa is but an illustration of the conditions
imposed on neighbouring areas by the last two countries of the world to claim the attributes of statehood
while, at the same time, they base their rkgimes
upon the principle of racial superiority and the
practice of military supremacy. This lethal combination implies secret connivance at violence and war.
French):

The meeting was called to order at 6.45 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Complaint by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 8 April 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/13878)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
In accordance with the decisions taken at the 2209th
and 2210th meetings, I invite the representatives of
Algeria, Angola, Cuba, Guyana, Liberia, Mauritius,
Nigeria, the United Arab Emirates, Yugoslavia and
Zaire to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bedjaoui
(Algeria),
Mr. de F’igueiredo
(Angola),
Mr. RoaKouri (Cuba), Mr. Sinclair (Guyana), Mr. Tubman
(Liberia), Mr. Ramphul (Mauritius),
Mr. Clark (Nigeria), Mr. Humaidan
(United
Arab Emirates),
Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia),
and Mr. Buketi Bukayi
(Zaire) took the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
I wish to inform the members of the Council that
I have received a letter from the representative Of
India in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In

5. The Council is now familiar with these practices,
this blackmail, these military excursions, which are a
routine part of the policies followed by South Africa
and Israel. Both derive from their blatant disregard of
international obligations, an astonishing freedom of
movement, a truly unbelievable immunity that permits
them to carry out, without many scruples, threats of
death and destruction and a new kind of State terrorism. This opens the way to a form of colonialism
which the United Nations must now identify, contain
and repress, before the permanent threat it poses to
peace and the security of nations leads to confrontation
and bloodshed, which both Pretoria and Tel Aviv are
not far from hoping for, or even fanning with suspicious zeal.
6. The frequency of our debates, which cannot even
claim to equal the frequency of the acts of aggression,
has indeed led to the isolation of those two rkgimes and
clear embarrassment for their very few allies. But it
is quite clear that the Council is not shouldering its
responsibilities simply by taking note of the situation
or by the repetition of its injunctions and condemna-

tions of principle. The Charter provides for measures
that would definitely be more effective, and our
political sense prompts us to assume our responsibilities in full awareness.
7. If it is true that we must have the facts before we
can determine blame, we can say that the Council is
amply provided with the facts because it has been
regularly seizedof the many violations committed by
South Africa over recent years, with or without the
complicity of the erstwhile Rhodesian troops, against
the front-line countries. Those acts are continuing, and
they follow the same logical pattern.

proportion involved, and perhaps today they will
deign to try to understand the tragedy that is ,,aw
being played out.
13. Like nazism in Europe, today’s tragedy tran.
scendsAfrica. And SO, havmg recourse to the United
Nations has for US a fundamental significance, The
Security Counctl thus bears an even heavier responsi.
bility: to US each word, each gesture, each vote is
significant.

14. If the members of the Council all agree that
South Africa has indeed carried out a new seriesol
acts of aggression against the same Member State
8. Accordingly, we are not really surprised at these what will they decide to do? It will not be enough Sin&
new outrages committed against Zambia over the to repeat the condemnations of principle, which will
last three months, but we are saddenedby the apparent Certainly not compensate for the losses Suffered and
casualnessof the international pressagencies,so eager the devastation wreaked on the Republic of Zambia
to comment and expand upon minor unpleasantnesses and will not guarantee the cessation of such actsof
in one part of the world and so negligent in reporting aggression in the future. To call for the withdrawalop
on the acts of barbarity that daily shatter the national the South African troops will not guarantee thatthey
security of an African country. South Africa certainly will be withdrawn, nor will it protect Zambia against
gains from this freedom and protection in keeping future invasions. It will not be enough simply to recall
our past resolutions to guarantee the conditionsfor
with its own cynicism.
peaceful development in security of all the neigh.
9. The escalation of the acts of aggressionbeginning bouring countries, in particular of Zimbabwe, which
last March is not fortuitous; it lifts the veil from a is just now emerging from a long war and still fears,
broader and more fundamental strategy. It shows, first as we can see, further bloodshed precisely becauseof
of all, that the collusion of the South African regime this South African strategy of military destabilization,
with that of racist Rhodesia was but a secondary
matter and that its designs were not confined to the 15. The experience of the United Nations in itsrela.
defence of the Rhodesian set-up, In intensifying its tions with the racist regime of South Africa hasshown
prolonged raids and lengthy stays in the territory of the futility of any decision that is based on the pure
Zambia and in establishingpermanent military camps, fiction that that regime possesses the attributesofa
South Africa is crossing a legal and political thresh- responsible State in the international community,The
old, the significance of which does not relate only to constant violation of international law in Namibia,
Zambia. In isolating parts of Zambian territory from which, in addition, South Africa uses as a base
the control of the central authority, it is proceeding for aggression against Angola and Zambia, the violato break up, divide and destabilizeZambia. This is the tion of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
forerunner of a broader programme whose scope we front-line States, the violation of the Universal
can infer simply by looking at the usual range of the Declaration of Human Rights and the maintenance
of
military acts of aggressioncommitted.
the apartheid
regime-a crime against humanityare all instructive examples of its policy.
10. This is the strategic outline that we can seefrom
the series of acts of aggression of a new kind which 16. The South African regime cannot be expectedto
the racist regime of South Africa has brought us with comply with any measure decided upon by the United
the tragic example of Zambia.
Nations if that measure is based on the samepremises
that have so far given South Africa its own immunit!
11. The United Nations, from the very outset, and have protected its freedom, enabling it to continue
became aware of the bitter truth that being a neighbour indefinitely to perpetrate the same crimes andthesame
of a racist country does not bring peace: far from it. violations of law. It is clear that the economicvialW
Zambia’s complaint brings this experience to us afresh.
and military security of the South African regimeare
inseparable from the political support of the Western
12. Every country in the region is faced with the same Powers. There is, therefore, no hope of any effective
unavoidable and implacable adversary, and the con- measures being imposed on that r6gime unlessthereis
frmtation
is even more tragic for Zambia, which has a clearly expressed agreement among all members
Of
lived through four wars of liberation in the neigh- the Council to include in any decision somemachinery
bouring areas and must now undertake efforts for for binding sanctions under Chapter VII oftheCFter,
Namibia and for the liberation of the people of South
Africa itself. No doubt the European countries that 17. In the hope of finding at least the beginniigsof
were subjected to Nazi blackmail and crushed by the some settlement that would ensure the Peace“lnd
Nazi armies could offer an illustration of the dis- security of the peoples of southern Africa andof Africa

as a whole, we’ expfess the wish that the Council
may unanimously respond to Zambia’s appeal to free
its territory of all aggression and for the Council to
adopt the effective measures for which the Charter
gives full authority.

they point to acts undeniably premeditated by South
Africa and cruel in their manifestation.
24. Thus, not content with its dehumanizing acts or
with martyrising the blacks in South Africa with
impunity, the racist regime of Pretoria has brutally
attacked the peace-loving populations of neighbouring
States to prevent them from upholding the cause of
justice and dignity in that unhappy country of Namibia, to which they are bound by indestructible values
and where South Africa’s illegal, repressive and harsh
colonization continues, in spite of the injunctions of
the international community. The facts are as follows:
there were some 20 consecutive acts by South Africa
on the territory of Zambia alone between January and
March of this year; there have been provocative concentrations of terrorist troops in the territory, and
flagrant violations of Zambian air space; many armed
attacks against travellers and villagers; dozens of men,
women and children killed or seriously wounded; and
incalculable destruction from which it will take a long
time for the Zambian economy to recover. That
sufficiently describes the tribulations of that people,
not to mention the moral harm they have sustained
and the insecurity skillfully maintained in the area,
not the least consequence of which is the loss of
workers to the economy.
25. Niger therefore feels that there is an urgent need
to put an end to the destruction; there is an urgent need
to impose on South Africa unbending law, the verdict
of the world, and the force of legality. There is an
urgent need to free Namibia, cost what it may, because
the facts demonstrate that only such a measure can
restore peace to the region. But it is also extremely
urgent to comfort the courageous people of Zambia
and sustain it in its course of helping Namibia, the
Namibian people and its political organization, the
South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO),
Zambia is holding high the torch of dignity and
freedom-the watchwords, in the last analysis, of the
United Nations Charter.

lg. In addition to expressing their unanimity in principle on a formal resolution, as a first gesture, we
would expect the allies of South Africa to contribute
to an immediate withdrawal of the troops now stationed in Zambia. The Council will be meeting again
and again to discuss acts of aggression committed by
South Africa. We shall be able to weigh the impact of
our unanimity all the more objectively if our efforts
do indeed reflect to the full our respective convictions.
19. The Tunisian delegation cannot do less than
express to the fraternal people of Zambia and to its
representative in the Council, Mr. Kamanga, our
feelings of solidarity with them in their long ordeal. In
their resistance and their calm determination, they can
count on the constant and unwavering support of all
just men. They must have faith that justice and right
will indeed triumph.
20. Mr. OUMAROU (Niger) (interprelation from
French): Please allow me, first of all, to express my
admiration for the outstanding way in which you,
Mr. President, represent the valiant country of Mexico
in the United Nations. Your qualities as a statesman
and a seasoned diplomat are sufficiently well known
for me not to have to dwell on the fact that, under
,your presidency, our Council is in good hands. Please
accept our congratulations and be assured that my
delegation will continue to work steadfastly and with
zeal to provide you its full and positive co-operation.
21. But since I have at last been given an opportunity
to do so, I should like to say how much we appreciated
the tact and wisdom of Ambassador Mills of the sister
Republic of’ Jamaica during his presidency for the
month of March. May he accept the gratitude and
compliments of my delegation for his exemplary
dedication and his great contribution to the vitality of
the Council.

26. Guardians as we are of world stability and peace
among nations, we have no right to allow South Africa
to work so openly to achieve the destabilization of
the region, to continue to defy the Charter and to
disturb its neighbours which are working for their
development while fighting for the triumph of the
sacred ideals that unite men.

22. In view of the grave situation prevailing today on
the front line in southern Africa, my country wishes
to express its profound indignation at and energetic
condemnation of the repeated and murderous actions
so often inflicted on the sister Republic of Zambia
during the past several months by reason of the
deliberate policy of destruction and destabilization
that South Africa practises almost daily at Zambia’s
expense.

27. Niger is therefore asking the Council to demand
the immediate withdrawal of all South African troops
operating illegally on Zambian territory, the cessation
of all violations of Zambia’s territorial integrity by
the racist Pretoria regime, and scrupulous respect
from that regime for Zambian sovereignty, The
Council should firmly condemn these provocations
from South Africa and solemnly warn that country
that, if those acts continue, they will be considered
additional defiance of our Organization and will incur
sanctions from the international community, including
the application of Chapter VII of the Charter,

23. The facts have been set forth here 12209th
meeting] by Mr. Kamanga, Chairman of the Political
and Legal Committee of the Central Committee of
the United National Independence Party of the
Republic of Zambia, whom my delegation is pleased
to welcome. The facts provided by him are instructive;
3

in Angola, which was a flagrant violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country. As is
well known, the Council called on South Africa
immediately to halt its raids and its acts of provocation
and demanded strict respect for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola.

28. Before concluding, I should like to affirm our
complete solidarity with the fraternal people of Zambia,
which we ask here, through its representatives, to
believe in our compassion and to accept our support
in the face of these distressing events.
29. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): The Security
Council is once again seized of the question of South
African aggression against Zambia, a State with which
the Soviet Union has relations of friendship and
mutual understanding. The facts set forth in a very
convincing statement by the representative of Zambia,
Mr. Kamanga, a member of the Central Committee
of the United National Independence Party of the
Republic of Zambia and Chairman of the Political and
Legal Committee of that Committee, whose participation in the work of the Council we welcome, and
the statements made by the representatives of other
countries are irrefutable proof of the fact that once
again we are faced with overt aggression by the racist
rbgime of Pretoria against an independent African
State. This provides confirmation of the gravity of
the threat to neighbouring States and to peace and
security in southern Africa, a threat that exists because
of the presence of the aggressive, racist Pretoria
rkgime.

33. However, the facts show that South Africa’s
policy of aggression against Zambia, Angola and other
neighbouring States is continuing. Not only is that
policy continuing, but the attacks on neighbouring
African States are being organized with increasing
frequency and they are more and more violent.
34. In its acts of aggression the Pretoria regime
attaches great importance to manauvres designed to
hamper the attainment of true freedom and independence by the people of Namibia under the leadership
of SWAPO, its political vanguard. The South African
racists are illegally using the Territory of Namibia,
which they occupy although it is under the direct
responsibility of the United Nations, to launch raids
against neighbouring States. They have established
bridgeheads for attacks against Angola, Zambia,
Botswana and other independent African countries.
There is no doubt at all that the South African
authorities intend to consolidate their position in
Namibia so that, from there, they can continue their
criminal actions aimed at destabilizing the situation in
those neighbouring countries and forcing them to
abandon their progress towards development and
social progress and their support for the national
liberation movement.

30. In their acts of aggression against Zambia, the
South African racists have constantly violated the
Zambian frontier; they have bombed populated areas,
destroyed bridges, plundered the property of Zambian
citizens and destroyed Zambia’s material resources.
As a result of the armed intervention there have been
victims among the peaceful civilian population,
including children. South African aircraft daily violate
the air space of that peaceful and independent State.
For several months, the troops of the racists have
been occupying various areas of the country, as a
result of which those parts have been cut off from the
rest of Zambia, and it has no longer been possible
to get food supplies to the people in those regions.
The scope of those acts of aggression by South Africa
shows that they have been elevated to the level of an
official policy towards Zambia by the racists of South
Africa.

35. Up until very recently, South Africa provided
active assistance and support to the illegal racist
regime in Southern Rhodesia, doing everything it
could to prevent the victory of the patriotic forces in
Zimbabwe. Having failed in that endeavour, the racist
r6gime of Pretoria has nevertheless not abandoned its
plans of direct armed intervention in the affairs of
Zimbabwe. Twenty-two thousand South African
soldiers are massed on the frontier with that young
State. As was stated by the Prime Minister of Zimbabwe, Mr. Mugabe, not all South African troops have
yet left the territory of that country. Open threats are
heard in Pretoria about the use of force if the South
African authorities consider that Zimbabwe’s policy is,
as they say, “undermining the security” of South
Africa. Hence it was not by chance that the Organization of African Unity, welcoming the victory of the
Patriotic Front in Zimbabwe, drew attention to the
continuing threat to the independence of Zimbabwe
and very firmly warned that African countries “would
not suffer any intervention on the part of any circles
whatsoever in the affairs of the young State. Africa“
-it was said-“ would support the people of Zimbabwe
with all its power if there was any threat to its independence”.

31. The acts of aggression of the South African racists
against Zambia are one of the links in the whole chain
of actions undertaken by Pretoria with the support of
its Western protectors to halt or at least slow down the
process of national liberation of the peoples of southern
Africa; indeed, they are trying to reverse that process
and turn it in a neo-colonialist direction. I
32. The Council has been seized almost constantly of
the acts of aggression by the Pretoria rkgime against
one or another independent African country. Last year
it twice considered complaints by the People’s Republic of Angola against South Africa and strongly
condemned the South African racists for their premeditated, deliberate and constant armed intervention

36. Continuing an aggressive policy towards the
neighbouring independent States, South Africa is
4

endeavouring to retain its control over southern Africa
by military means. To attain that end, the pivot of its
internal and external policy, South Africa has been
preparing for war and carrying out acts of aggression
against neighbouring States and against the national
liberation movements of Africa. Over the past few
years, the armed forces of South Africa have been
tripled and they now number a quarter of a million
soldiers. The resources allocated for military expenditures are growing steadily. In the last fiscal year
they amounted to 2 billion dollars.
37. To maintain their domination, the racists are
willing to go to any extreme. We have learned that
work is being carried on in South Africa to establish
nuclear facilities. The former South African Minister
of Information has said, and this is particularly
ominous:
“In the event of an attack on us, if our survival
is in jeopardy, then there will be no rules at all in
effect. We shall use all the resources that are available to us, whatever they may be.”
It is well known that the idea of national and social
liberation is considered by the South African racists to
be a “threat to their existence” or, rather, to the
criminal systemof apartheid in South Africa.
38. There is no doubt at all that, without the support
of the West, primarily the United States, the United
Kingdom and other members of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization, the South African racists would
not have been able to continue attacking independent
African States for so long and with such impunity or
to disregard so many decisions of the Security Council and the General Assembly. Overt and covert support by the imperialist Powers to the racist regime is
not really surprising, because this is based on very
deep-seated common interests. Southern Africa is still
one of the main sources of raw materials; it is the main
source of gold for the West. Certain non-ferrous
metals, uranium and diamonds all provide fabulous
profits because of the inhuman exploitation of indigenous African labour. In 1978 alone, raw materials in
the amount of 2 billion dollars were supplied by South
Africa to the United States.
39. The imperialist forces are doing everything they
can to preserve their political and economic position
in that part of the world, using the South African
racist leaders for that purpose. On that basis, Sauth
Africa is provided with all kinds of assistance, even in
the United Nations, where the Western Powers constantly prevent the adoption of resolutions containing
effective measures to halt its aggressive policy.
40. Throughout its activity in the United Nations,
the Soviet Union has, together with the other socialist
and progressive countries, pursued and is still pursuing
a consistent policy based on the principle of struggle
for the complete elimination of any remnants of

colonialism, racism and npartheid and for the exercise
by all peoples, including the peoples of southern
Africa, of their inalienable right to determine their
own future, Guided by that position of principle, the
Soviet Union supports Zambia in its struggle against
South African aggression and other infringements by
South Africa on its sovereignty andterritorial integrity.
41. We share the view expressed by the representatives of African States that the continuing and, indeed,
increasingly frequent acts of aggression perpetrated
by South Africa against Zambia constitute a serious
threat to peace and security.
42. The Soviet delegation strongly condemns the
acts of aggression committed by the South African
racists against Zambia and proceeds from the premise
that the Council must not only very severely condemn
South African aggression against Zambia but also take
action to force South Africa immediately to halt its
acts of aggression against Zambia and to respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country and
of other African States. To that end, the Council
must consider the adoption in respect of South Africa
of coercive measures under Chapter VII of the
Charter.
43. Mr. R. RAHMAN (Bangladesh): We have
listened with close attention to the statement of the
representative of Zambia, Mr. Kamanga. His presence
here in New York only underscores the urgency and
gravity of the matter now before the Council.
44, The spate of provocations and depredations
unleashed by the racist regime of South Africa against
Zambia is a matter of the deepest concern to my
delegation, not least because they form part of a longestablished pattern of premeditated violations and acts
of aggression against Zambia and indeed the other
front-line States. Thus evidence and records have
accumulated over the past several years of air and
ground movements of South African armed forces
across Zambian frontiers; of the killing of innocent
civilians and of the abduction, torture, detention
and harassment of others; of the establishment of
camps, road blocks and other mechanisms of surveillance; and of the wanton destruction of property,
with a singular focus on infrastructural damage, aimed
at disrupting communication lines and paralysing all
normal life.
45. What we are witnessing today, however, is an
increasing intensification of those acts of aggression,
including a large-scale military build-up inside Namibia
and the continuing presence of South African forces
inside Zambian territory itself. The reality of the
events here presented, the dangers they pose and the
aims to which they are directed can hardly be doubted.
46. At issue today, therefore, are not only the
indiscriminate violation of the territorial unity and
integrity of a sovereign State, or the undisguised

attempt to destabilize its Government and terrorize its
people, but issues that obviously go beyond and
cannot be divorced or isolated from events affecting
the future of the whole of southern Africa and peace
and stability in that region.

53. The Norwegian Government shares the grave
concern already expressed in the Council at the violations by South Africa of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Zambia. It has been and
still remains our hope that the imminent attainment
of genuine independence by the people of Zimbabwe
will usher in a new era for all the peoples of southern
Africa. During this period it will be necessary to
expedite and complete the process leading towards
independence and self-determination for all the peoples
of the region. For this process to be completed
peacefully, it will be necessary for all the countries
in the region to demonstrate respect for each other’s
territorial integrity and sovereignty.

47. There can be no doubt that South Africa’s
actions against Zambia, Angola and the front-line
States represent the last entrenched stand of the racist
regime to preserve the anachronistic status quo of
white supremacy and the universally condemned
practice of apartheid,
48. As we prepare to celebrate the independence of
Zimbabwe and rejoice with the people of that country
in its emergence to sovereign statehood after years of
bitter turmoil, travail, heroic struggle and sacrifice,
all eyes are now increasingly focused on the completion of the liberation process in Namibia. South
Africa’s illegal stranglehold on Namibia, its prevarication over all attempts to find a peaceful solution
and the consolidation of its military grip and racist
control of that international Territory have the
inevitable fall-out of continued aggression against
Namibia’s neighbours, despite the remarkable restraint
and concessions of the latter.

54. South Africa’s encroachments on Zambian territory and air space constitute clear violations of that
country’s territorial integrity and political independence. Furthermore the continued South African
presence inside Zambia constitutes interference in
the internal affairs of Zambia, in contravention of
international law, including the Charter. The Norwegian Government condemns the actions of South
Africa in this regard and calls upon it to withdraw
forthwith from Zambian territory and to desist from
further violations of that country’s sovereignty.

49. My delegation takes this opportunity to pay a
particular tribute to the Government and people of
Zambia, as well as to other front-line States, for their
singular contribution to furthering the process of
liberation in southern Africa through the immense
sacrifice and self-deprivation of their own people.
In the face of the determined and sustained demonstration of support and solidarity by the international
community, the regime in Pretoria is now engaged
in desperate attempts to preserve its last bastions and
remaining strongholds.

55. Genuine independence and self-determination
for the peoples remaining under minority rule in
southern Africa would be greatly accelerated if South
Africa would agree without further delay to the United
Nations plan for Namibia. The implementation of that
plan would guarantee free and fair elections in Namibia and increased stability and security in the region
as a whole.
56. The Norwegian delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution before us [S/13887]. We shall
do so because the situation so clearly documented for
the Council on 10 April by the representative of
Zambia remains intolerable not only to Zambia but
also to the Council.

50. The Council must assume its responsibilities in
the face of the patent threat to peace and security
posed by South Africa’s persistent acts of aggression.
We believe that the Council must unequivocally
pronounce its condemnation of these unprovoked and
intensified acts against the Republic of Zambia and
demand that South Africa cease such violations and
withdraw forthwith all military forces from inside
Zambian territory. This Council should make it clear
that the continuation of these aggressive acts can
result only in its taking the necessary effective measures laid down in the Charter.

57. As Zimbabwe nears its well-deserved and longfought-for independence, it is proper that the frontline States themselves, including Zambia, also be
enabled to enjoy the fruits of peace. Zimbabwe represents a victory for peaceful solutions and negotiated
settlements of international conflicts. From this, South
Africa should also learn the lesson that continued
acts of aggression against neighbouring countries
will seriously complicate the present situation in the
region. This is the time to solve, through renewed
determination by all the parties concerned, the remaining problems in southern Africa by peaceful
means.

51. Mr. ALGARD (Norway): Mr. President, I should
like to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. I am pleased to see you,
as the representative of Mexico, a country with which
Norway has the friendliest of relations, presiding
over our proceedings this month.

58. Mr. MATHIAS (Portugal): We should like, first
of all, to address our warm greetings to you, Mr. President, on the occasion of your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of April. It
is particularly gratifying for us to see you in the Chair

52. I should also like to pay a tribute to Ambassador
Mills of Jamaica for his, as always, most able handling
of the business of the Council during the month of
March.
6

because Of your outstanding personal qualities both as
a skilled diplomat and as the representative of a
country with which Portugal has always maintained
the most friendly of relations.

particular for its leader this month, for, with the
diplomatic and political skills that you bring to the
presidency, the Council should be able to act with
dispatch and distinction on the crucial issues before it
this month.

59. A tribute is also due to Ambassador Mills of
Jamaica, who presided over our deliberations during
the month of March with all the wisdom, knowledge
and experience we all recognize in him.

[The speaker continued in English.]

64. Your predecessor, Ambassador Mills of Jamaica,
is to be warmly congratulated for steering us with
ease and aplomb through the crises that came before
USlast month. Ambassador Mills comes from an island
country like the Philippines, but his handling of his
tasks last month bespeaks a universal outlook which
has stood him and the Council in good stead.

60. The report that has been presented to us by
Mr. Kamanga, member of the Central Committee of
the United National Independence Party of Zambia
and Chairman of the Political and Legal Committee
of the Central Committee
on the situation in the
Western Province of his country is indeed very
disturbing. Once again, a front-line State has seen its
boundaries and air space violated and has suffered
human and material losses. The international community cannot remain indifferent to these recent acts
of aggression by South Africa or to the sufferings of
the Zambian people, to whom we should like to express
our deepest sympathy on this occasion.

65. The matter before us today is one of the vexing
issues before the General Assembly and the Security
Council. It is an issue that remains unresolved, not
because the United Nations has lacked decisiveness,
but because the party in question, the racist rkgime of
South Africa, has ignored the decisions of the world
body. As a result, we are saddled with a grave problem
in southern Africa; the international community continues to reap the bitter fruits of a rampant racist
policy that is unchecked, and the process of liberation and decolonization of subject peoples is still
incomplete in Africa.

61. We associate ourselves with all those who have
spoken before the Council in expressing our concern
and our distress at the flagrant violation of the soveieignty and territorial integrity of a Member State of
this Organization, a violation which constitutes a most
serious breach of the elementary principles of international law,

66. My delegation believes that at the root of the
present problem lies the anachronistic policy of upartheid, a particularly vicious institutionalized
type of
racism. In the particular case before us, it is obvious
that racism breeds recidivism. Unless and until this
manifestation of racism in southern Africa is eliminated, until racism in general is eradicated, we can
expect the illegal occupation of Namibia to continue,
and we can expect the neighbouring countries-the
front-line States of Zambia, Angola, Botswana,
Mozambique and Tanzania-continually
to suffer from
actions by the apartheid rCgime designed to destabilize
them and to derail United Nations efforts to enable
the Namibian people to exercise their inalienable
right to self-determination.

62. With the settlement of the Rhodesian question
and the holding of free and fair elections in that country, the international community formed great hopes
of seeing a quick end to at least some of the problems
still facing the people of southern Africa. Those expectations have, unfortunately,
not yet been entirely
fulfilled, as this debate has shown. We therefore urge
the South African Government not to persist in creating
situations like the one we are dealing with today,
but to abide by the resolutions of the Council. We feel
that it is in its best interests fully to co-operate with
the overwhelming
view of the international
community, as expressed once again in the draft resolution upon which we are about to vote.

67. It is an outrage that Zambia should have had to
experience these wanton acts of aggression so soon
after it had suffered ravishment at the hands of the
illegal ri$gime in Southern Rhodesia, with South African
collusion. While Zambia and the other front-line States
no longer have to suffer depradations from Southern
Rhodesia, it is deplorable that Zambia should have to
bear again the brunt of a new series of incursions and
aggression, this time from South Africa, through
Namibia, which itself is the victim of an unjust, illegal
occupation by the minority rkgime in Pretoria. As with
all the developing States of southern Africa, it is time
that Zambia was given the opportunity to develop
in peace, free from external interference and aggression.

63. Mr. YANG0 (Philippines) (interprefation froln
Spanish): I should like to take this opportunity to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of this Council for this month. We
warmly welcome your presidency because Mexico
and the Philippines are linked by fraternal ties that
date back to the seventeenth century, when the
galleohs of our common colonial ruler crossed the vast
distance that separate Acapulco from Manila and gave
us a common historical and cultural legacy, on which
we have built our present close and intimate relations.
On this basis we have always co-operated splendidly
in every endeavour, international and bilateral, for
the attainment of the common &pirations Of our two
peoples. This Council is fortunate in having YOU in

68. The South African occupation of Namibia has
been declared illegal by the International
Court of
7

I%

71. There is incontrovertible and overwhelming
evidence that aggression has been committed against
a peaceful and non-aligned State in southern Africa,
The principles of the United Nations have once again
been violated by the apartheid rbgime of South Africa.
We have no choice but to uphold the principles of
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence
enshrined in the Charter. The United Nations and the
Council cannot and should not condone the naked
violation of these principles on the pretext of preemptive or preventive measures.

Justice, the General Assembly and the Security Council, as well as by the Organization of African Unity
and the non-aligned States, It is this illegal occupation
that enables South Africa to commit these destructive
and wanton acts of aggression against Zambia. It is
ironic that Zambia, which was one of the parties that
played a leading role in making the Lancaster House
agreement a success and terminating minority rule in
Zimbabwe is now being punished by another minority
rhgime .
69. This matter is of great importance not only to
Zambia but also to the international community
because of the threat it poses to international peace
and security. Its importance is underscored by the
appearance before us of Mr. Kamanga, Chairman of the
Political and Legal Committee of the Central Committee of the United National Independence Party of
Zambia. He has documented the destructions, injuries
and deaths caused by South African aggression against
the Western Province of Zambia. This catalogue of
crimes perpetrated against the people of Zambia
parallels those committed by the illegal rbgime of
Southern Rhodesia against Zambia last year. As a
result, the Council adopted resolution 455 (1979),
which created a committee under the chairmanship of
the representative of Norway, Mr. Per Aasen. The
report of that committee [S/13774 of 3f January 29801
has shown us the extent of the destructions and
injuries caused by the act of aggression. We have also
heard statements of the Organization of African Unity
and the non-aligned movement underscoring the
gravity of the ,present crimes. From the front-line
States and from SWAPO, the sole and authentic representative of Namibia, we have also received reports
of the criminal acts of South African forces in their
territories and in Namibia. As a result of these acts,
those countries have suffered grievous harm; their
economies have been shattered and the daily lives of
their peoples have been dislocated. In their honest
efforts to comply with the relevant General Assembly and Security Council resolutions, they have
had to undergo much sacrifice.
70. Answering the appeal of the Secretary-General,
the Philippines has unhesitatingly responded to
United Nations and non-aligned calls for assistance to
alleviate the plight of the peoples of Zambia and the
other front-line States on various occasions. By the
same token, we have fully supported the struggle of
the Namibian people, under the leadership of SWAPO,
to attain their national heritage as a free and independent nation. As an earnest of the firm commitment of the Philippines to the independence of
Namibia, the Philippines received, in March 1979, a
delegation from the United Nations Council for
Namibia, the Administering Authority for Namibia, as
a result of which a joint communiquhl was issued
expressing support for the cause of the Namibian
people. Towards the same end, my Government has
consistently contributed annually to all the various
United Nations funds for Namibia, including the fund
for the Institute in Lusaka.

72. For these reasons, the Philippines firmly supports the recommendations and courses of action submitted to the Council by the Government of Zambia,
In particular, we demand that all South African forces
withdraw immediately from Zambian territory and that
South Africa henceforth cease all violations of
Zambia’s air space and scrupulously respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Zambia. We believe that such demands for South
Africa to desist from its actions must also apply in
relation to the other front-line States. South Africa
should be warned that persisting in these acts will
make it subject to enforcement measures by the Council, including those provided for in Chapter VII of
the Charter.
73. This is an urgent matter that cannot brook delay,
Every moment that passes without forthright action
by the Council poses a peril to the people of Zambia
and a threat to international peace and security. Let
us seizethis opportunity to put a stop once and for all
to South African aggression committed in total
violation of the sacred principles of the Charter and
against the people of the Republic of Zambia and its
neighbours.
74. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of India, whom
I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
75. Mr. B. C. MISHRA (India): Mr. President,
I wish first of all, on behalf of the delegation of
India, to thank you, and through you the other members of the Council, for affording me an opportunity
to address the Council on the serious situation arising
out of the acts of aggression committed by the South
African racist rkgime against the Republic of Zambia,
76. The Council has, on a number of occasions during
the past few years, been seized of the question of
South African atrocities against Zambia, Angola and
other sovereign African States. It has adopted resolutions condemning such aggressive attacks as flagrant
violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of those independent States and as a serious threat to
international peace and security.
77. The most recent provocative military actions
undertaken by South African troops and aircraft in the
8

Seshekeand Senanga districts of Zambia are not only
characteristic of Pretoria's
outrageous behaviour,
which is contrary to all norms of civilized relations
amongStates,behaviour that hasbecome typical of the
apartheid political psychology, they are also illustrative of a new obstinacy on the part of its rulers in
the face of the rapid development of events in that
part of the world and a further attempt to stem the
inexorable tide of historical change in southern Africa.

it in setting up the enormous military-industrial complex upon which it relies in the conduct of its aggressive policies.
82. The Security Council has a solemnresponsibility
to put a stop to South Africa’s acts of aggression
and attempts at destabilizationof independent African
front-line States. The Charter is unambiguous on the
method of handling such a situation. For its aggression against neighbouring States, for its apartheid
Policy, for its usurpation of the resourcesof Namibia
and for its violation of the basic human dignities of
the African people, South Africa deservesthe censure
of the Council, as it has already deserved that of the
international community. In condemning the aggressive acts of the racist rkgime we strongly support the
demand of the overwhelming majority of Member
Statesthat the Council should, in accordancewith its
responsibilitiesunder the Charter, do everything necessary to eliminate the threat to international peace and
security which the continuing unlawful occupation of
Namibia by South Africa and its aggressive actions
directed againstindependentAfrican Statesrepresent.

78. Mr. Kamanga, member of the Central Committee of the United National Independence Party of
Zambia and Chairman of the Political and Legal Committeeof that Committee, presented us with a detailed
pictureof the sanguinary misdeedsof the racistsagainst
innocent Zambian civilians, including children, who
arevictims of cynical manceuvreson the part of South
Africa’s apartheid military and political strategists.
The successive and sustained nature of these actions
against the front-line States of southern Africa cannot be viewed in isolation as individual acts of State
terrorism. They are part of a larger design.
79. While the political developments in neighbouring
Zimbabwe should have given the present regime in
Pretoria sufficient cause for circumspection and for a
thorough reassessmentof the advisability of continuing
its outdated policies and tactics, South Africa’s recent
actions have given proof of little understanding and
less wisdom. Not only have its actions in Namibia,
typified by its continued obfuscation on the plan for a
political solution to the question of Namibia, left no
doubt of South Africa’s true intentions-namely, to
continue by all possible means its illegal occupation of
that Territory and to perpetuate the colonial exploitation of the people and resources of Namibia-but it
would seem that the rkgime in Pretoria has not given
upits attempts to revive the concept ofa “constellation
of States” in the area hinged on Pretoria and aimed at
offering security for the racist minority Rump in the
region. Its present actions should be viewed in such a
context.

83. The Council should act urgently in the current
situation and condemn in the strongestpossible terms
South Africa’s aggression against the Republic of
Zambia. It should demand that the Government of
South Africa immediately ceaseall acts of aggression
and provocation against Zambia and withdraw forthwith all its armed forces from sovereign Zambian territory. South Africa should scrupulously respect the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the neighbouring independent African States and
desist from the utilization of Namibia, a Territory
occupied by it illegally, to launch acts of aggression
against Zambia or other neighbouring States. The
Pretoria rhgime should be placed on notice that, in the
event of any further aggressiveaction on its part, the
Council will promptly take up the question of enforcement action against it under Chapter VII of the
Charter, All Member States should be requested by
the Council urgently to extend necessary assistance
to the Government and people of Zambia as well as
to the other front-line States in order to strengthen
their defence capabilities against the repetition of
such insolent provocations by South Africa.

80. If all these are not sufficient indicators of South
Africa’s cynical intentions, its stepped-up activities
in the direction of acquiring nuclear weaponsmustgive
the international community cause for grave concern.
South Africa’s aim, obviously, is to use its military
prowess, including its nuclear capability, as a lever to
blackmail and intimidate Africa into abandoning sup
port for the oppressed people of the region. In this
context, my delegation firmly supports the decisions
concerning the policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa contained in General Assembly
resolution 34/93, as well as those on the question of
Namibia contained in General Assembly resolution 34192.

84. The people of Zambia have long endured the
provocations from Pretoria. The daily sacrificein terms
of economic hardships and the threat they face from
across the border is the price they have been called
upon to pay in their persistencein supporting the cause
of the Namibian people, It is for the Council to undertake thorough and comprehensive consideration Of
this grave threat to the peace and stability of that
region, and we hopethat the Council will be able to live
up to the expectations of the people of Zambia and
justify the confidence they have placed in it.

As is clear to everyone, it is the continuing
The PRESIDENT (interprekztion from Spanish):
economic, financial and other support enjoyed bY the 85.
The
next speaker is the representative of Nigeria.
Pretoria regime in various quarters that has assisted

81.

9

direct response to the threat pose,d,by these terrorist
activities. They are aimed solely at the elements
committing aggression and not against the countries concerned or their citizens. Zambia must bear
full responsibility for allowing terrorist elements to
establish sanctuaries in, and operate from, its territory.” [Ibid.]

I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
86. Mr. CLARK (Nigeria): Mr. President, I should
like, first of all, to express my very deep appreciation
for the opportunity you have afforded me to address
this extremely crucial meeting of the Council under
your most able presidency. Your outstanding and
well-known personal qualities and the pivotal role
of your country, Mexico, in the world today are a firm
guarantee that full justice will be done to the subject
on the Council’s agenda.
87. The timing of the current acts of aggression committed by the racist regime in South Africa against
Zambia could not have been more clumsily contrived.
Occurring on the eve of the accession to freedom and
independence of Zimbabwe, where South Africa’s
policies have suffered their most shameful defeat to
date-a triumph brought about by the heroic sacrifices
of the people of Zimbabwe and the people of Zambia
alike-these acts are an unmitigated outrage. But
when linked to a spurious pretext, as the South
African Minister for Foreign Affairs and Information
has sought to link them in his letter of 10 April
[S/13886], they are reminiscent of the futile efforts of
that regime in the past to stem the tide of history
in southern Africa, to arrest the expansion of the
frontiers of freedom in Africa and to defy the United
Nations.
88. Zambia’s complaints against South Africa of
aggression, intimidation and harassment have been
proved beyond any doubt. In his competently documented presentation yesterday, the representative of
Zambia, Mr. Kamanga, a member of the Central
Committee of the United National Independence Party
of the Republic of Zambia, showed how his country
had been a constant victim of South African aggression over the years. Nigeria strongly condemns those
acts of aggression against Zambia, a sister State of
Nigeria’s. In this connection, I recall Council resolution 455 (1979), in which the Council not only strongly
condemned the illegal regime then in power in Southern
Rhodesia, as well as South Africa, for their brazen
acts of aggression against Zambia, but also called for
the payment of full and adequate compensation to
make good Zambia’s losses resulting from those acts
of aggression. The recent acts have further aggravated
the situation.

90. As if this admission of premeditated acts of aggression in flagrant violation of the Charter, of
adherence to the criminal doctrine of “hot pursuit”
and of the arrogation to itself of the right to protect
the Namibian people, whose Territory South Africa
has continued to usurp and occupy illegally, were not
provocative enough, the Minister went on to challenge
the competence of the Council to implement its own
resolutions on Namibia with an implied threat, by
saying:
“It is clear that the Zambian request for a meeting
of the Security Council was timed to pre-empt South
Africa’s reply to the Secretary-General’s report of
31 March 1980 on the South West Africa negotiations.” [Ibid.]
91. The triumph of the democratic process in Zimbabwe has completely unsettled the complacency of
South Africa. It has destroyed its fig-leaf image of
being a strong military Power capable of dealing with
the liberation struggle within its own borders and of
playing a role in deciding the destiny of the front-line
States, among which Zimbabwe is now a vanguard
member. It has damaged the concept of the so-called
Western security and defence system, which includes
South Africa to the total exclusion of the entire continent of Africa. It has buried all dreams of the survival
of racist minority regimes in Africa.
92. I would therefore venture to suggest that three
aspectsof the root of the problem should beaddressed.
93. First there is incontrovertible evidence that
South Africa’s actions under consideration constitute
a threat to the peace, a breach of the peace and an act
of aggression within the meaning of Article 39 of the
Charter. The Council should therefore act swiftly and
decisively to prevent aggravation of the situation. It
should strongly condemn South Africa for its aggression. It should call for the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of South African troops from Zambian
soil. It should adopt effective measures to prevent a
recurrence of acts of aggression by South Africaagainst
Zambia. It should call upon South Africa to compensate Zambia substantially for its losses. After all,
South Africa has accepted responsibility for its
actions. It must be made to pay for them. South
Africa cannot escape its criminal responsibility.
Nigeria therefore strongly supports Zambia in its
present plight and will do everything in its power to
help it to defend its sovereignty and territorial integrity.

89. Even the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Information of South Africa, Mr. Botha, has admitted that
his regime has committed, and will continue to commit,
acts of aggression against Zambia. The Council cannot
overlook the serious challenge to its authority flowing
from that threat. In his letter to you to which I referred
earlier, the South African Minister said:
“[South Africa] therefore has no alternative but to
take protective action against aggression committed
from Zambian soil. South Africa’s actions are in

94. Secondly, the Council should assume its full
responsibility under the Charter by facing up to the
10

recalcitrance of South ,Africa over Namibia, To call
SWAP0 a terrorist organization is sheer poppycock.
SWAP0 is recognized by the United Nations, by the
Organization of African Unity and by more than
130 States as an authentic liberation movement and as
the sole legitimate representative of the Namibian
people. Its right to demand the independence of
Namibia and to fulfil that demand by all means,
including armed struggle with full international support, is therefore beyond doubt.
95. But more important is the Council’s perception
of its own powers and its determination to implement
its own resolutions. The Council has adopted several
resolutions with respect to the United Nations legal
responsibility for Namibia, the inalienable right of the
people of Namibia to self-determination
and independence, the illegal occupation of Namibia by South
Africa, and the implementation
of the mandate of the
United Nations Transition Assistance Group, so as to
ensure the early independence of Namibia.
South
Africa’s allegation that Zambia’s complaint would
complicate the Secretary-General’s
current efforts to
implement the Council’s resolutions must be rejected
asgrossly impertinent and totally unacceptable. In fact,
in the view of Nigeria, these talks with South Africa
over Namibia have gone on for too long. South
Africa is making a mockery of the whole exercise.
Those who say that South Africa should be given more
time to pursue the talks, particularly in the aftermath of
its Zimbabwe ddbgcle, are merely playing Devil’s
advocate. South Africa’s policy of occupation and
exploitation of Namibia will not change. It can be
defeated only by the combined will of the Council
and the armed struggle by SWAPO.
96. Thirdly, the Council should take into account
the fact that the consequences of the uparfheid policies
of the racist rhgime in South Africa for the peace and
stability of Africa, particularly
of the front-line
States, are not an overnight development. Since the
adoption of its resolution 134 (1960) the Council has
been considering the fact that apartheid is a threat to
international
peace; it has recognized that South
Africa’s increasing arms build-up and its recent
acquisition of a nuclear-weapon capability are to be
used in furtherance of its racist policies; it has constantly reiterated its total opposition to the policies
of apartheid of the Government of South Africa; and
it has condemned, time and again, South Africa’s
armed incursions into and acts of aggression against
Angola, Zambia, Zimbabwe and other States of the
region.
97. The only significant practical measure taken So
far by the Council to ensure the implementation
of its
resolutions against the apartheid regime has been its
adoption of a resolution on an arms embargo against
South Africa [181 (196311. But that was in 1963, some
17 years ago. Since then South Africa, through collusion with some important Member States of the United
Nations, even of the Council, and through the exploita-

tion of the human and natural resources of the Republie, has been acquiring more weapons, conventional
and nuclear, and building up its war machine. Consequently, it is emboldened to engage in military
adventurism and to issue blatant warnings of invasion
to neighbouring African countries. A recent warning
was addressed to Mozambique.
98. The Special Committee against Apartheid and
the anti-clpartheid international community have lately
been drawing attention to the fact that South Africa
now poses an even greater threat to international
peace and security than it did in 1963 when the arms
embargo was called for. Indeed, today as we meet
here, there are reports that South African military
forces have been mobilized and are deployed along the
borders of Mozambique,
Zimbabwe, Zambia and
Angola. We have also been able to ascertain that the
South African armed forces rely on aircraft and
heavy equipment to be able to move quickly and cover
enormous distances with a relatively small force and
to deal with strategically over-stretched positions,
and that their capacity to flex their military muscles
depends on the supply of oil.
99. Those facts became very clear to us during the
recent International
Seminar on an Oil Embargo
against South Africa, which was organized by the
Holland Committee on Southern Africa and the
Working Group Kairos in co-operation with the Special
Committee against Apartheid and held in Amsterdam
from 14 to 16 March. The Seminar therefore declared
that, since South Africa was able to continue its
heinous system of upnrtheid and its policies of aggression against the neighbouring States because of its
ability to fuel its machinery of repression and war, an
oil embargo against South Africa was both necessary
and urgent.
100. I should therefore like to submit for the Council’s immediate consideration-partly
as a modest
contribution to its effort to redress Zambia’s present
grievances and partly as a positive component of an
overdue international action for the elimination Of
apartheid and of support for the struggle of the OPpressed people of South Africa and Namibia for
liberation-a
proposal for the Council to impose a
total embargo on the supply of crude oil and oil
products to South Africa. That would reinforce the
already existing arms embargo. Such a decision
would be most popular, not only in Africa but also
throughout the world. It would restore and enhance
the prestige and credibility of this Council as the
primary organ for the maintenance of international
peace and security. And it would not be impossible to
implement, because all the major producers of oil,
including all the members of the Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries and your own great
country, Mr. President, have already prohibited the
sale of their oil to South Africa.
101. The objective of such a decision as I am recommending would be to encourage all States imme-

Zambia, which, discounting all sacrifice, have stood
unflinchingly on the side of principle, of freedom and
of justice.

diately to adopt legislative, administrative and other
effective measures to implement an oil embargo,
including strict penalties against any companies and
tanker operators which might violate it for what are
now popularly known as “obscene profits”. Recent
stories of tankers appearing and disappearing with
cargoes of oil off the coast of Africa may make good
reading as an extension of the mythology of the
Bermuda Triangle, but they trouble the conscience of
all decent people who care for the authority of the
Security Council and who love liberty. South Africa’s
threats to the peace of Africa and, indeed, of the
world must be curbed before it is too late.

108. Ironical though it may be, it does not surprise
anyone that the present situation should have come
about. There once was a time when the defence
perimeter of apartheid, as perceived by the racists of
Pretoria, rested on the twin bases of the continuance
of Portuguese colonialism in Africa and the involvement on South Africa’s side of powerful and influential
countries desirous of maintaining their national
interests in the area and willing to subordinate principle to profit and the freedom of the oppressed peoples to their perceived economic advantage and their
own global military requirements. The victories of
the peoples of Mozambique and Angola, the more
recent victory of the people of Zimbabwe, the
strengthening of the forces of liberation in Namibia,
the heightened political resistance of the oppressed
people of South Africa itself-all those factors have
helped to upset the calculations of the Pretoria game
theorists.

102. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Spun&h): The next speaker is the representative of Guyana.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
103. Mr. SINCLAIR (Guyana): Mr. President, I wish
to thank you and, through you, the other members of
the Council for having granted my delegation the right
to speak on the matter of which it is now seized.

109. It is clear for all to see that the victory of the
people of Zimbabwe has brought the winds of freedom
that much closer to South Africa. Justice, which for
so long had been trampled upon by the forces of oppression of Salisbury, has finally conquered and now
stands menacingly even on the banks of the Limpopo.
It is that vision which has produced the reaction of
desperation which we see manifested in the series of
attacks by South Africa against the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of independent, non-aligned
Zambia which the representative of that country
chronicled before this Council yesterday afternoon.
Those actions are intended to neutralize Zambia’s role
in the continuing liberation of southern Africa, to
strike fear into the hearts of Zambians; they are only
an external manifestation of the politics of fear which
the racists of Pretoria have chosen to practise to
ensure their survival. Fear, intimidation and aggression are all vital parts of the machinery of what passes
for government in South Africa; they are the foundation on which white economic superiority in South
Africa is based. Such fear, intimidation and aggression
are part of the daily life of black South Africans and
of Namibians.

104. When I assure you, Mr. President, of the particular pride and satisfaction that Guyana feels as it
addresses the Council under your presidency, I am not
merely observing tradition. You represent a sister
Latin American country of whose history and continuing contribution to Latin America’s political and
economic emancipation our region is justly proud, a
country with which Guyana maintains the most cordial
relations. Your own experience and diplomatic skills,
which we all know so well, are our assurance of a
positive outcome for the deliberations of the Council
during the month of April.
105. You have assumed the presidency of the Council following that of Ambassador Mills of Jamaica, a
country also from our own region and one with
which Guyana is bound by close ties, historical and
cultural. It therefore gives me special pleasure to pay
a tribute to Ambassador Mills for the efficiency and
skill with which he conducted the business of the
Council during the month of March.
106. You are presiding over the Council in a month
when the international community is rejoicing at the
birth of the independent State of Zimbabwe. The
Council itself has watched and toiled for numerous
hours as the forces of reaction in both Pretoria and
Salisbury fought tooth and nail to prevent that birth
and to forestall the march to freedom of the people of
Zimbabwe. It is an irony of the most cruel sort that,
even as we rejoice, the Council should be convened to
hear a complaint against South Africa advanced by
Zambia, a front-line State which has paid so dearly
in human and material resources in order that Zimbabwe might at last be free.

110. Such continuing and unprovoked attacks against
the people and the territory of Zambia must outrage
the fraternal States and peoples of Africa and the
progressive forces throughout the world. My delegation is profoundly concerned by these acts and joins
all those that have raised their voices in condemnation
of them.
111. But there is another aspect of South Africa’s
aggression against Zambia to which my delegation
would like to refer. That is the blatant, callous manner
in which a Territory legally the responsibility of the
United Nations has been misused by South Africa asB

107. Guyana has long admired the courage, fortitude
and steadfastness of the Government and the people of
12

--..

springboard to mount invabions of Zambia, That action
must be forthrightly condemned by the Council.

117. The universal process of political decolonization
which began at the end of the eighteenth century is
close to culmination. One of the strongest bastions
Of colonialism has been in southern Africa. However,
thanks to the determined efforts of these peoples to
win their independence and the sustained support
they have received from the United Nations, the situation has changed considerably in recent years.

112. The Presence in our midst of Mr. Reuben
Kamanga, a member of the Central Committee of the
United National Independence Party ofthe Republic of
Zambia, testifies to the seriousness of the situation
produced in Zambia by South Africa’s wanton armed
attacks and to the faith which Zambia, like many other
small States, reposes in the United Nations in general
and the Security Council in particular, The Council
therefore has a special responsibility to ensure that
that faith in its effectiveness and authority is sustained.
The Council must demand that South Africa withdraw
its troops immediately
from Zambian territory and
that it desist forthwith from all intervention and interference in Zambia’s internal affairs. In this regard a
special responsibility
devolves on South Africa’s
major Western allies among the permanent members
of the Council which, through their active collaboration, buttress and sustain the system of apartheid,
the preservation of which Botha seeks to ensure at
whatever cost. My delegation calls on those allies to
use their undisputed influence with the racists in
Pretoria to have them withdraw their troops forthwith
from Zambian territory, respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Zambia and cease all acts of
aggression against that country.

118. South Africa, which just recently considered
itself to be protected by a belt of countries dominated
by minority or openly colonial rigimes, today is the
neighbour of free peoples. This triumph, first of
insurgency and then of reason, in Zimbabwe, traumatized the racist minority of South Africa and has
heightened the insecurity of a system based on exploitation and injustice, At the same time, the political
awareness and resistance of the segregated majority
in South Africa have increased, and that has undermined the Pretoria Government’s capacity to act and
its very legitimacy.
119. For that reason, to defend the sovereign rights of
the front-line States is to increase the isolation of the
South African rkgime and compel it substantially to
modify the policies and practices which the intemational community has repeatedly condemned. Internal
resistance and regional isolation are making the South
African system more intractable. That can place us
in unexpected situations which the Council must now
begin to anticipate with energetic and determined
action.

113. Guyana reaffirms its solidarity with the Government and the people of Zambia in their efforts to rid
themselves once and for all of the wrath of the racists
in Pretoria. This is for us only a natural response.
The peoples of Zambia and Guyana are united by
strong links of empathy and understanding, links
forged by ancestry and a shared history of suffering
through colonialist and imperialist domination. These
links have been made even closer in the continuing
struggle of our peoples for their full development.

120. The attack against Zambia is one which can be
condemned on two accounts: it constitutes an act of
armed aggression and it confirms the fact that the
r&gime of South Africa is determined, with the aid of
its allies, to resist any change and to maintain an
unacceptable structure of privilege.
121. The example of equality, freedom and selfdetermination given to the world by the other nations
of southern Africa, as well as their deep-rooted political solidarity, clearly encourages the oppressed people
of South Africa to claim their rights. Thus the international community must stand unequivocally side by
side with one of the two parties in this confrontation:
namely, with the one that fearlessly defends the
fundamental values which underly our Organization.

114. We sincerely hope that the peace-loving people
of Zambia will, with their abiding commitment to the
liberation of southern Africa, very soon be able once
again to devote themselves to the business of their
own internal development, free from the fear of outside aggression and intervention and with their territorial integrity intact.
115. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish): I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the representative of MEXICO.

122. The long list of acts of aggression mentioned
yesterday by the representative of Zambia are SUfficient proof of the fact that in its desire to check the
process of change in the region, the Pretoria rkgime is
determined to continue to increase its military power
and the support available to it, in order to oppose
neighbouring countries.

116. Once again the Council is compelled to consider
a serious threat to international peace and security
caused by South Africa. However, there are notable
differences between the circumstances which have
produced these attacks and those surrounding
previous acts of aggression. The belt of white supremacy surrounding South Africa has disappeared.
Independent Africa has won nearly all the battles
against the last bastion of racism on that continent,

123. In that regard, it is necessary to act with the
greatest sense of historical responsibility. It is obvious
that such acts of aggression could not occur if South
Africa could not count on substantial aid from abroad,
13

.which Permits it to maintain its very modern and
well-trained army,
124. Morally and politically condemned, surrounded
by egalitarian and independent countries, the South
African rkgime has nothing left but its capacity for
war, with which it continues to threaten and attack
and to defy the decisions of the United Nations.
125. Despite the fact that Council resolution 418
(1977) placed a compulsory embargo on the provision
of weapons and related matPrieL to the South African
regime, that rhgime none the less continues to receive
the supplies which enable its armed forces to bomb
and invade defenceless countries like Zambia.
126. The members of the Council are aware of
numerous instances in which the embargo has been
violated, to the peril of international peace and security
and, as we now know, at the cost of human lives.
My delegation considers that all States, simply because
they are Members of the United Nations, and particularly those which have voted in favour of the
relevant Council resolutions, must ensure that this
embargo is observed and must avoid any complicity
in the violation of it.
127, We are convinced that respect for the text on
which we shall shortly be voting-and my delegation
will support it-cannot be dissociated from the commitment incumbent on all States strictly to respect the
embargo on the supply of arms to South Africa or
from the necessity of blocking all channels, whether
open or clandestine, by which aggressors are supplied.

132. I should like to record my delegation’s appreciation of the work of your predecessor, Ambassador
Mills of Jamaica, an able representative of a fellow
Commonwealth country, whose polished skill guided
the Council through last month.
133. I also wish to take this opportunity to welcome
most warmly to the Council Mr. Reuben Kamanga,
whose important statement we heard yesterday,
134. The United Kingdom’s firm attachment to
peacefully negotiated solutions to the problems of
southern Africa is well known. The arduous and
delicate process which started at the Commonwealth
Conference in Lusaka and will end next week at the
independence celebrations in Zimbabwe showed
that those solutions can be achieved with patienceand
determination on the part of all the parties involved,
We sympathised deeply with the long suffering of the
Zambian people through the years of illegality in
Rhodesia. That particular suffering was finally ended
at the conference table, We shall make every effort,
in company with our partners of the Five, to ensure
that the outstanding problem of Namibia is also
resolved through peaceful negotiation. My Government rejects the criticism that it is ambivalent and
lacking in determination in these efforts. The outcome
of the Rhodesian problem should be sufficient to
refute this charge.
135. Zambia’s geographical position has drawn it
inexorably into the past conflict of Rhodesia and the
continuing conflict over Namibia. The suffering of the
Zambian people must stop. We deplore attacks and
violence, from whatever quarter they come. Military
operations against Zambia cannot be justified and we
condemn them. We call upon South Africa to withdraw
immediately any of its forces now in Zambia and to
respect in future the territorial integrity of Zambia.
But the cycle of violence must be ended and we
believe that the best way to achieve that lies in the
early implementation of Couticil resolution 435 (1978),

128. The more violations of the Charter there are
and the more the resolutions of the Council are
ignored, the greater the grounds for questioning the
effectiveness of our action. Cases such as the one
now under consideration call for a unanimity that
would authentically reflect the political will of the
members of this body. Thus would the age-old struggles and hopes of all the peoples of the world merge
and become a reality.

136. We support Zambia in its plight. Armed incursions by South Africa have caused the death of
innocent Zambians and the destruction of property in
clear violation of Zambian sovereignty. They mustnot
recur. However, we deplore any escalation of violence
in relation to Namibia, either there or in neighbouring countries, We call upon all parties to exercise
maximum restraint and we reconfirm our support for
the appeal for restraint issued by the SecretaryGeneral earlier this year.

129. I: shall now resume my capacity of PRESIDENT
of the Council.
130. It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to vote on the draft resolution before it [S/138871.
If I hear no objection, I shall put it to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution
(resolutiort 466 (l98Q.l).

137. I turn now to the resolution that has just been
adopted. I wish to reiterate the words of the United
Kingdom representative in his explanation of vote on
resolution 454 (1979), on 2 November 1979. He said:
“ . . . the Council is only effective when it acts on
a basis of full consensus. Resolutions which divide
the Council, even if they are adopted, seldom if

was adopted UnanimouslY

Mr, MANSFIELD (United Kingdom): I take
Mr. President, in congratulating YOUon the
you now hold. Your qualities and expertise
clearly match your difficult task.
131.

pleasure,
position

14
1

ever lead to practical’
:

action.”

[2/7&h

meeting,

144. The United States, both alone and in conjunction with Canada, France, the Federal Republic of
Germany and the United Kingdom, has repeatedly
called on South Africa for restraint and on SWAP0
to exercise similar restraint as we work towards a
Peaceful solution to the Namibian conflict. We renew
that call today, and we reaffirm our efforts to achieve
an internationally acceptable settlement in Namibia.
In our view, that alone will ensure a lasting peace
for Namibia and for all its neighbours.

para. 114.1

138. I greatly appreciate the efforts of the Zambian
delegation, and above all of the Zambian representative, to consult the members of the Council with the
aim, in which my delegation firmly believes, of sending
a unanimous signal from this Council meeting. As a
result of those efforts, my delegation was able to support the draft resolution we have just adopted, We
must, however, make clear that we do not regard it as
committing us to any particular course of future action
in the Council.

145. Mr. LEPRETTE (France) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, as this is the first time that
I have spoken this month, I should first of all like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council. Your country took its seat in the Council only three months ago, None the less, we have
already had the opportunity several times during this
particularly sensitive and burdensome period, to
recognize your professional and human qualities.
Being aware of your natural diplomatic skills, we
are convinced that you will be able firmly to steer the
debates of the Council during the coming weeks.

139. Mr. McHENRY
(United States of America):
Mr. President, as this is the first opportunity that
I have had to address the Council since your taking
office, 1 take this opportunity to express my congratulations to you and to your predecessor on the manner
in which you have conducted the Council’s business.
140. Today we are considering a serious situation.
No principle enshrined in the Charter is more fundamental to the maintenance of good relations between
States than mutual respect for the territorial integrity
of all nations. The Government of Zambia has informed
the Council that that fundamental principle has been
violated repeatedly and continues to be violated by
South African military
incursions into Zambia’s
Western Province.

146. I should like also to pay a tribute to your predecessor as President, Mr. Mills, the representative of
Jamaica, who guided with talent and competence our
proceedings during the month of March, He had
already demonstrated his skill during an earlier term
of office: several among us still recall those moments
of great intensity.

141. My Government’s position on this issue can be
simply stated. South African military operations in
Zambia are unjustifiable.
They violate the rules of
law and comity that should govern relations between
States. The United States therefore supported the
draft resolution just voted on. We call upon South
Africa to withdraw its forces from Zambia immediately
and to respect Zambia’s territorial integrity in the
future.

147. The debate which began yesterday enabled us
to hear Mr. Reuben Kamanga, Head of the delegation that came specially from Lusaka to submit
Zambia’s complaint against South Africa. I should first
like to welcome him to New York and to assure
him of our understanding. His testimony, which the
French delegation listened to with the greatest
attention, has demonstrated that South African troops
have engaged in armed incursions into Zambian territory which have resulted in loss of life and considerable destruction,

142, All of us should recognize that in a practical
sense South Africa’s actions are part of an everspiralling cycle of violence rooted in South Africa’s
illegal occupation of Namibia and in the continued
failure to reach an internationally
acceptable solution
to the Namibian
question. We must redouble our
efforts towards that end. South Africa could contribute
towards a solution by providing an early and unequivocally affirmative response to the latest report of the
Secretary-General [S/13862]. That would facilitate the
earliest possible deployment of the United Nations
Transition Assistance Group in Namibia. SWAPC,
too, can play a constructive role by exercising restraint
at this critical time in our effort, thereby doing its Part
to end the cycle of violence.

148. France condemns such acts of force and calls
for their immediate cessation. The French delegation
wishes on this occasion to reiterate its sympathy to the
Government and the people of Zambia. That country
has already paid a heavy price in the combat provoked
by the Rhodesian conflict, It is high time that its sorely
tried people was able to live in peace and build its
future.
149. It should be clear that France condemns the
attacks directed by a State against its neighbours,
whatever the pretext, as well as the use of ViOknCe
-armed violence, in particular-as
an instrument in
international relations. Respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity is, for us, one of the abiding principles in the life of States.

143. Zambia has borne too long the burden of regional
unrest in Southern Africa. With the coming of independence to Zimbabwe, Zambia looks forward to Years
of peace and prosperity, free from the hazards and
sacrifices of its past. That is Zambia’s right, as it is the
right of every nation.

1st). Moreover, in the present case it is obvious
that the South African attacks have seriously COm15

plicated the initiatives to bring about a peaceful
settlement to the problem of Namibia. They prove
once again, if that were necessary, that such a settlement is indispensable for stability and peace in
southern Africa. France, like its four Western partners,
will spare no effort to achieve that goal, with the
assistanceof all countries sincerely devoted to finding
a just and lasting solution to the question. We appeal
to all parties concerned to display moderation and to
foster the creation of conditions for such a settlement.
151. With regard to the draft resolution which was
submitted to us, the French delegation concurs in its
spirit and inspiration; we associateourselves with the
concerns it reflects and with the aims it sets, particularly the need to put an end, once and for all, to
attacks against Zambia. Thus we voted in favour of
that text.
152. Need one repeat on this occasion that the
resolutions of the Council have all the more meaning
and authority when they are adopted unanimously?
The French delegation wishes, in conclusion, to pay
a tribute to the care taken by the Zambian delegation
to consult its partners on the Council, and to the attention it has given to their views.

of South Africa’s acts of aggression. It is my delegation’s hope and expectation that South Africa will
heed the call of the Council and withdraw forthwith
all its military forces from my country, ceaseall violations of my country’s air space and scrupulously
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Zambia.
155. Failure by South Africa to comply will only contribute to the escalation of tension in the area. In this
regard, we take seriously the warning to South Africa
contained in paragraph 3 of the resolution, that in the
event of any further armed incursions against the
Republic of Zambia, the Council will meet to consider
further appropriate action under the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, including Chapter VII
thereof.
156. It is not my intention to take a lot of the Council’s time, but allow me in conclusion once again to
express my delegation’s appreciation to the Council,
not only for urgently responding to my country’s
request for an immediate meeting of the Council, but
also for acting positively on our request.
157. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The Council has concluded this stage of its
consideration of this item.

153. Mr. KAMANGA (Zambia): I have asked to be
allowed to speak at this stage merely in order to
express the sincere gratitude of my delegation to you,
Mr. President, and to all members of the Council for
the unanimous adoption of the resolution on our country’s complaint against South Africa.

The meeting rose at 9 pm.

154. My delegation is encouraged by the Council’s
positive action because it is an expression of support
for my country based on understanding of the difficulties and problems we are experiencing as a result

NOTE
’ See OfJcial
Records
of the General
Session, Suppletnent
No. 24, vol. II,

Assembly,

partl.53.

16

Thirty-fourth

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,
New

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
aupres
des ventes,
New York
ou Genbve.

COMO

CONSECUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

DES NATIONS

sent en vente dans les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de Ias Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York
o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00400

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

et les agences
a : Nations

depositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Seccibn
de Yentas,

83-61462-At@ust

1X%--2,425
