UNITED NA TIONS

URITY C UNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

2188’”

MEETING:

6 JANUARY

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2188)

. . . . +. . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . , . I . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , , , , . . . . . . , . . . . .

1

Letter dated 3 January 1980 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Australia, the Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, the
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Germany, Federal
Republic of, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia, Italy, Japan,
Liberia, Luxembourg, Malaysia, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Portugal,
Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Somalia, Spain,
Suriname, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America, Uruguay
and Venezuela (S/13724 and Add. 1 and 2) . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . .

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital lelters cornbined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . , .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplcmerzts of the Officinl Recads of the Secdt.s Corr~rc~il. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rcsolrrtimrs
cc/d
Decisiom of the Security Council.
The’new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

PI
Ban
Rep
pine
Rep
Nor

1.

2.

2188th MEETING
Held in New York on Sunday, 6 January 1980, at 4 p.m.
President;

Mr. Jacques LEPRETTE

(France).

1. The PRESIDENT
(inte,pretrrtion
j?otn French):
In accordance with decisions taken at the 2185th to
2187th meetings, I invite the representatives
of
Afghanistan, Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea,
Egypt, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Liberia, Malaysia,
Mongolia,
New Zealand, Pakistan, Poland, Saudi
Arabia, Singapore, Somalia, Spain and Turkey to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh,
China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2188)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2.

A? rhe invitcrtion of the Pre.videtzr, Mr. Sahok
(Afghanisfon),
Mr. Anderson (Attstt~~ii~t), Mr. Yrrnkov
(Buigda),
Mr. Barton
(Catda),
Mr. Lie’vmo
(Colombia),
Mr. Piza Escuictnte
(Costa
Rim),
Mr. Huiinsk$ (C~echosiovcrkia),
Mr. Thiounn Prasith
(Democratic
Kampuchea), Mr. Ahdel Meguid(EgyptJ,
Ms. Hoiiai (Hungary),
Mr. LN Roua (Italy), Mr. Nisihot? (Jcrpsn),
Mr. Tuhtwn
(Lihesia),
Mr. Zctiton
(Mctinysia), Mr. Dnshtseren (Mottgoiia),
Mr. Francis
(New Zeaitrtd),
Mr. Ncrik (Pokist(ttl),
Mr. Jaroszek
(Poinnd),
Mr. Aiingany (Snsrtii A tubia), Mr, Koh
(Singapore), Mr. Shorlf (Sotnuiia), Mr. Piniks (Spain)
und Mr. Etwip (Turkey) took rhe places reserved fog
them crt the side of the Council chamber.

Letter dated 3 January 1980 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives of Australia, the Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Bejgium,
Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa:Rica, Denmark, the Dominican
Republic, Ecutiddr, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji,
Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Haiti,
Honduras,
Iceland,
Indonesia,
Italy, Japan,
Liberia, Luxembourg,
Malaysia,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines,
Portugal, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Suriname,
Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United States of America, Uruguay and
Venezuela (S/I3724 and Add. 1 and 2)

2. The PRESIDENT
(itzterpretcttion fiotn French):
I wish to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of the Federal
Republic of Germany, the Netherlands, Venezuela and
Viet Nam in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion. In accordance with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate
in the discussion, without the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

The meeting WNS called to order ut 4.55 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The crgenda was ndopted.

Letter dated 3 January 1980 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of
Australia,
the Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Belgium, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Germany, Federal Republic
of, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia,
Italy, Japan, Liberia, Luxembourg, Malaysia, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines,
Portugal, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Suriname,
Sweden,
Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
States of America, Uruguay and Venezuela (S/13724
and Add.1 and 2)

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Jeionek
(Germany,
Federal
ReplthiiL’ oj>, Mr. BoddensHosang (Nethedrrtzds),
Mr. Na\‘rr Ccwiiio (Venezuela)
and Mr. Ha Vun Lau (Viet Nrrm) look the places
reserved for thetn of rhe side of the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT
(inrerptartrtlion jiotn French):
Members of the Council have before them document_
S/13728, containing the text of a letter dated 4 January 1980 addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the representative of Chile.
4.

Mr.

FLORIN

(inferpretcttion

1

fi0171

(German
Russim):

Democratic Republic)
As members are aware,

9. The delegation of the German Democratic Repub.
lit believes it appropriate to draw the attention of the
members of the Security Council to the fact that, in
connection with the successful carrying out of the
Afghan revolution, imperialistic
and other reactionary
circles bent every effort to prevent the progressive
development of Afghanistan. We would venture to
recall that what we are talking about here are the very
same circles that, in particular, used gangs of mercenaries in open acts of aggression against independent
African, Arab and Latin American States to achieve
their purposes, which were aimed against the interests
of the peoples.

the delegation of the German Democratic Republic
opposed the holding of these meetings of the Security
Council, since the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan
poses no threat whatsoever to the security of any
State and the Council should not intervene in the
internal affairs of a State Member of the United
Nations. The course of these meetings has confirmed
our misgivings that the Council might tind itself acting
in contradiction of the Charter.
5. I should like most warmly to welcome Mr. Shah
Mohammad Dost, the Minister for Foreign Affairs Of
the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, and mY
delegation would like to thank him for his cogent
testimony about the events occurring in Afghanistan
and their true causes. We share his assessment of the
situation and support his demands.

10. In so far as concerns Afghanistan, the imperialistic and other hegemonistic forces armed and trained
numerous counter-revolutionary
gangs and masterminded their criminal actions in Afghanistan from
abroad. There was an unbridled propaganda campaign
in the imperialist mass media and a hue and cry was
raised favouring intervention in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan, All this recalled the worst periods of the
cold war. As to how this all actually happened, we
learned a considerable amount from the press of the
United States. Openly, and in detail, reports were
communicated
about various centres and command
headquarters
that were leading
the counterrevolutionary
actions and acts ‘of aggression. Data
about the geographical locations of those centres also
indicated that certain countries were behind those
machinations
against the Afghan revolution.
The
expansion of flagrant intervention
in the internal
affairs of Afghanistan and massive foreign support
for counter-revolutionary
forces led to a direct threat
to the peace and security of that country.

6. In April 1978 there began in Afghanistan a
national, democratic and anti-feudal revolution aimed
at bringing about profound social and economic
reforms in that country. Democratic agrarian reform
and the elimination of illiteracy, unemployment
and
hunger were proclaimed as the priority tasks of the
revolution and step by step a start had been made on
performing these tasks. It was intended to convert
Afghanistan into a country governed by its people,
one in which a new social order would be established
on the basis of justice and social progress.
7. In the light of the historical experience of other
revolutions, the then Prime Minister, Mr. Taraki, as
long ago as 9 May 1978 warned that:
66.a. the exploiter classes, which have been overthrown, supported by international imperialism and
internal forces of reaction, are preparing a conspiracy against the people’s Government
and
opposing the reforms aimed at bringing about
improvements in the lives of the working masses.”

11. We understand very well why the new Government of Afghanistan, because of these developments,
in accordance with the Treaty of Friendship,
Good
Neighbourliness and Co-operation between the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Democratic
Republic of Afghanistan of 5 December 1978,’ turned
once again to the Soviet Union for political, moral and
economic assistance, including military
assistance,
in order to avert the danger that threatened the territorial integrity and national independence of Afghanistan and peace in that region.

All too soon his words became a tragic reality, As a
result of a conspiracy, a counter-revolutionary
plot,
organized with the helpaf
foreign forces, Prime
Minister Taraki was killed and power was seized by a
usurper who b trayed the revolution and established
a bloody dicta 8orship against the progressive forces of
Afghanistan. The traitorous designs of Amin and his
henchmen played into the hands of those imperialist
and reactionary forces abroad that were organizing
counter-revolutionary
actions on an ever-growing scale
within the countrYA Understanding,
as they did, this
danger, with the utmost consistency the revolutionary
forces that had begun the April revolution overthrew
the Amin regime.

12. Conditions were established that permitted the
Afghan people to continue a course of development of
its own choice, conditions that helped to stabilize
peace in the Middle East. As the Council is aware,
the Soviet Union stated that Soviet troops would be
withdrawn from Afghanistan immediately
when the
reasons for their presence there had been eliminated.

8. Under the leadership of the President of the
Revolutionary
Council and Prime Minister of the
Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, Babrak Karmal,
who, after the successful April 1978 revolution,
assumed the post of Deputy Prime Minister, a new
phase of the Afghan revolution began,

13. The measures agreed upon between the Governments of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan and
the Soviet Union were adopted in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, which confirms the
inalienable right of States to collective or individual
self-defence. Therefore, in a statement published on
2

1 January 1980 [see S/13734], the Afghan Government,
with entire justification,
categorically
rejected as
intervention in the internal affairs of Afghanistan all
the attacks that had been made upon the military
assistance provided by the Soviet Union.

to others. Today-and
this has been amply confirmed
by the machinations against the Afghan people-ruling
circles in China now find themselves on the other side
of the barricades and, along with the forces of
imperialism,
are opposing the aspirations of peoples
to social progress and national independence. That
policy is ominous for those peoples.

14. The German Democratic Republic also believes
in strict observance of the right of any State itself to
determine its own internal and external relations, and it
repudiates all attempts to challenge exercise of that
right by the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan.

19. The delegation of the German Democratic Republic is of the view that the work of the Security
Council should be aimed at reducing rather than
exacerbating
international
tension. We therefore
resolutely oppose any attempts, in any form whatsoever, to condemn the measures agreed upon between
the Soviet Union and the Democratic Republic of
Afghanistan or to put forward demands inimical to the
sovereign rights of those States. We are convinced
that the progressive forces of the world will support
the just struggle of the Afghan people to carry out
this new phase of its revolution. That will also serve
the cause of peace, which is also a cause supported
by the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan.

15. The delegation of the German Democratic
Republic views the campaign launched by imperialist
and other reactionary forces against the Democratic
Republic of Afghanistan as one of the attempts of the
opponents of d&ente to intensify tension in general,
and in the Middle East in particular, and to ignite the
arms race. It is typical that, in this regard, NATO is
playing a particular part. It suffices to take a look at
the signatures on the request for the convening of this
series of meetings of the Security Council. From press
reports we know that, on the initiative of the United
States, questions relating to the Middle East were
officially discussed in NATO organs. Undoubtedly,
there is here a link with the recent decisions of NATO,
which, in disregard of the proposals put forward by
the Soviet Union and other socialist countries, were,
in practice, aimed at expanding the arms race.

20. As far back as 27 December 1979, Babrak Karma1
stated in a message to his people:
“Revolutionary
Afghanistan will continue its
peace-loving foreign policy, a policy of positive and
active neutrality. On the basis of the principles of
the policy of peace and friendship among peoples
Afghanistan will continue to develop friendly relations with all nations and States in the world and
primarily
with its neighbours. Afghanistan will
attempt to dispel misunderstandings
in relations
with other States. In the international arena, the
Democratic Republic of Afghanistan will work
together with the forces of peace for the freedom
of peoples, the independence of nations and
progress and against the forces Gf war, reaction
and imperialism and those who sow enmity and
violence,.Ii will also be a’fiithful and active Member
of the United Nations and the non-aligned movement
and the loyal friend and ally of the working masses
of Moslems in the world.”

16. Now attempts are being made to embroil the
Security Council in the campaign against the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan and, among other
things, to divert attention from the imperialist policy
of interfering in the internal affairs of Afghanistan and
to consolidate spheres of influence in that area. The
concentration of the military potential of the United
States of America in the Persian Gulf, which has been
going on for months, as well as the open threat by
that country to use military means to ensure its socalled strategic interests in various parts of the world
should make all peace-loving States, and particularly
the States of the Middle East, stop and think.
17. The policy of a targeted campaign of propaganda
has led to unbridled and slanderous attacks that are
apparent to all, as can be seen from document S/13717.
It is being quite seriously asserted that in the case of
Afghanistan, the Soviet Union wants to attempt to
isolate Europe and to gain control over the sea lanes
of the Indian Ocean, although it suffices to glance at
the map to realize that the central Asian country is
thousands of kilometres away from Europe, and, as a
land-locked country, is almost 1,000 kilometres from
the Indian Ocean.

21. In so far as concerns the position of the Government of my country, I might refer to the statement
made on 2 January 1980 by the Politburo of the
Central Committee of the Socialist Unity Party of
Germany and the Council of Ministers of the German
Democratic Republic-a
statement which stresses that
the German Democratic Republic
LLI . I welcomes the measures taken by the Party
and State leadership of Afghanistan to protect the
sovereignty and independence of the country and
is firmly in favour of respect for the inalienable rights
of the Afghan people to collective and individual
self-defence. The German Democratic Republic,
together with the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and other socialist fraternal countries and all
peace-loving forces, will continue consistently to

18. In that regard, we should like’ to remind representatives that there was a time when a revolution
was carried out in China itself-a revolution which
was unreservedly supported by all progressive, antiimperialistic forces-and
a time when the Chinese
revolutionaries
rendered internationalist
assistance
3

support the ensuring of peace by means of Peaceful
coexistence, detente and disarmament and against
a]]
attacks
aimed
against
the vital interests 0f
peoples. The German Democratic Republic Will continue to render assistance and solidarity to the
Democratic Republic of Afghanistan.”

Powers. That violation also affects an entire political
climate which, over the past years, some of us have.
felt could and should, with patience, be created,
notwithstanding the ideological’ divergences between
us, the differences in economic and political systems,
and different notions of society.
’

22. Mr. MATHIAS
(Portugal) (ir?terprctnfion fro/n
F~c>&): The bonds of friendship which join Portugal
and France have roots which extend back t0 the
founding of our two countries in Europe. Throughout
the centuries, despite the vicissitudes of history, our
peoples have remained fundamentally faithful to those
bonds. We have been brought together by the same
culture and by the same principles and values. That is
why we have profoundly friendly feelings towards
you, Mr, President, as you assume the presidency Of
the Security Council for this month. Your distinguished
qualifications as a diplomat, along with the breadth
of your experience and your knowledge, guarantee
that you will conduct our proceedings ably and
efficiently.

27. It is against that background that we see the
present drama in Afghanistan taking place. The
repercussions of the conflict might be disastrous if the
Soviet Union fails fully to live up to its responsibilities
in the international
community
as a permanent
member of the Council. Those responsibilities require
that it put an end to its alggression immediately
by
withdrawing its forces from Afghanistan so as to allow
the people of that country freely to determine their
political or religious, economic or social future,
without interference of any kind.
28. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
jkvn French):
The next speaker is the representative of Venezuela,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

23. I should like also to thank your predecessor,
Mr. Chen Chu, for the exemplary skill and wisdom
with which he carried out his tasks in the course of
the month of December. I also welcome the new members of the Council and express the appreciation of
my delegation to those who have left the Council;
their co-operation was particularly valued by us.

29.

Mr. NAVA CARRILLO,

(Venezuela) (DzferpeeI should like to
thank you and, through you, the members of the
Security Council for allowing Venezuela to take part
in this meeting called for by 52 Members of the United
Nations, including my country, to consider the
situation that has arisen in Afghanistan and its consequences for international peace and security. My
delegation joins in the praise which has beeu expressed
to you and the best wishes put forward for yout
success as President of the Council.

tation from .Spanislz): Mr. President,

24. My delegation, with 51 others, signed the letter
contained in document S/13724 and Add.1 and 2, which
called for a meeting of the Security Council to deal
with the situation in Afghanistan arising from the Soviet
military intervention in that country. That situation
has been followed with the greatest apprehension by
my Government since it constitutes, in our eyes, a
serious threat to international peace and security.
The violation of elementary principles of international
law which we have witnessed in Afghanistan, the use
of force, the interference in the internal affairs of a
State, the scorn for its territorial integrity and all the
human suffering that those violations entail, are
intolerable and unjustifiable.

30. We joined in the initiative of calling for this series
of meetings fully convinced that the events in Afghanistan require action from the international community,
in accordance with our commitments
under the
Charter of the United Nations and the many decisions
that have been adopted by the various bodies of the
Organization. Furthermore, Venezuela belongs to a
part of the world that has fought and continues to
strive for the full guarantee of the right of all peoples,
from any nation and any State, to determine freely
their own future and to choose their own ways to and
plans for development, without external interference,
pressure or obstacles, subject only to respect for the
rule of law both domestically and internationally.

25. Attempts to justify Soviet aggression have failed
to convince my delegation. The lack of logic in
invoking a treaty of friendship to render admissible
military assistance aimed at bringing down the very
Government which allegedly called for that assistance has already been mentioned in our debate, and
I need hardly revert to that now.

31. The facts concerning the events in Afghanistan
have been a matter of public knowledge since 1978,
when representatives of a certain ideological tendency
took over the Government of the country. General
information shows that a struggle began between
various institutions and political and social currents,
which is obviously part of an internal Drocess to
determine the political, economic and social direction
of the country in response to the aspirations of
Afghan society.
-

26. What is of particular concern to my delegation is
the flagrant violation of the fundamental principles of
the Charter, which must be condemned and causes
US considerable concern. It not only has dramatically
upset the stability of the area but has set a new and
dangerous precedent in this increasingly interdependent world, where distances have become neg&
gible in view of the military resources of the major
4

32, That is the norm

shou]drespect the exF
whichshould not be in
ofthe kind which has
words, mutual resp
equality among them
prereqUiSiteS
tf peace
and if there are to
harmonious
and adv;
That is vital for all
pensablefor the fUtt
whichbase their rig
externalinterference
thrustand specific *
Article2, paragraph
33. In recent time
threatsto that proc
been open to the I
plaints,
and the inte
corrective machine,
threatened by exte
the normal course
jurisdiction can use
denouncethat aggrc
for the Charter im
violate the principl
concealed.To con’
condemned, but \:
demned,and to ag
certainsituations, !
34, Venezuela fir
intervention, becat
continental and WI
compromise in thi
thebases and cha!
ment, Venezuela (
settlingdomestic I
this in internation
Of reference is
betweenour corn
Charterof the Ur
all cases.That in
nal affairs of Stat
Provisions,
35. We are very

of Certain situat
hegemonistic tet
the life of smal
tional relations a
36. Objectively
aan calls for s
worrying for tl
betweenthe gre
tries. Debate w
determine its op
for using force ,
thenormal procl
OfgcVernment

32. That is the normal evolution of any country and
should respect the expression of the will of the people,
which should not be interfered with by external actions
of the kind which has been denounced here. In other
words, mutual respect among States, recognized
equality among them and self-determination
are strict
prerequisites if peace and security are to be maintained
and if there are to be fundamental guarantees for
harmonious and advantageous international relations.
That is vital for all States and is especially indispensable for the future of the developing countries,
which base their right to live and develop without
external interference on the rule of law, and this is the
thrust and specific meaning which stems clearly from
Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter.

being discussed by certain segments of a population.
The population must determine its own ideology. We
believe that in the particular case before us, that
freedom to choose has been paralysed and impeded by
a massive presence of military forces, which is a
violation of commitments
and of the principles
of
peaceful coexistence,
non-interference
and mutual
respect among States. That will have a great impact
on the maintenance of peace and security.
37. The objective part appears obvious to us and
matters of interpretation
should not lead either to
abandoning
or to postponing
obligations
of clear
ethical and legal foundation, nor should they lead to
violations of the Charter, as State commitments
in that
area must not, as we have said, affect the idea of the
compatibility
of the obligations
imposed upon all
Member States, by the Charter.

33. In recent times, if there have been external
threats to that process, the international forum has
been open to the presentation of appropriate
complaints, and the international community has suitable
corrective machinery whereby any State that feels
threatened by external aggression that is impeding
the normal course of events under its domestic
jurisdiction can use the Organization and its bodies to
denounce that aggression and call for action. Respect
for the Charter implies that such situations, which
violate the principles enshrined in it, should not be
concealed. To condone events which have not been
condemned, but which could and should be condemned, and to agree that those events have caused
certain situations, is tantamount to distorting reality.

38. Considering the events which have occurred and
the general situation which has arisen, the Organization, and primarily the Security Council, has an
obligation to put an end to interference in matters
which basically come under the domestic jurisdiction
of Afghanistan and which should be determined solely
and in complete freedom by that country’s nationals.
39. The PRESIDENT
(il?terpretntim
from Fremh):
The next speaker is the representative
of Czechoslovakia. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

34. Venezuela firmly supports the principle of nonintervention, because of our regional persuasions and
continental and worldwide commitments.
We cannot
compromise in this area. Because of our history and
the bases and characteristics of our political development, Venezuela cannot tolerate an outside presence
settling domestic political disputes, nor can we accept
this in international commitments,
as our basic point
of reference is that there must be compatibility
between our commitments and the obligations of the
Charter of the United Nations, which must prevail in
all cases. That includes non-intervention
in the internal affairs of States and goes beyond merely national
provisions.

40.

Mr. HULINSKk

(Czechoslovakia)
(InfelpretaI should like to thank you, Mr. President, and the other members of the Security Council
for granting the request of the Czechoslovak
delegation and giving us an opportunity
to speak today.
In congratulating
you, an experienced diplomat of a
country with which Czechoslovakia is linked by ties of
traditional co-operation,
on your assumption of the
presidency, I should also like to thank you and the
other representatives for the kind words addressed
to my delegation
as an outgoing member of the
Council,
tion from Russicw):

41. The Democratic Republic of Afghanistan is going
through difficult times. The confluence of internal and
external circumstances and events have posed a threat
to the gains of the revolution
which in April 1978
opened up encouraging prospects for the people of
that country. Against revolutionary
power, the most
reactionary, feudal and capitalistic
forces of the old
rBgimes united and exploited even the mistakes made
by the revolution,
which undoubtedly
weakened it
internally, With active support from abroad aimed at
re-establishing military strategic positions which had
been lost in Iran, they attempted to turn back the clock
of history. At a difficult, critical time, when the
revolution was faced with mortal danger at the very
end of last year, a new Government
appeared on the
political scene in Afghanistan, determined
to resolve
the situation in a principled manner.

35. We are very much concerned over the emergence
of certain situations which show imperialistic
and
hegemonistic tendencies that seriously compromise
the life of smaller countries and endanger international relations and our system of values.
36. Objectively speaking, the situation in Afghanistan calls for serious reflection and is particularly
worrying for the future of international
relations
between the great Powers and the developing countries. Debate within a society as it endeavours to
determine its own political future cannot be an excuse
for using force or other outside elements to interrupt
the normal process of choosiAg political rkgimes, forms
of government or certain political ideologies that are

s

46. Obviously, the attainment of those goals must be
served by these meetings of the Security Council. My
delegation categorically rejects such attempts. The
Council has no right to appraise measures taken by the
Government of Afghanistan to resist the growing
danger of a direct threat to the independence and
sovereignty of its country and to resist counterrevolution supported from outside. The Foreign
Minister of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan,
Mr. Shah Mohammad Dost, in his telegram of 3 January
1980 addressed to the President of the Security Council
[S/13725], was therefore entirely justified in categorically protesting against such an intent.

42. The attitude of the Czechoslovak people towards
the people of Afghanistan was clearly expressed in a
telegram which the President of the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic, Gustav Husik, sent on 29 December 1979 to the President of the Revolutionary Council and Government of Afghanistan, Babrak Rarmal.
The telegram stated:
“The Czechoslovak people sincerely welcomed
the victory of the April revolution in Afghanistan
and has been following with great sympathy the
struggle for the implementation
of its goals. I am
sure that the people of Afghanistan, under the
leadership of the People’s Democratic Party, will
successfully defend the gains of the revolution and
the sovereignty and independence of their country.
I am sure that the traditional ties of friendship
and international co-operation between our two
Parties and countries will be developed further and
grow deeper, for the good of the peoples of both
our countries, far the sake of progress, socialism
and peace throughout the world.”

47. The Czechoslovak delegation is sure that both the
people and the Government of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan have given a compelling answer to
all those who have been attempting to bring about a
counter-revolutionary
cnuy in their country and the
peace-loving peoples of the world will, in the final
event, thwart the plans of reactionaries who are
aiming, inter &-and
this inciudes the method of
distorting the recent development
of events in
Afghanistan-at
turning back the course of peaceful
coexistence and detente in international relations to
the years of the cold war. At the same time, I should
like to express my conviction that members of the
Security Council, too, will not permit the Council in
its practices to slip into the rhetoric of the cold war.

43. The new leadership of the Democratic Republic
of Afghanistan has taken decisive measures for defence
purposes and to ensure the development of the further
phase of the people’s democratic revolution. Afghanistan has also exercised its inalienable right as a
sovereign State in requesting the Soviet Union to
render it general assistance, including military assistance, for the sake and in the interest of the Afghan
people, not against it.

48. To conclude, I should like briefly to talk about
the not-very-new attacks by the Chinese representative against my country. The representatives of today’s
China are obviously embarrassed by the fact that,
with the internationalist
support and assistance of
allied countries in 1968, it was possible in Czechoslovakia to defend the socialist system and to avert
bloodshed and the emergence in central Europe of a
situation fraught with the most serious dangers to
international peace. As we know, there still exist
certain foreign circles, which in 1968 encouraged
attempts at bringing about a counter-revolutionary
coup in Czechoslovakia-attempts
radically to change
the very foundations of our internal and foreign policy,
and to tear Czechoslovakia out of the family of
socialist countries. Even now, more than 10 years
later, those forces apparently cannot resign themselves
to the fact that their goals and hopes were dashed.
We can understand their disenchantment but it cannot
change the reality of the situation. The Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic was, is and will remain a firm and
reliable link in the Socialist community.

44. The dangerous plans for converting Afghanistan
into a beach-head against the Soviet Union have
failed. The internationalist assistance of the Soviet
Union will be understood and supported by all who
cherish the goals of the Afghan revolution, respect the
efforts of the Afghan people to bring about social
progress and genuinely feel strongly about the interests
of preserving peace and security in that part of the
world.
45. Recent events in Afghanistan have been the
target of crude attacks by world reaction, which has
been exploiting misinformation and confusion. Today
when plans for a counter-revolutionary
colrp in
Afghanistan have failed, the enemies of progress have
been doing everything in their power at least to whip
UP an anti-Afghan and anti-socialist campaign. The
initiators of that campaign are trying at the same time
to divert the attention of world public opinion from the
military threat hanging over Iran from their aggressive
policy in the Middle East and in the far East and other
Parts of the world; from the new phase of the feverish
arms race into which the members of NATO have
plunged Europe; from their attempts to prevent the
entry into force of the Treaty between the United
States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics on the Limitation of Strategic Offensive
Arms (SALT II),* and in general to whip up a wave
of attacks against the stabilization of the process of
international detente.

Netherlands delcgatiol
$;;,,gosf :$,,h $%-t’ 2
council for giving me
in this debate.
51, ‘I& Governmen
concerned about the
For reasons 1 Will set
urgentmeeting of the
is order to consider tl
supportedthe requesl
s great number of Mc
ofthe world. My dek
to present its views (
affectstability in the
peaceand security i,
52. The Governme
US,on 27 December
intervention in neig
ful examination, tl
however,reached tl
the argumentation (
bythe Government
leadership of Afgh
Union with a reqL
against foreign age
outside interventio
Stan,with the use,
and to acts of fore
53. However, or

tion, it seems less
On the contrary,
are faced with r
Union in Afghani
country. From t
December on, we
the real aim wa
powerin Afghan
more responsive
54. Such was

in Afghanistan (
buildup of Sovi,
outside threat t
reality non-exist
thesecurity inte

any way at stak
55. The Gove
statement
justij

49. The PRESIDENT
(inrerpreration from French):
The next speaker is the representative of the Nether-p
lands, whom I invite to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
50. Mr.

BODDENS-HOSANG
(Netherlands):
Mr. President, I wish at the outset to join previous
speakers. in expressing our appreciation to you as
President of the Security Council for this month. The
6

of the Charter
what I have jr
collective self
justified.’ Here
recourseto on
What else, th
ference by m
Member State
the Charter ar

Netherlands delegation in New York is very much
aware of your diplomatic
skills in presiding over
meetings. I wish to thank you and the members of the
Council for giving me the opportunity to participate
in this debate.

Government
unacceptable.

considers

this

intervention

totally

56. My Government’s concern is also inspired by the
consequences of the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan
for peace and stability in the region. We are all aware
of the grave conflicts with which that area is confronted. Its population has already greatly suffered as
a result of the ensuing instability. Also, in view of the
strategic importance of that part of the world, any
interference in the internal affairs of sovereign States
must be considered a potential threat to international
peace.

51. The Government of the Netherlands is deeply
concerned about the recent events in Afghanistan.
For reasons I will set out, my Government felt that an
urgent meeting of the Security Council was necessary
in order to consider these developments. We therefore
supported the request pertaining thereto, together with
a great number of Member States from different parts
of the world. My delegation is grateful for being enabled
to present its views on a matter which could not only
affect stability in the area but also seriously endanger
peace and security in the world.

57. Seen from a wider perspective, the use of‘ force
in international
relations cannot be tolerated by the
community
of nations. The Netherlands regards the
Soviet action as a grave setback for international
dCtente, a concept which by its very nature is both
indivisible and of a global character. It is our earnest
expectation that the Soviet Union will live up to its
commitment
to respect the principles of the Charter
and not interfere in the internal affairs of other nations.

52. The Government of the Soviet Union provided
us, on 27 December 1979, with an explanation for its
intervention in neighbouring Afghanistan. After careful examination,
the Netherlands Government has,
however, reached the conclusion that it cannot accept
the argumentation contained therein. The explanation
by the Government of the Soviet Union states that the
leadership of Afghanistan itself turned to the Soviet
Union with a request for assistance to defend itself
against foreign aggression. It refers to long-standing
outside intervention in the internal affairs of Afghanistan, with the use, among others, of armed elements,
and to acts of foreign aggression.

58. My Government therefore launches an earnest
appeal to the Government of the Soviet Union to
withdraw its forces from Afghanistan immediately and
to cease forthwith its interference in the internal
affairs of that country. The people of Afghanistan
should be allowed to determine their own future freely,
without outside interference or “assistance”,
in
accordance with their own laws and Constitution, and
with the right to self-determination.

53. However, on the basis of all available information, it seems less than obvious that such was the case.
On the contrary, we have reason to believe that we
are faced with military intervention by the Soviet
Union in Afghanistan, an independent and sovereign
country. From the unfolding of events from early
December on, we cannot but draw the conclusion that
the real aim was to overthrow the Government in
power in Afghanistan and to replace it with a rCgime
more responsive to Soviet interests.

59. Finally, I should like to draw the attention of the
Council to the plight of the Afghan refugees. It is to
be feared that their number will rapidly increase unless
the Soviet presence in that country is quickly brought
to an end. My Government views that aspect with
concern and is aware of the inflow of Afghan refugees
into neighbouring countries-in
particular, Pakistanwhich will inevitably cause considerable problems
for the authorities of those countries.

54. Such was the sequence: the change of power
in Afghanistan on 27 December was preceded by a
buildup of Soviet troops in that country. The alleged
outside threat to the security of Afghanistan was in
reality non-existent, and neither could it be argued that
the security interests of the Soviet Union itself were in
any way at stake.

60. The PRESIDENT
(intPrpwtNtiwt
.fiom French):
The next speaker is the representative of Viet Nam,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
61.

Mr. HA VAN LAU

(Viet Nam) (irrter.prettrtior~

.fivm FIYJI~C~): Mr. President, 1 wish first of all to thank

55. The Government
of the Soviet Union in its
statement justified its action by referring to Article 51
of the Charter. It should, however, be clear from
what I have just said thpt recourse to individual or
collective self-defence ‘,was neither called for nor
justified. Here we are’ $resented with an unjustified
recourse to one of the dtisic provisions of the Charter.
What else, therefore, have we witnessed but interference by military force in the internal affairs of a
Member State, in violation of the basic principles of
the Charter and of international law? T,he Netherlands

the members of the Security Council for having given
the delegation of Viet Nam this opportunity to participate in the debate. I wish also to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I am also very pleased to greet
the new members of the Council and wish them every
success in their important mission.
62. Before expressing my views on the substance of
the matter before us, I should like to make a few
preliminary
comments on these meetings of the
7

tion in his country
[2185th ~eetingl,
which has
contributed to giving the Council. a comprehensive
and objective picture of the developments in Afghanistan since the victorious April 1978 revolution and,
above all, of their causes and consequences for the
young Republic of Afghanistan as well as for peace and
stability in that region.

Council. First, the Security Council is meeting even
though it does not yet have a full complement of
members as defined by the Charter of the United
Nations. The cause of this abnormal situation has been
set forth by the delegation of the Soviet Union. 1 shall
not return to it but merely draw the attention of the
Council to the views of many Member States that, in
such a case, the activities of the Council are not in
conformity with the Charter, although it is the Council
itself which should guarantee respect for the Charter.

67. The delegation of Viet Narrr hopes that the voice
of the genuine and legitimate representative of the
people of Afghanistan will be heard by those who
cherish the truth, for he has shed light on the real
situation in Afghanistan, which has been deliberately
distorted in’a biased manner by a propaganda campaign
inimical to the people of Afghanistan and their
revolution.

63. Secondly, it is regrettable that the Council has
allowed an individual, the would-be representative Of
“Democratic Kampuchea”, to speak in this lofty body.
The words “Democratic Kampuchea” are enough to
make men of conscience throughout the world
shudder as they think of the heinous crimes committed by the anti-democratic genocidal rigime overthrown exactly a year ago by the people of Kampuchea. It is for that very reason that one permanent
member of the Council had to withdraw recognition
following the demands of the people and public
opinion in that country. It is truly ironic that the
Organization has tolerated the presence in our midst
of that butcher in “democratic”
garb stained by the
blood of 3 million innocent Kampuchean% he is nothing
but the spokesman of his masters in Beijing coming
to disrupt important meetings of the United Nations.
The delegation of Viet Nam hopes that an end will be
put to this absurdity, which only damages the prestige
and honour of the United Nations, and that the seat
of the People’s Republic of Kampuchea in the United
Nations will be returned to its legitimate owner, the
Revolutionary People’s Council of Kampuchea.

68. The Socialist Republic of Vjet Nam considers
that recent events in Afghanistan, namely, the retaking
of the reins of power by the people’s forces of Afghanistan, led by President Babrak Karmal, is part of the
development of the 27 April 1978 revolution in Afghanistan, which had been thwarted by imperialist and
international reactionary forces.
69. With the April 1978 revolution, the people of
Afghanistan, exercising their right to self-determination, overthrew the regime of the dictator Mohamed
Daoud and set for themselves the task of building a
new society in keeping with the aspirations of the vast
majority of the population,
thereby actively contributing to the cause of peace and stability in the area.
70. The toll in human lives paid by that courageous
people for their political and social emancipation says
a good deal about their determination
to put behind
them centuries of injustice and put an end to an
archaic tyrannical kingdom supported by imperialism
-which had too long maintained the people of Afghanistan in slavery, poverty and ignorance-with
a view
to founding for the first time the Democratic Republic
of Afghanistan. That has been a serious defeat for
imperialism and international reaction, and that is why
they have tried by every means to plot against the
young Republic-as
indeed they have done with
respect to other revolutions-because
it is so difficult
for them to accept the fact that oppressed peoples
dared to overthrow the old established order.

64. Thirdly, this is a matter of principle under the
Charter: in spite of the strong protests by the Government of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, the
Council is none the less meeting to consider the situation in Afghanistan, a sovereign country which is in
the process of settling vital questions successfully
without calling on the United Nations for action. That
is clearly direct and obvious interference in the internal affairs of a State Member of the United Nations,
just as during the same period a year ago [2/081/r 10
2112/h ~?rceti~s], the Council discussed the situation
in Kampuchea without a request from the Revolutionary People’s Council of Kampuchea, the genuine
and legitimate
representative of the people of
Kampuchea.

71. Unlimited support on all levels has been given to
the reactionary elements of the fallen regime to overthrow revolutionary forces and to ensure control over
the country. Attacks have been launched from outside
the country; there have been terrorist operations,
disruptive actions, subversion and sabotage against
the new regime-all carried out by military men trained
and equipped by the agents of American imperialism
and by Maoist groups, agents from Beijing, in various
centres in the territory of a neighbouring country.

65. Having stated those reservations and made those
remarks, my delegation would now like to set forth in
the Council the position of the Government of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on the recent events in
Afghanistan.
66. First of all, the delegation of Viet Nam warmly
welcomes the presence here of Mr, Shah Mohammad
Dost, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, and, in particular, his
clear and precise statement with regard to the situa-

72. For the past year and longer they have deliberately perpetrated more than 250 acts of rebellion
8

andarmed attack:
in March 1979 thi
ofHerat,
.
73, Yesterday, ‘i
SovietUnion Pre
plotshatched by
Chinaagainst th
Stan,That eviden
press.
I might jt
facts.The comn
oneof his visits
Stan,cynically dl
armsto rebelliot
saboteursin the
14~ Yesterday
Delhi gave us
ferenceby the
affairsof Afgl
Chinesemilitar!
to train rebelI,
Kabulalso rep
oftraining Afg
Afghanistan a
munitions.
75, In additic
ties, the Gove
sionist author;
economicpres
trying to threi
to agreeto an
forthe revolul
political prejl
country, with
revolutionam
allegationsof
religion.
76. While tl
withthe varic
international
by the Fore
Amin, playir
rialists, carr
which led t
Mohammad
of thousand
thereby Ienr
tional react
revolution il
77, In the

whatthe re
Sianby arr
destabilizin
country, 0
authentic p
KarmaI, O\
the people’
of the Den

and armed attacks Bgainst the Afghan revolution, and
in March 1979 they caused bloodshed in the province
of Herat.
,“l’,
..’
73. Yesterday,iri ‘the Council the delegation of the
Soviet Union pres’ented irrefutable evidence of those
plots hatched by the United States of America and
China against the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan. That evidetieeirjas revealed even in the American
press. I might ju’st”add a few particularly significant
facts. The commander of the air forces of China, in
one of his visits to a neighbouring country of Afghanistan, cynically declared that Beijing intended to supply
arms to rebellious Afghan troops and to train groups of
saboteurs in the city of Beijing itself.
74. Yesterday United Press International
in New
Delhi gave us further proof of this shameful interference by the Beijing authorities in the internal
affairs of Afghanistan. According to that agency,
Chinese military advisers have already arrived in Pamir
to train rebellious, Afghan forces. Diplomats
from
Kabul also report tliat tlie Chinese are in the process
of training Afghan rebels in the north-eastern part of
Afghanistan and are giving t.hem weapons and
munitions.
75. In addition to those political and military activities, the Government in Washington and the expansionist authorities in Beijing have been intensifying
economic pressure, cutting off material assistance and
trying to threaten other countries and to force them
to agree to an embargo or to cause further difficulties
for the revolution in Afghanistan. They try to whip up
political prejudice; to poison the religions in the
country, with the aim of dividing the people in the
revolution and slandering the revolutionary power with
allegations of violations of human rights or freedom of
religion.
76. While the Afghan revolution was trying to deal
with the various difficulties caused by imperialism
and
international reaction, as was stated in the Council
by the Foreign Minister of Afghanistan, the traitor
Amin, playing precisely into the hands of the imperialists, carried out his counter-revolutionary
plot,
which led to the assassination of President Noor
Mohammad Taraki and the imprisonment
and killing
of thousands of revolutionary patriots and militants,
thereby lending himself to imperialism
and international reactionism and their designs to destroy the
revolution in Afghanistan.
77. In the face of the imminent danger of losing
what the revolution had gained as a result of aggression by armed groups from abroad, and given the
destabilizing activities that had oc‘ctirred within the
country, on 27 December 1979 the forces of the
authentic Afghan revolution, led by President Babrak
Karmal, overthrew the fascist Amin rbgime, restored
the people’s power and thereby ensured the progress
of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan.

78. As regards ‘th’e limited military assistance that
the Afghan leadership requested of the Soviet Union,
a neighbouring country with which the Democratic
Republic of Afghanistan had formed traditional relations of good neighbourliness,
the statement by the
Foreign Minister of Afghanistan in the Council was
clear enough to expose any delaying tactics aimed at
lending credibility to the idea of aggression or armed
invasion by the Soviet Union against the Democratic
Republic of Afghanistan.
79. That request from Afghanistan and the positive
response of the Soviet Union, for which the people
and lawful Government of Afghanistan are grateful,
are in keeping with the provisions of the Treaty of
Friendship, Good Neighbourliness
and Co-operation
signed in Moscow by the leaders of the two countries
on 5 December 1978.’ The limited military assistance
that the Soviet Union has given is also in keeping with
Article 51 of the Charter, which refers to “the inherent
right of individual or collective self-defence if an armed
attack occurs against a Member
of the United
Nations”.
80. Once ‘again, the aim of crushing the young
Afghan Republic has been thwarted. The bitterness
of that failure may explain the anger of the sponsors
of the aborted attempt which has caused them to
slander the Soviet Union, arguing that the presence
of Soviet troops in Afghanistan is a threat to the
peace and security of the area. The sole threat to peace
and security in the area is unquestionably
the feverish
activities of the United States of America in collusion
with the expansionist authorities in Beijing, who are
trying to submit the peoples of that world nerve-centre
to their will with a systematic policy of military buildup, destabilization
of the area and interference in its
internal affairs.
81. On 30 December
Stated,

1979, President

Babrak Karma1

“The present policy of the Government
of the
Democratic Republic of Afghanistan is to move the
April revolution in the right direction in order to
eliminate poverty and backwardness, to bring about
equality among peoples and societies, to build an
independent economy and to pursue a foreign policy
based on the principles of active neutrality and
peaceful coexistence.”
82. According
to the Agence France Presse in
Moscow, on 4 January 1980, President Babrak Karma1 denounced:
the lies of the United States, which is using
this technique to try to justify its defeat. The United
States must realize that the changes that have taken
place in Afghanistan have been brought about by our
Party, by our national armed forces, that the
material, moral and even military assistance given
us by the Soviet Union is entirely in keeping with
“

. . .

the will of the People of Afghanistan,
and that it is
being used to thwart threats that have come from
abroad and that even
now are hanging
over
Afghanistan.”
83, Whereas imperialistic
and reactionary
circles
are stressing the fact that the Democratic Republic
of
Afghanistan has been enjoying
military assistance from
the Soviet Union to protect
the revolution, they have
been very careful to avoid
uttering a word about
their own conspiracies. How, for how long have they
been financing, training,
equipping
and supplying
commando reactionary units from neighbouring
countries or areas far from Afghanistan
in an attempt
to
interfere in the internal affairs of Afghanistan and to
sweep away the Afghan revolution?
84. Their hostile activities
towards the Democratic
Republic of Afghanistan
are part and parcel of the
traditional policies of imperialist,
reactionary circles,
which have clung to the old, established order on the
flimsy pretext of defending
the principles
of the
Charter, in an attempt Lo maintain
their privileges and
interests,
Wherever
the
to uphold their sordid
oppressed peoples of the world succeed in winning
their political, economic
or social emancipation
after
a great struggle, the forces of imperialism
and international reactionism
continue
to pursue a relentless
revanchist policy in an effort to regain their “lost
positions” or, at the very least, to destabilize permanently those countries which have dared to stand up
to them. The case of Afghanistan
should only be
added to the long list of countries that have been
victims of that policy of revanchism
and hegemony
in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
85. The methods of coercion
and of destabilization
which have been employed
by imperialism
and international reactionism over the past two years in Afghanistan are the very same methods
which have been used
elsewhere in the world. They are really part of a classic
policy, namely: the strangulation
of economies
by
blockade; the assassination
of political leaders;
the
recovery of military debris
and the police apparatus
of the fallen rhgime; the provision
of assistance to
refugees as a cover for training
them as agents of
infiltration and commando
attack units; the promotion
of psychological warfare
among various ethnic and
religious groups to sow racial hatred and division;
and the colonization
of minds by the dissemination
of distorted information
through the mass media.

from wars of aggression, colonialist, imperialist and
racist domination, policies of hegemonism and expansionism, are quite capable of realizing that in the
crucial moments of their struggle, when young, revolutionary r6gimes are being victimized by warmongers
and revanchist Powers, only international
political,
material, moral and military
assistance from progressive forces which sustain peace and justice
throughout the world can give them the means of
overcoming their enemies.
and expansionist
88. Fdr their part, imperialist
circles are fully aware of the fact that, unless they can
isolate their victims from the support of progressive
forces in the world, their aim of putting down revolutions will be doomed to failure. That explains their
systematic, frenzied efforts to slander and distort the
reality regarding the international
assistance of progressive forces to peoples struggling for their emancipation. Those attempts go so far as cynically denying
to their victims the sovereign inalienable right to enjoy
solidarity and international
assistance.
89. From the .standpoint of Viet Nam, the events of
27 December 1979 represent a major victory for the
people of Afghanistan, safeguarding what the revolution of April 1978 had accomplished, thwarting the
maneuvres of American imperialism,
of the Beijing
reactionaries and of other reactionary forces that
have tried to liquidate the Afghan revolution.
90. The strong, timely, positive and generous assistance of the Soviet Union is entirely justified and
necessary, in keeping with the aspirations of the people
of Afghanistan, with the Treaty of Friendship, Good
Neighbourliness
and Co-operation between the two
countries signed on 5 December 1978,’ and with
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations. This
is a purely internal affair of the people of Afghanistan,
regarding bilateral relations between two sovereign
countries. No one has the right to interfere.
91. The people and the Government of Viet Nam
wish to assure the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan of their unfailing support. In the face of the
premeditated attempts of certain circles to rally world
public opinion to their own concerns, and considering
the total failure of their adventurous and criminal
plans to subvert the young Democratic Republic
of
Afghanistan, may I make an appeal for calm and serene
reflection.

86. These evil efforts are so many time bombs on an
international scale which represent a constant threat
to the peace and security
of the peoples of the world.
First and foremost, they threaten the peoples of the
small countries and the young, revolutionary
r&imes
which have not yet had time to recover from their
long years of social
wars of liberation
or from
disruption.

92. In this constantly changing world, and in view of
the victory of the Afghan revolution and the irreversible
forward march of the oppressed peoples, if the United
Nations
has not already made its contribution,
willingly or unwillingly,
it must at least refrain from
any action which could cause harm.
93. Our international community will be able to prove
its lucidity, if that is its desire. To lend our support
to the efforts of the martyred peoples of the world
in

Nam and the oppressed
87. The people of Viet
peoples of alI continents,
who have personally suffered
10

their akpirations for independence, justice and peace
,-instead of condoning the plots of retrograde forces,
regardless of their labels-would
constitute, in our
diew, international action truly on the side of the peace
and security of peoples and nations.
94. Mr. MILLi
(Jamaica): Mr. President, I should
like at the outset to extend my delegation’s sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. It is clear that
the Council will be confronted with a variety of
complex iss.ues and a fairly heavy workload throughout
this month. With your renowned diplomatic experience, dedication and quiet efficiency, I am sure that
you will perform the duties of the presidency in an
exemplary manner. I should also like to pay a tribute
to your predecessor, my colleague from China, who
guided our deliberations during the month of December with his customary astuteness and wisdom.
95. It is appropriate that I avail myself of this opportunity to welcome the new members of the Council:
the Niger, Tunisia, the German Democratic Republic
and the Philippines.
These are all countries with
which Jamaica has excellent relations, and my delegation looks forward to continued friendly, co-operative
and constructive working relations with them in the
Council.
96. We wish to express our warmest thanks to those
countries and their delegations which have left the
Council. It was a privilege to have worked with them
and to have enjoyed the close, friendly co-operation
which they showed. My delegation acknowledges the
significant contribution they all made to the work of the
Council.
97. As we begin a new year and a new decade, we
must all be aware of the very serious economic and
political circumstances which have emerged in the
world in recent times, and which pose a threat to peace,
to progress and to development. In spite of these
formidable manifestations of trouble and conflict,
many have dared to hope that the international
community would enter the new decade with a new spirit
of determination, balanced by the necessary restraint,
in order to overcome the major problems we face
and to set a new and more just and peaceful era on its
way. The vision, the concepts which emerged and
which were being examined so thoroughly over the
past few years, could now be the subject of purposeful
action towards their realization.
98. Recent developments in central Asia have been
a source of grave concern to my delegation. In spite
of the fact that Jamaica is relatively far away from that
area, the manifold implications of developments in the
region leads us to the view that a serious threat exists
to the maintenance of peaceful and cordial relations,
as well as of international peace and security.
99. The Security Council is now seeking to exercise
its responsibility
under the Charter of the United

Nations in respect of the recent serious developments
relating to Afghanistan. My Government has examined
the available information
on this matter, and particularly in the light of the principles which form the
fundamental basis of international affairs, the possible
implications
of those developments
also form a part
of our concern. The conclusions and Jamaica’s position are clear. They are summarized in a statement
issued on 5 January by my Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs:
“The evidence available to date fails to establish
that there was at the time of Soviet intervention
any threat of external aggression directed against
Afghanistan. Jamaica regards the massive movement
of Soviet troops into Afghanistan as being a case of
intervention
in the internal affairs of a sovereign
non-aligned State and is of the view that this action
represents a potential danger to international peace
and the security of that region.”
100. Jamaica, as a small developing country and
a member of the non-aligned movement, has consistently taken a firm stand, in the various international
forums, against any form of interference, direct or
covert, in the internal affairs of States. The peculiar
circumstances surrounding the latest change of Government in Afghanistan are thus a matter of grave
concern to the Government and people of Jamaica.
We are unequivocally
opposed to any action by a
State which is not based on full respect for the sovereignty, equality and independence of States. We particularly oppose any action which circumscribes the
right of a people to choose freely its own sociopolitical system as well as its own Governme,nt.
101. It is imperative that peace, security and stability
be restored to Afghanistan in accordance with the principles of the United Nations. This requires, in the view
of my Government,
the immediate
withdrawal of
Soviet troops from Afghanistan as a necessary and
indispensable step to enable the peoples of that country
to determine freely their own destiny, free from outside intervention,
coercion or constraint of any kind
whatsoever.
102. Finally, we would urge all States, especially
those with a direct interest in that region, to exercise
the utmost restraint and not to see the situation as
the occasion for intervention in Afghanistan by foreign
troops from any other source. The sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-aligned character of Afghanistan must be respected and the internal problems of
Afghanistan solved by the Afghan people themselves.

NOTES
I To be printed
in
No. 17976
2 See CD/53/Appendix

“United
IlI/vol.l,

Nations,
document

Twrr/y
CDL%

Series”,

under

HOW

TO OBTAIN

LJ,XfTED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world. Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your
bookstore

from bookstores
or write to: United

and distributors
Nations,
Sales

COMMENT SE PROCURERLESPUBLICA'MONSDESNATlONSUNIES
L,es publications
des Nations
Unies nont en vente dnns
les librairies
et les agences
d6positaires du mondo entier. Informez-ooua
aopr& ric vatre libraire
ou sdressez-vow
B : Nations Unies, Section clea ventes, New York ou GenLve.
XAX

JfOlIYWfTb

ff3~AHNII

OPI’AIIfI

3AIllIlf

COMOCONSECUIRPUBLICACIONESDELASNACIONES

O~-frEL0fHEHHbIX

HAWfR

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de Iss Naciones
Unidaa
estin en venta en libredas
y casas distribuidoras en todas p&es
de1 mundo.
C-onsulte a su librero
o dirijaae
a: Naciones
Unid_as, Seccidn
de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.
..-.
“.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00300
