92

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,2
Having heard the statements of the representatives
of the administering Power and of the Government of
Papua New Guinea,:i
Taking into account the conclusions and recommenda;ions of the '.frusteeship Council and the Special
Coz:nmittee
regardmg developments in Papua New
Gumea,
. Noting with satisfaction the transfer of authority to
the Government of Papua New Guinea by the administering Power, marked by the attainment by Papua
New Guinea of formal self-government on 1 December
1973,
Taking note of the express desire of the Government
of Papua N~w Guinea for national unity and independence as a smgle and sovereign political and territorial
entity, and of the express desire of the administering
Power to create an independent and united country,
_Noting also that the Constitutional Planning Committee, composed of members of the Papua New Guinea
House of Assembly, is preparing recommendations on
the future constitution of Papua New Guinea,
Noting further that the final report and draft constitution recommended by the Constitutional Planning
~ommittee will be tabled in the House of Assembly
m February 197 4, that the constitution will provide
for all major aspects of a system of government and
will include provisions for the transition to independence, and that the House of Assembly will meet in
special session in April 1974 to consider and adopt
the constitution,
Mindful that the House of Assembly has affirmed its
right as the duly elected parliament of the people of
Papua New Guinea to decide when independence is to
come and that the administering Power accepts that the
House of Assembly represents the wishes of the people
on the question of independence,
Noting, with respect to the timing of independence,
the view of the administering Power that there are two
elei:nents involved in the determination of the question
of mdependence: the view of the administering Power
and the views of the people of Papua New Guinea as
expressed through their elected representatives in the
House of Assembly, and that, in this regard, the administering Power expects independence to come by
1975 and that independence should be achieved in the
closest consultation with the Government and the House
of Assembly of Papua New Guinea,
I. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Papua New Guinea to self-determination and independence in accordance with General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) and the Trusteeship Agreement of 13 December 1946;
2. Welcomes the attainment of self-government as
an important step in the progress of Papua New Guinea
towards independence;
3. Calls upon the administering Power and the Government of Papua New Guinea to consult on the timing
of independence, noting in this regard the views of the
administering Power and of the Government of Papua
New Guinea that the House of Assembly is regarded as
2 Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/9023/Rev.l), chaps. m and
XIX.
B Jbid., Twenty-eighth Session, Fourth Committee, 2071st
meeting.

representing the wishes of the people of Papua New
Guinea;
4. Emphasizes the imperative need to ensure that
the national unity of Papua New Guinea is preserved;
5. Strongly endorses the policies of the administering Power and of the Government of Papua New Guinea
aimed at discouraging separatist movements and at
promoting national unity;
6. Stresses the right of the people of Papua New
Guinea to control and dispose of their natural resources in their national interest;
7. Stress_es also the importance of preserving the
cultural heritage of the people of Papua New Guinea;
8. Welcomes the growing involvement of the Government of Papua New Guinea in matters of defence
and external affairs and calls upon the administering
Power to continue to expand its consultations with the
Government of Papua New Guinea regarding these
matters;
9. Calls upon the organizations of the United
Nations system and their members to assist in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national life of
Papua New Guinea;
10. Notes the continued willingness of the administering Power and the Government of Papua New
Guinea to receive a visiting mission, notes also that
the Trusteeship Council is to consider the dispatch of a
visiting mission to Papua New Guinea at its fortyfirst session and reaffirms that such missions are to be
composed on the basis recommended in General Assembly resolution 2590 (XXIV) of 16 December 1969;
11. Requests the administering Power to report to
the Trusteeship Council and the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples on the implementation
of the present resolution;
12. Requests the Trusteeship Council and the Special Committee to continue to examine this question
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
twenty-ninth session.
2198th plenary meeting
I 2 December I 973

3110 (XXVIII). Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963_, in _which_ it requested the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the D~claration . on the Granting of Independence to
(?olomal C~untnes and Peoples to study the information transmitted to the Secretary-General under Article
73 e of the Charter of the United Nations and to take
s~ch _inforl!lation fully into account in examining the
s1tuat10n with regard to the implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolution 2978 (XXVII) of 14 Dece_mber 1972,. in which_ it requested the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrusted
to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII) in accordance
with the procedures approved by the G~neral Assembly
in its resolution 2109 (XX) of 21 December 1965,

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Recalling further the provisions of paragraph 5 of
resolution 2978 (XXVII), in which it requested the
administering Powers concerned to transmit, or continue
to transmit, to the Secretary-General the information
prescribed in Article 73 e of the Charter, as well as
the fullest possible information on political and constitutional developments in the Territories concerned,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee dealing with the transmittal of information under Article 73 e of the Charter and the
action taken by it in respect of that information!
Having also examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on this item, 5
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations;
2. Strongly deplores that, despite the repeated recommendations of the General Assembly and the Special Committee, some Member States having responsibilities for the administration of Non-Self-Governing
Territories have ceased or have failed to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter, have transmitted insufficient information or have transmitted information too .late;
3. Strongly condemns the Government of Portugal
for its continued refusal to recognize the colonial status
of the Territories under its domination and to transmit
information under Article 73 e of the Charter on those
Territories in complete disregard of the provisions of
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Special Committee;
4. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by
the General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing
Territory has attained a full measure of self-government
in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering Power concerned should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter with respect
to that Territory;
5. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
transmit, or continue to transmit, to the SecretaryGeneral the information prescribed in Article 73 e of
the Charter, as well as the fullest possible information
on political and constitutional developments in the Territories concerned;
6. Reiterates its request that the Administering
Powers concerned transmit such information as early
as possible and, at the latest, within a maximum period
of six months following the expiration of ,the administrative year in the Non-Self-Governing Territories concerned;
7. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under General
Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with
established procedures, and to report thereon to the
Assembly at its twenty-ninth session.
2198th plenary meeting
12 December 1973
'Ibid., Twenty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9023/
Rev.I), chap. XXIX.
II A/9239 and Add.I.

93

3111 (XXVIII). Question of Namibia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Namibia,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia 6 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 7
Having heard the statement of the representative of
the South West Africa People's Organization, 8 who has
participated in an observer capacity in the work of the
United Nations Council for Namibia and also, in accordance with the decision taken by the General Assembly at its 2139th plenary meeting on 3 October 1973,0
in the Fourth Committee's consideration of the item,
Having also heard the statements of the petitioners, 10
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling, in particular, its resolutions 2145 (XXI)
of 27 October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967
and subsequent resolutions of both the General Assembly and the Security Council relating to the question
of Namibia, as well as the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971, 11 delivered in response to the request addressed to it by the
Council in its resolution 284 (1970) of 29 July 1970,
Taking into consideration the programme of action
adopted by the International Conference of Experts
for the Support of Victims of Colonialism and Apartheid
in Southern Africa, held at Oslo from 9 to 14 April
1973, 12 the resolutions on Namibia adopted by the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity at its twenty-first ordinary session, held at Addis
Ababa from 17 to 24 May 1973, and by the Fourth
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held at Algiers from 5 to 9 September 1973, 13 as well as the Lusaka Declaration adopted
by the United Nations Council for Namibia on 14 June
1973, 14
Reaffirming that the Territory and people of Namibia
are the direct responsibility of the United Nations and
that the Namibian people must be enabled to attain
self-determination and independence within a united
Namibia,
6 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/9024).
7 Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/9023/Rev.1), chaps. I-VI
and VIII.
8 lbid., Twenty-eighth Session, Fourth Committee, 2046th
meeting.
o See "Other decisions", p. 111.
10 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Fourth Committee, 2047th, 2053rd and 2060th meetings.
11 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence
of South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970), Advisory
Opinion, l.C.J. Reports 1971, p. 16.
12 A/9061, annex, sect. IV.
1s A/9330 and Corr.l, p. 42.
14 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/9024), para. 157.
