A/65/PV.75

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fifth session

75

th plenary meeting
Friday, 28 January 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Kleib
(Indonesia), Vice-President, took the Chair.

Draft resolution (A/65/L.59)

Agenda item 133 (continued)

The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 66th and 67th plenary meetings, held on
15 December 2010, the Assembly considered agenda
item 69 and its sub-items (a) to (d).

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/65/691/Add.1)

I now give the floor to the representative of
Argentina to introduce draft resolution A/65/L.59.

The Acting President: Before proceeding to the
items on the agenda, I should like, in keeping with
established practice, to draw the attention of the
General Assembly to document A/65/691/Add.1, in
which the Secretary-General informs the President of
the Assembly that, since the issuance of his
communication contained in document A/65/691,
Zimbabwe has made the necessary payment to reduce
its arrears to below the amount specified in Article 19
of the Charter.

Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to address the General Assembly on
behalf of the Group of 77 (G-77) and China to
introduce the draft resolution contained in document
A/65/L.59.

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.

May I take it that the General Assembly takes due
note of the information contained in document
A/65/691/Add.1?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 69 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations

I would first like to express the gratitude of the
Group of 77 and China to Mrs. Isaura DuarteRodríguez of Colombia, who successfully coordinated
the negotiations on the draft resolution. I would also
like to thank all delegations for their active
participation in the negotiations. I am also pleased to
announce that Mexico and Japan have become
sponsors of the draft resolution.
(spoke in English)
As in previous sessions, the G-77 and China have
this year submitted the draft resolution entitled
“International cooperation on humanitarian assistance
in the field of natural disasters, from relief to
development”.
The G-77 and China believe that humanitarian
assistance should not only provide relief but also
contribute to rebuilding the social fabric of affected

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-21790 (E)

*1121790*

A/65/PV.75

populations, and that its sustainability after an
emergency should be ensured. Emergency assistance
must be provided in ways that will be supportive of
recovery and long-term development.
Moreover, efforts to reduce disaster risks must be
integrated
into
programmes
for
sustainable
development, with a view to reducing poverty and
achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
The massive losses of life and property caused by
natural disasters in developing countries make clear the
need to support their capacity-building efforts through
international cooperation. In that regard, strengthened
coordination among United Nations agencies and
Governments would help to ensure a more efficient
response to disasters, without duplication of efforts.
The Group of 77 and China reiterates its
commitment to the guiding principles set forth in the
annex to resolution 46/182, of 19 December 1991, as
the framework for the provision of United Nations
humanitarian assistance. Those principles, which
include neutrality, humanity, impartiality and
independence, should remain the basis for all responses
to humanitarian emergencies. We also emphasize the
primary role of the affected State in the initiation,
coordination and implementation of humanitarian
assistance.
Financial support is the backbone of humanitarian
work. Therefore, strengthening both United Nations
and non-United Nations funding mechanisms for
humanitarian assistance and ensuring timely,
predictable, adequate and flexible funding for
emergencies arising from natural disasters are essential
for effective responses. In that regard, we welcome the
financial pledges made during the high-level
conference on the Central Emergency Response Fund
held in December 2010.

minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Mercado (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to again join the consensus on
this year’s draft resolution entitled “International
cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of
natural disasters, from relief to development”
(A/65/L.59). We reaffirm the importance of
international assistance in supporting the efforts of
affected countries to overcome the impact of natural
disasters.
We share the view that the international
community should intensify efforts, not only by
strengthening disaster preparedness activities to
prevent or minimize the impact of natural disasters but
also by developing and enhancing the national and
local response capacities of countries affected by
natural disasters and improving international
coordination in the timely provision of humanitarian
assistance.
We support the intent of paragraph 6, but would
have preferred a revision to improve its accuracy and
clarity. We have some concerns about language in the
draft resolution, which states that global climate
change, among other factors, contributes to the
increase in intensity and frequency of natural disasters.
We interpret the text in question to be intended to
reflect the actual state of climate science, including
that climate change may contribute to future increases
in the frequency and/or intensity of weather-related
hazards.
We would have preferred more technically
accurate and precise language in the draft resolution,
and hope to see more precise language in the future.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position.

The Group engaged constructively during the
negotiations on the draft resolution, integrating to the
extent possible the different views and proposals
expressed by our partners while trying to preserve the
driving spirit of the draft resolution. We look forward
to its adoption by consensus.

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/65/L.59, entitled “International cooperation
on humanitarian assistance in the field of natural
disasters, from relief to development”. I give the floor
to the representative of the Secretariat.

The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/65/L.59. Before giving the
floor to the speaker in explanation of position, may I
remind delegations that explanations are limited to 10

Mr. Botnaru (Department of General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to
announce that, since its issuance, the Russian
Federation has become a sponsor of the draft resolution
contained in document A/65/L.59.

2

11-21790

A/65/PV.75

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/65/L.59?
Draft resolution A/65/L.59
(resolution 65/264).

was

adopted

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 69.
Agenda item 113 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(g) Appointment of a judge of the United Nations
Appeals Tribunal
Memorandum by the Secretary-General
(A/65/679)

Nations Appeals Tribunal, to take due consideration of
geographical distribution and gender balance.
If there is no objection, I shall take it that the
General Assembly agrees to the proposal?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Consistent with the
practice of the General Assembly, the candidate who
obtains the largest number of votes and a majority of
the votes of those present and voting shall be
considered elected, and thereby appointed by the
Assembly to the Appeals Tribunal. Also, balloting shall
continue, in accordance with the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly, until one candidate has
obtained, in one or more ballots, a majority of votes of
the members present and voting. In the case of a tie
vote, we will proceed to the drawing of lots in
accordance with rule 93 of the rules of procedure.

The Acting President: As indicated in document
A/65/679, the General Assembly is required, at its
sixty-fifth session, to appoint a judge to the Appeals
Tribunal to serve the remainder of the seven-year term
of Judge Rose Boyko, which commenced on 1 July
2009. Judge Boyko resigned her position as judge of
the Appeals Tribunal, effective 15 January 2011.

May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to
those procedures?

As also indicated in document A/65/679, in
accordance with article 3 (2) of the statute of the
Appeals Tribunal, its judges shall be appointed by the
General Assembly on the recommendation of the
Internal Justice Council in accordance with resolution
62/228, and no two judges shall be of the same
nationality.

Only those candidates whose names appear on the
ballot papers are eligible for election. Representatives
are requested to indicate the candidate for whom they
wish to vote by placing a cross to the left of the name
of the candidate on the ballot paper. Each
representative may vote for not more than one
candidate.

The names of the candidates recommended for
appointment to the Appeals Tribunal are contained in
document A/65/671.

The election will be held in accordance with the
relevant rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
Therefore, in accordance with rule 92 of the rules of
procedure, the election shall be held by secret ballot
and there shall be no nominations.

In order to be eligible for appointment, article 3 (3)
of the statute of the Appeals Tribunal requires that a
person be of high moral character and possess at least
15 years of judicial experience in the field of
administrative law, or the equivalent within one or
more national jurisdictions.
In document A/65/679, it is proposed that the
General Assembly proceed to appoint a judge of the
Appeals Tribunal by way of an election, bearing in
mind paragraph 58 of resolution 63/253, in which the
Assembly invited Member States, when electing judges
to the United Nations Dispute Tribunal and the United

11-21790

It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now proceed to the election of a judge of the
United Nations Appeals Tribunal.

Before we begin the voting process, I should like
to remind members that, pursuant to rule 88 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly, no
representative shall interrupt the voting except on a
point of order on the actual conduct of the voting.
We shall now begin the voting process. Members
are requested to remain seated until all ballots have
been collected.
Ballot papers will now be distributed. May I
request representatives to indicate the candidate for

3

A/65/PV.75

whom they wish to vote by placing a cross to the left of
the name of the candidate on the ballot paper?
May I also remind representatives that they may
vote for not more than one candidate. A ballot will be
declared invalid if more than one name is marked.
At the invitation of the Acting President,
Ms. Molné Casajuana (Andorra), Mr. De Millo
Terrazzani (Monaco), Ms. Kramberger Mendek
(Slovenia), Mr. Manar Taleb (Syrian Arab
Republic) and Mr. Kang’ombe (Zambia) acted as
tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 10.50 a.m. and
resumed at 11.15 a.m.
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Number of ballot papers:
135
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
135
Abstentions:
1
Number of members voting:
134
Required majority:
68
Number of votes obtained:
Ms. Mary Faherty (Ireland)
52
Mr. Brian Tamberlin (Australia)
48
Mr. Roy Lewis (United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland) 34
Since no candidate has obtained the required
majority, the Assembly will proceed to a second round
of balloting restricted to the two candidates who were
not elected but obtained the largest number of votes in
the ballot. In accordance with rule 93 of the rules of
procedure, we shall therefore proceed to the first
restricted ballot.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like
to remind members that, pursuant to rule 88 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly, no
representative shall interrupt the voting except on a
point of order on the actual conduct of the voting.
We shall now begin the voting process. Ballot
papers will now be distributed. All candidates whose
names appear on the ballot papers are eligible. May I

4

request representatives to indicate the candidate for
whom they wish to vote by placing a cross against his
or her name on the ballot paper. May I also remind
representatives that they may vote for not more than
one candidate for appointment to the Appeals Tribunal.
A ballot will be declared invalid if more than one name
is marked. Votes may only be cast for those whose
names appear on the ballot papers.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Molné
Casajuana (Andorra), Mr. De Millo Terrazzani
(Monaco), Ms. Parado-Brillo (Philippines),
Ms. Kramberger Mendek (Slovenia), Mr. Manar
Taleb (Syrian Arab Republic) and Mr. Kang’ombe
(Zambia) acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 11.30 a.m. and
resumed at 11.40 a.m.
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Required majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Ms. Mary Faherty (Ireland)
Mr. Brian Tamberlin (Australia)

134
0
134
2
132
67
75
57

Having obtained the required majority and the
largest number of votes, Ms. Mary Faherty
(Ireland) was elected a judge of the United
Nations Appeals Tribunal for a term of office
beginning on 28 January 2011 and ending on
30 June 2016.
The Acting President: I take this opportunity to
extend to Judge Flaherty the congratulations of the
Assembly on her appointment and to thank the tellers
for their efforts.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (g) of agenda
item 113.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

11-21790
