United Nations

A/RES/60/217

General Assembly

Distr.: General
29 March 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 73 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2005
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/60/496 and Corr.1 and 2)]

60/217. Economic assistance for the reconstruction and
development of Djibouti
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 58/116 of 17 December 2003 and its previous resolutions
on economic assistance to Djibouti,
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 1
Recalling further the Brussels Declaration 2 and the Programme of Action for
the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001–2010, 3 adopted by the Third
United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries on 20 May 2001, as
well as the mutual commitments undertaken on that occasion and the importance
attached to the follow-up to and implementation of the Programme of Action,
Aware that Djibouti is included in the list of the least developed countries and
that it is ranked 150th out of the 177 countries studied in the Human Development
Report 2005, 4
Noting that the economic and social development efforts of Djibouti are
constrained by the extreme local climate conditions, in particular severe droughts
and flash floods, and that the implementation of reconstruction and development
programmes requires the deployment of substantial resources which exceed the
limited capacity of the country,
Noting also that the situation in Djibouti has been made worse by the
disastrous drought situation prevailing in the Horn of Africa and by the absence of
natural resources, which continue to place serious constraints on the fragile
economic, budgetary, social and administrative infrastructure of the country,
Expressing its concern at the severe shortage of drinkable water and the severe
food crisis, as reflected in the report of the Secretary-General, 5
_______________
1

See resolution 55/2.
A/CONF.191/13, chap. I.
3
Ibid., chap. II.
4
Available from http://hdr.undp.org.
5
A/60/302.
2

05-50062

A/RES/60/217

Noting that the Government of Djibouti has implemented a reform programme,
including the approval of a poverty reduction strategy paper with the Bretton Woods
institutions,
Noting with gratitude the support provided by various countries, as well as
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, to meet the humanitarian
needs of the country,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;5

2.
Declares its solidarity with the Government and the people of Djibouti,
who continue to face critical developmental and humanitarian challenges owing to
the scarcity of natural resources, coupled with harsh climatic conditions, including
the acute issue of water supply and the severe food crisis impacting on the
development aspirations of the country;
Encourages the Government of Djibouti, despite difficult economic and
3.
regional realities, to continue its important efforts towards the consolidation of
democracy, the promotion of good governance, accountability and the eradication of
poverty;
Notes the implementation of a reform programme and the adoption and
4.
endorsement of a poverty reduction strategy paper by Djibouti, encourages the
Government of Djibouti to continue to work towards the attainment of the goals
outlined in the poverty reduction strategy paper, and, in that context, appeals to all
Governments, international financial institutions, the specialized agencies and nongovernmental organizations to respond adequately to the financial and material
needs of the country in line with the poverty reduction strategy;
Expresses its gratitude to the intergovernmental organizations and the
5.
specialized agencies of the United Nations for their contributions to the national
rehabilitation of Djibouti, and encourages them to continue their efforts;
Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his continued
6.
efforts to make the international community aware of the difficulties faced by
Djibouti, and welcomes his coordinated response to the financial and technical
needs of Djibouti and the process of aligning the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework to the Djibouti poverty reduction strategy through the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework midterm review of 2003–2007;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue, in close cooperation with the
7.
Government of Djibouti, his efforts to mobilize the resources necessary for an
effective programme of financial, technical and material assistance to Djibouti;
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at
8.
its sixty-second session on the progress made in the implementation of the present
resolution.
68th plenary meeting
22 December 2005

2
