S/PV.9042

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9042nd meeting

Wednesday, 25 May 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield/Mr. Hunter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Dime Labille
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Roscoe

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2022/381)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-36047 (E)
*2236047*

S/PV.9042

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2022/381)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark,
Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Morocco, Nepal, New
Zealand, Nigeria, Pakistan, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, Uruguay, Viet
Nam and Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Ramesh
Rajasingham, Director of Coordination in the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs;
Mr. Robert Mardini, Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross; Mr. David
Miliband, President and Chief Executive Officer of
the International Rescue Committee; and Ms. Rachel
Boketa, Country Director of Women for Women
International in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
I propose that the Council invite the observer of
the Permanent Mission of the Holy See to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
2/33

25/05/2022

with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/381, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
I now give the floor to Mr. Rajasingham.
Mr. Rajasingham: Let me highlight some of
the key concerns set out by the Secretary-General in
his annual report (S/2022/381) on the protection of
civilians, released last week. The report illustrates the
grim reality that civilians continue to bear the brunt of
suffering in situations of conflict.
First, and most fundamentally, conflict continued
to cause widespread civilian deaths and injury last
year. When hostilities took place in densely populated
areas, the risks of death and injury for civilians rose
sharply. When explosive weapons were used in
populated areas, about 90 per cent of casualties were
civilians, compared with 10 per cent in other areas.
In Syria, Afghanistan and elsewhere, improvised
explosive devices, landmines and explosive remnants
of war caused civilian deaths and injury and hindered
access to farm land, essential services and livelihoods.
Conflict damaged and eroded critical infrastructure,
disrupting vital water, sanitation, electricity and health
services. In Yemen, attacks damaged or destroyed
schools, hospitals, telecommunications infrastructure,
roads, factories, houses, cars and farms. And in Gaza,
in the occupied Palestinian territory, fighting damaged
wells, reservoirs, desalinization and waste-water plants
and water-delivery networks and pumping stations,
depriving people of access to clean drinking water.
Conflict also puts education at risk. Schools were
relentlessly attacked, and hundreds of teachers killed,
injured, kidnapped or assaulted. Conflicting parties
attacked and occupied schools, depriving hundreds of
thousands of children of learning and making them more
vulnerable to recruitment into armed groups, exploitive
labour and other dangers. In the first nine months of
last year, more than 900 schools in Afghanistan were
destroyed, damaged or closed, and their rehabilitation
was hindered by explosive hazards. In Ethiopia,
thousands of schools were entirely or partially damaged,
and more than 30,000 teachers were displaced. And
22-36047

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

conflict does not damage infrastructure alone. It
damages the natural environment, not just through the
fighting itself, but also through weak governance and
neglect. In Syria, for instance, damage to industrial
infrastructure generated millions of tons of rubble and
dust containing hazardous material, such as asbestos,
heavy metals, chemicals and combustion products, with
a potentially serious impact on civilians’ health.
We are all too familiar with the cycle of violence
and displacement, and 2021 was no exception. By
mid-year, fighting and insecurity had forcibly displaced
84 million people, with close to 51 million internally
displaced. As the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees reported over the weekend,
the war in Ukraine, and other conflicts, have now
pushed the number of people forced to flee conflict,
violence, human rights violations and persecution to
more than 100 million for the first time on record.
When civilians fled to safer areas, people with
disabilities, including children and older people, were
often left behind. Those who did manage to flee often
lacked their assistive equipment and faced difficulty
with mobility or were unable to access assistance.
Conflict also takes a significant mental health toll.
More than one in five people living in conflict-affected
areas were estimated to suffer from depression, anxiety
or post-traumatic stress disorder.
Medical workers, facilities, equipment and transport
continued to come under attack, while parties to
conflict interfered with medical care. In northern
Ethiopia, health-care facilities, equipment and
transport were attacked and looted, and hospitals were
used for military purposes. In Afghanistan, attacks
on health-care facilities hampered access to health
services for 300,000 people. In Yemen, only half of
the health facilities were fully functioning, and those
that remained often faced huge shortages of staff,
medicine, fuel and medical supplies. Over and above
conflict, the pandemic intensified human suffering and
further strained and weakened health-care services.
Nearly 3 billion people are still waiting for their first
vaccination, many of them in conflict situations where
health systems are weak and the level of public trust
is low.
As we heard from the Secretary-General and others
last week (see S/PV.9036), conflict-driven hunger has
worsened. By the end of last year, conflict and insecurity
were major drivers of crisis, with worse levels of acute

S/PV.9042

food insecurity for approximately 140 million people
in 24 States. Thousands of people in Ethiopia, Nigeria,
South Sudan and Yemen found themselves on the cusp
of catastrophic food insecurity, primarily owing to
armed conflict and violence. Parties to conflict made
food insecurity worse by impeding food production,
cutting access to food and destroying food sources.
In northern Ethiopia, agricultural production was
significantly hampered because people were displaced
from their farms, crops were destroyed and livestock
were looted or killed. In Yemen, farms, livestock, food
storage facilities and other essential food production
inputs and infrastructure were damaged. And in the
Central African Republic, armed groups occupied
fields and prevented access to crops and opportunities
to harvest.
Humanitarian operations have also faced continued
complex access challenges that deprived people of the
assistance that they need to survive. In Somalia, fighting
has impeded the movement of humanitarian personnel
and supplies along main routes. In the Central African
Republic, insecurity has forced non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) to scale back or suspend their
activities, and the increased use of explosive devices
has hampered humanitarian movements and civilian
access to assistance and services. Some fighting
parties imposed severe limitations on humanitarian
activities. Bureaucratic measures also slowed or stalled
operations. In Myanmar, for instance, obstacles have
included lengthy processes for approval of travel and
difficulties registering organizations or obtaining visas
for international staff. In some parts of the country,
humanitarian access to people in need was blocked
because of delayed or denied travel authorizations,
roadblocks and checkpoints. The increased number
of non-State armed groups in conflicts complicated
humanitarian access negotiations, while the growing
presence of private military and security contractors
also created difficulties for humanitarians trying to
reach people in need.
Sanctions and broadly conceived counter-terrorism
measures impeded principled humanitarian activities.
Misinformation and disinformation eroded trust, put
humanitarians at risk of harm and ultimately jeopardized
humanitarian operations. Social media facilitated the
spread of harmful information influencing various
audiences. In some cases, that information included false
stories about humanitarian organizations, hampering
their work. When humanitarian activities were

22-360473/33

S/PV.9042

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

politicized, community acceptance was jeopardized.
Humanitarian staff were intimidated, arrested or
detained while carrying out their functions. For
instance, staff from the NGO Médecins sans Frontières
have been harassed and abused in Afghanistan, Iraq and
Nigeria for allegedly supporting terrorists by providing
impartial health care.
Humanitarian workers and assets also came under
attack. Last year, some 143 security incidents against
humanitarian workers were recorded in 14 countries
and territories affected by conflict. They resulted in
the deaths of 93 workers. National staff accounted
for 98 per cent of the humanitarians killed, injured or
kidnapped. This year looks no better.
The conflict in Ukraine has caused immense civilian
suffering and loss. Since 24 February, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
has recorded 8,089 civilian casualties in the country.
Of that number, 3,811 were killed and 4,278 injured.
Hospitals, schools, residential buildings and shelters
have come under attack. Some 12 million Ukrainians
have been forced from their homes. Civilians remain
trapped and cut off from food, water and electricity.
And the prospect of nuclear conflict, once unthinkable,
is now back within the realm of possibility.
As we all know, the war has effectively ended
Ukraine’s food exports, and the humanitarian impacts
are being felt far beyond its borders. Globally, food, fuel
and fertilizer prices are skyrocketing. Price increases
of up to 30 per cent for staple foods have threatened
people in countries across Africa and the Middle East,
including Cameroon, Libya, Somalia, the Sudan and
Yemen. That is hitting the poorest people the hardest,
exacerbating suffering in other conflict situations and
planting the seeds for further political instability and
unrest worldwide.
As the Secretary-General has stated repeatedly,
protecting civilians depends on full compliance with
international humanitarian law by all parties. That
entails many practical steps that States and non-State
armed groups should take. I will mention a few here.
They should track reports of civilian harm to gauge
the impact of military operations and shift course, if
necessary. They should increase the understanding
of the effects of conflict on the natural environment
and integrate legal protection for the environment
into military training, doctrine and policy and
legal frameworks.
4/33

25/05/2022

In operations involving a coalition with security
partners and allies, including non-State armed groups,
States should engage in political dialogue, training
and joint operational planning and withhold arms
transfers where there is a clear risk that the arms will
be used to commit serious international humanitarian
law violations. They should ensure that humanitarian
operations are shielded from the political dynamics of
conflict and support humanitarian engagement with all
parties to conflict, including non-State armed groups.
They should take steps to facilitate humanitarian
activities and exclude humanitarian and medical
activities from the scope of counter-terrorism and
sanctions measures. They should investigate alleged
war crimes, prosecute perpetrators, ensure reparations
for victims and strengthen other States’ capacity and
resources to investigate and prosecute.
Finally, States should develop policy frameworks
and build upon those good policies and practices.
Parties to conflict and States must apply much greater
political will and commitment in order to respect the
rules of war and implement good policies and practices.
The President: I thank Mr. Rajasingham for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mardini.
Mr. Mardini: On behalf of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), I am pleased and
honoured to brief the Security Council on what we see as
some of the most pressing protection challenges today.
My thanks go to the United States for the invitation.
Let me be honest: I come here with a certain sense
of déjà vu. The ICRC has briefed the Council for
many years. Our concerns and asks may have varied
somewhat, but the central theme has been much the
same — how best to respond to the terrible suffering we
witness day in and day out in armed conflicts around
the world and how to prevent it from happening in the
first place.
This year is no different. While certain progress
has been made on the normative and policy fronts on the
issue of the protection of civilians, for the most part, the
reality on the ground continues to tell a very different
story. We see deliberate attacks on civilians and civilian
objects, causing untold suffering. We see indiscriminate
and disproportionate attacks all too frequently. We see
the blatant politicization of humanitarian action, while
political solutions to end conflict remain elusive. We
22-36047

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

see States that have the primary responsibility for
respecting, and ensuring respect for, international
humanitarian law falling short.
At the same time, I come here today with an
unwavering sense of hope — hope in our common
humanity; hope that things can and will improve and
that the words spoken in the Council will translate into
a meaningful reality for the millions of women, men
and children suffering the horrors of armed conflict.
With that in mind, I would like to highlight three issues
that we find to be of particular concern — all of them
interconnected — with clear asks aimed at improving
the situation on the ground.
The first is the appalling human cost of war in
cities. This certainly is not the first time the ICRC
has highlighted that concern in the Security Council,
and I dare say it will not be the last. I hardly need
remind members of the massive harm urban warfare
causes, primarily to civilians, and all the more so
when explosive weapons with wide-area effects are
used. All of us have seen it on our screens, if not on
the actual front lines — countless people killed or
gravely wounded, homes and vital infrastructure
destroyed, hospitals faced with multiple casualties and
complex injuries quickly overwhelming emergency
rooms, survivors left with lifelong disabilities or severe
psychological trauma.
That clearly raises serious questions about how
parties to such conflicts interpret and apply the relevant
tools of international humanitarian law. Indeed, the
concept of military necessity is abused more often
than not. It is used as an excuse for the use of force
rather than a reason to limit it. The risks often increase
when weapons are supplied to belligerents by allies or
partners without proper oversight. We once again urge
States and parties to armed conflict to avoid the use
of heavy explosive weapons in populated areas due to
the high risk of indiscriminate effects. We urge them to
take preventive and mitigation measures at all levels to
that effect to strengthen the protection of civilians and
facilitate respect for international humanitarian law.
More broadly, we ask States, including Council
members, to ensure that the protection of civilians is
a strategic priority in the planning and conduct of all
military and security operations in populated areas.
That includes allowing civilians to receive humanitarian
assistance, sparing them from attacks and facilitating
their safe passage to obtain respite from violence.

S/PV.9042

Civilian infrastructure, allowing for the provision of
essential services to the civilian population, must be
protected, as unanimously endorsed in resolution 2573
(2021). That also includes leveraging the influence of
Council members and special relationships with allies,
partners and proxies to foster respect for the law,
while focusing squarely on ensuring better protection
outcomes for civilians and others not fighting.
The second issue of particular concern is the rapid
spread of misinformation, disinformation and hate
speech during armed conflict. We see at first-hand in
our operations how that phenomenon reduces the ability
of affected people to make well-informed decisions that
impact their safety and dignity. It dangerously distorts
information that is vital to human needs, such as access
to safety, shelter and health care.
We are also seeing the surge in misinformation,
online and offline, which jeopardizes humanitarian
efforts to earn the trust and acceptance of affected
people. False narratives around the role of humanitarian
organizations not only hamper our work but can create
dangers for the people we try to protect and assist and
for our own staff. In that regard too, States have an
essential role to play, both in preventing misinformation
and disinformation and mitigating their impact on
the people affected. Armed conflicts are precisely
where the risks are highest and the safeguards lowest.
We therefore urge States and parties to conflicts to
ensure that at the very least their own activities and
information campaigns are not part of the problem, that
they put the protection of civilians at the centre of their
efforts and that they do not compromise or endanger the
humanitarian space.
My third and final concern relates to the increasing
pressure on front-line humanitarian organizations to
help States obtain information for eventual criminal
proceedings in armed conflict. Of course, improving
respect for international humanitarian law requires
accountability, and accountability in turn helps to
prevent violations of international humanitarian law,
which is in all our interests. But we need to separate
the work of humanitarian organizations from that
of investigative bodies. That is critical if we are to
preserve neutrality and impartiality and the ability to
access populations in need. For those reasons, we urge
States to refrain from making operational humanitarian
organizations such as ours responsible for sharing data
from international humanitarian law monitoring.

22-360475/33

S/PV.9042

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Improving
compliance
with
international
humanitarian law, which is at the heart of our
mandate, includes helping Governments meet their
responsibilities by adopting legislation and training
their armed forces and police. It includes engaging
in constructive dialogue with the parties based on
our observations on the ground. It can also include
providing technical assistance and practical guidance
on domestic legislation that serves as a basis for
investigations and help ensure it is effective. We
respectfully ask that States take that wider view in
their pursuit of accountability in the context of armed
conflicts, in order to allow and facilitate organizations
to work according to their particular mandates.
In conclusion, the gap between the ever-growing
protection and assistance needs of conflict-affected
people and the ability of humanitarian organizations to
deliver an adequate response is still far too wide. We
need to bridge that gap. That means removing obstacles
such as restrictive measures that criminalize aid and
deny access, politicize funding or impose requirements
compromising our humanitarian principles. And we
should be clear that the responsibility for removing
those obstacles, for ensuring protection, lies first and
foremost with States, including the members of the
Security Council.
To that end, the ICRC urges States to take decisive
action in the three areas that I highlighted — making
the protection of civilians a strategic priority in the
planning and conduct of all military and security
operations in populated areas, which includes avoiding
the use of heavy explosive weapons; working to
avoid and prevent the spread of misinformation and
disinformation in armed conflicts and mitigate their
impact on affected people; and ensuring accountability
for victims without compromising the neutral and
humanitarian space that humanitarian organizations
need to operate in. Action in those three areas would
go a long way to ensuring better protection of civilians
in armed conflicts everywhere. And it might just mean
that next year, in this same briefing, we have something
to celebrate.
The President: I thank Mr. Mardini for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Miliband.
Mr. Miliband: It is an honour to be with the Security
Council today to speak as a fact witness on behalf of the
30,000 staff and volunteers of the International Rescue
Committee (IRC) who served more than 35 million
6/33

25/05/2022

civilians at 200 field sites in conflict zones around the
world last year. The demand that both our staff and
clients share is not for new rights or new laws, but for
the Council to fulfil the commitments it has made and
allow them to enjoy the civilian protections they have
been repeatedly promised.
The Security Council has said many times that
the protection of civilians is its business. Countless
resolutions have promised to fulfil commitments under
international humanitarian law. Yet there are 56 active
conflicts in the world today. As Mr. Rajasingham
said, civilians account for nearly 90 per cent of the
casualties of war, and we learned this week of the more
than 100 million people who have been forced to flee
their homes by conflict and disaster. So the system
for protecting civilians — diplomatic, political, legal,
humanitarian — is not succeeding but failing. And no
failure is greater than the denial of access for innocent
civilians to the legal right to receive life-saving aid. So
the focus that you have chosen for this debate, Madam
President, could not be more important.
Every year the delivery of aid becomes harder in
conflict zones, not because the natural geography is
more difficult but because the human-made obstacles
are more significant. IRC and other humanitarian staff
are kidnapped at checkpoints, shot at by armed groups,
threatened with arrest if they provide life-saving aid
to what is termed the enemy. And that is before the
bureaucracy, the endless waiting for permissions, for
visas, for documentation, for cash delivery — delays
designed to frustrate, not deliver. According to the
Assessment Capacities Project, ACAPS, nearly
200 million people in humanitarian need — 70 per cent
of the total — are living in countries with very high or
extreme humanitarian access constraints.
That is not the collateral damage of conflict. It is not
a stray bullet or a military mistake. It is often part of a
war strategy, one that directly violates the laws of war.
And while this is tragic, it needs to be said that it is not
just a strategy on the part of non-State actors but also of
States Members of the United Nations. And those who
complain, or expose, or campaign against it — whether
they are United Nations officials or non-governmental
organizations or political opposition — are often
targeted for retribution. The Ukraine crisis is obviously
the capstone of this age of impunity, but it is not the
exception. Just last week two IRC vehicles were attacked
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, leaving one
22-36047

25/05/2022

S/PV.9042

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

medical staff member in hospital with gunshot wounds
and others kidnapped.
The Council is not responsible for the tactics of
those laying siege to communities or targeting civilians
or aid workers. However, it is responsible for the failure
to hold those actors to account and curb their illegal
excesses. That is what needs to change. We know
what is needed to turn back the age of impunity — the
countervailing power of transparency, of monitoring,
of contact groups, of accountability and of justice. We
have seen the effects of those measures, and that is what
we call for today, new muscle in the drive to prevent the
strangulation and weaponization of aid. We do not call
for new rights. We call for new determination to uphold
existing rights.

cross-border access to Syria, that vote should be based
on facts and law alone to ensure that humanitarian
aid reaches those in need by the most direct and
effective routes.
We live in the real world. We see the constraints
around the often-divided Security Council, as well as
in the conflict zones where we work. But we also look
to the wider international community to help break
the deadlock.

First, humanitarian access and its denial should be
a permanent agenda item for the Council, because that
denial is a threat to regional peace and security. When
reports are issued and benchmarks set, they must be
followed up. When progress stalls or commitments are
abandoned, they should be called out.

When the Security Council is divided, the
General Assembly can continue to play a critical role
in establishing independent mechanisms to gather
evidence on international humanitarian law violations.
Where humanitarian work needs guarding from the
politics of Member States, the General Assembly
can establish independent panels and fact-finding
missions and deliver transparent reporting on barriers
imposed on humanitarian action in conflict settings.
Public and unequivocal documentation of the current
state of humanitarian access is the first step towards
accountability and diplomacy for renewed access.

Secondly, United Nations officials have a critical
role to play, from the Secretary-General on down.
Their bravery and their voices should be lauded, not
muffled. The Security Council should set a standard
for defending United Nations officials who call out
violations of international law.

The United Nations reflects all the complexities
of international relations, but also the inspiration of
humanitarian values. We hope that this debate shines a
light on the gap between the two and leads to renewed
effort to live up to the better angels of our nature and,
frankly, the better angels that helped to found this body.

Thirdly, those officials should be backed by
independent assessments of access violations that leave
no room for political pressure to squeeze out plain
speaking. In its watch list, published in December last
year, the International Rescue Committee proposed an
independent office for the promotion of humanitarian
access to promote precisely such an independent
assessment. The European Union has proposed driving
independent data collection and reporting by funding
those efforts and ensuring the independence of the
body doing it. We hope that Member States will commit
to using that data to drive accountability.

The President:
his briefing.

Fourthly, early-warning mechanisms cannot be
allowed to gather dust. Resolution 2417 (2018), on
conflict-induced hunger, could be an effective indicator
of food insecurity and famine and a tool to fight it, but it is
undermined by weak and inconsistent implementation,
data and reporting. That needs to change.
Lastly, where the Council has direct power over
access to aid, such as in the upcoming vote to renew

I

thank

Mr.

Miliband

for

I now give the floor to Ms. Boketa.
Ms. Boketa: I thank the United States Mission
for the opportunity today to share our experience
of ongoing conflict and crises in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It might seem obvious, but to
protect civilians in armed conflict and ensure better
humanitarian access, it is vital to first listen to those
of us from conflict-affected countries. I am a national
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I therefore
know first-hand the challenges facing my country in
general and in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where I work.
To refresh a little regarding the context, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is currently home
to more than 5.5 million internally displaced persons
(IDPs), which is one of the largest IDP populations in
the world. Overall, 70 per cent of the population lives
below the poverty line, and 27 million Congolese

22-360477/33

S/PV.9042

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

are highly food insecure, that is, more than one in
four people in the country. Global inflation and food
shortages caused by the war in Ukraine are making a
bad situation even worse. Furthermore, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is currently ranked 163 out of
170 countries in the recently released global Women,
Peace and Security Index, which means that, on top of
the other challenges, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is also one of the most difficult places in the
world to be a woman.
At Women for Women International, we help women
survivors of war to rebuild their lives. Our programmes
are locally led and rooted in the communities that
we serve. To ensure better humanitarian access
and to better protect all civilians, we believe that
gender-transformative approaches and local women’s
organizations must be part of the strategy from the start.
Women are uniquely and disproportionately
affected by the cycles of poverty and displacement in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as are other
marginalized populations, such as children, indigenous
people, people with disabilities and the elderly. The
path to gender equality in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo indicates that not only are women plagued
by the context of insecurity and conflict, but they also
face harmful, patriarchal social norms and beliefs,
which hinder their access to basic social services and
humanitarian aid and create barriers when they try to
challenge those circumstances. Those compounding
challenges also render women and marginalized
groups the most likely to fall between the gaps of
the humanitarian and protection, development and
peacebuilding nexus.
At Women for Women International, I work
with women living in communities in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Those women
may have been displaced three or four times by the
time they settle there — and, believe me, choosing
to settle in such areas is not risk-free. The illegal
exploitation of natural resources and mining conflicts
often translate into armed violence that blocks roads
and humanitarian access points. We therefore have to
be creative and adaptive in order to provide consistent
services to women, deliver stipends and maintain our
training programmes.
The women in our programmes not only develop
vocational training skills and start their own businesses,
but they also learn about savings, the link between
8/33

25/05/2022

nutrition and health and their rights. Their savings and
additional income offer them resilience and a buffer
between crisis and total destitution. But, with the
coronavirus disease, the war in Ukraine and rising food
and fuel prices, that buffer for women is slowly eroding.
We stand in solidarity, and share a hope for peace,
with all Ukrainians, because we know that the effects of
war, conflict and disasters near and far are often borne
by the most vulnerable and the most marginalized. It
is community-based and women-centred organizations
that are the first on the front line to provide them with
immediate support and to prevent a rollback on the
progress that women have made in their savings and
resilience, as well as in their dignity and status.
I will give an example of one of our programme
graduates, Solange, who was raped four times over
two decades of war. She saw her husband and their
three children being tortured and killed. It was after
her fourth rape resulted in a pregnancy that she left
her village, searching for a new start for her and her
newborn daughter. Despite the self-sufficiency gained
from the training that we provided to her, society still
mocked her and isolated her as a victim of rape due
to her visible scars from the beatings she endured. It
is because of the good friends she met in her group
training sessions and the trust built among participants
and trainers alike that she says that we all accept each
other, without discrimination, and her invisible scars
can begin to heal.
A woman such as Solange is just one example of the
many who might fall between the gaps of community
services due to stigma and isolation. If the goal of
humanitarian aid and access is to reduce harm to all
civilians affected by conflict and war, in order to reach
Solange gender-transformative approaches and local
women’s organizations must be part of the protection
and humanitarian strategy.
Such approaches would not just recognize and
account for the unique impacts and challenges to
humanitarian access posed by women’s vulnerabilities.
Gender transformative means that the decision-making
and planning processes at all levels would appropriately
value and recognize the resourcefulness and capabilities
of women in civil society as leaders.
We see year after year that, when we can build
women’s power and resilience through our programmes,
they are able to pay it forward to other women, the
community and the next generation.
22-36047

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

There are women like Cinama, who saw her mother
struggle to raise her seven children on barely one meal
a day, because, as a widow, she had no rights to land
or inheritance, leaving the entire family vulnerable to
each new wave of conflict and crisis. Now 26 years
old, Cinama built her self-reliance through our training
programme to become a brickmaker. Today, as a
vocational trainer herself, Cinama passes along those
same skills to other women in her community, and
she owns her land. She is leaving a legacy to the next
generation that she hopes will outlast the wars that have
marked the milestones of her own life.
During crisis, people affected by disasters and
conflict look to their national and local authorities,
the United Nations and the broader humanitarian
community to support and strengthen their protection
from those threats. Protecting them is therefore a
primary responsibility of the duty-bearers. In order to
fulfil the great responsibility of ensuring humanitarian
access and protecting civilians, there must be closer
coordination among the humanitarian country teams,
Government authorities, peacekeeping missions like
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and civil
society across the planning and implementation phases
of humanitarian response.
Civil society organizations — and especially
women’s civil society — need additional, flexible
financial resources, human resources and capacity.
The inclusion of civil society organizations that are
already providing aid and services is key to ensuring
humanitarian access for displaced people and for
marginalized, vulnerable populations in places like
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The lives of
those civilians and of women like Solange and Cinama
do not fall neatly into the buckets of different sectors
or agendas, or even frameworks. So, to ensure their
protection, I ask that the global humanitarian community
and Member States think and act holistically, locally
and transformatively in order to meet them where they
are — because every crisis is a protection crisis.

S/PV.9042

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.
Let me start by thanking Director Rajasingham
and Director-General Mardini for their briefings
today. I also express my deep appreciation to our civil
society speaker, Ms. Rachel Boketa, from Women
for Women International, and Mr. David Miliband,
from the International Rescue Committee. I thank
Mr. Miliband for his clear and practical list of solutions
for providing much-needed humanitarian access, and
I thank Ms. Boketa for raising the different ways in
which women, girls, men and boys are harmed when
humanitarian access is impeded — an issue that is too
often ignored. I very much appreciate her sharing the
real-life stories of Solange and Cinama and the impact
that her programmes are having on their lives. I also
want to thank Mr. Mardini for sharing the perspectives
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
his recommendations to the Council. The United
States greatly appreciates all the work that the United
Nations, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and other non-governmental organizations carry out
on the ground in order to protect civilians in armed
conflicts. They know that they are all life-savers, and
we appreciate them.
We hear new reports of civilians under threat every
single day. The reports come from every corner of the
globe — from a musician in Mali who, earlier this
week, told The Washington Post about the slaughter of
at least 300 civilians by the Russian-backed Wagner
Group; to the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, who, on Monday, told the world that, for
the first time, more than 100 million people have been
forcibly displaced.

The President: I thank Ms. Boketa for her briefing.

To make matters worse, killings, forced
displacements and lack of humanitarian access often
come together and create a downward spiral. As just one
horrific example of that, in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, more than 5.6 million Congolese remain
displaced. Ms. Boketa reported an even higher number
and stressed that that is one of the largest displaced
populations in the world.

I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.

The ceaseless fighting has severely limited
humanitarian access. Over 10 months in 2021, at least
260 separate incidents directly affected humanitarian
workers or supplies. Nearly 60 workers were killed,
injured or kidnapped during that period. Similarly,
humanitarian workers were attacked in South Sudan,

22-360479/33

S/PV.9042

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

when three aid workers were killed on 24 March as part
of a World Food Programme convoy. The killings make
it harder to deliver humanitarian aid, and the lack of aid
makes it more likely that civilians will remain displaced.
The result of that vicious cycle is what we see in
Syria, where, after 11 years of the Al-Assad regime’s
brutal war, 14 million Syrians rely on humanitarian
assistance and 6.6 million Syrian remain internally
displaced. Every month, Syrian civilians are attacked
and killed by the Al-Assad regime and others, and
hospitals often do not have the medicine or supplies to
help the injured because humanitarian convoys are not
able to reach them.
The people of Ukraine are also in need of dire
humanitarian assistance, as countless civilians continue
to be injured or killed by Russia’s brutal war of choice.
We have seen images of mass graves. We have seen
images of destroyed buildings. We have seen credible
reports of individuals executed, bodies showing signs of
torture and horrific accounts of sexual violence against
women and girls, as well as boys and lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex persons. This
month, the United Nations Human Rights Monitoring
Mission in Ukraine announced that it has evidence of
at least 300 unlawful killings of civilians, including
children, since Russian forces withdrew from areas
north of Kyiv. Yesterday we saw credible media reports
of Russian forces stealing grain from Ukraine, as this
war has exacerbated a global food security crisis. The
impact has been particularly devastating on children, in
the region and across the world.
For those reasons, we call on the Secretary-General
to add Ukraine as a situation of concern in the upcoming
annual report on children and armed conflict. There
will be justice, and Russia will be held accountable for
those atrocities.
Our charge — to maintain international peace
and security — means that we have an obligation to
address all those threats to civilians in armed conflict.
States and non-State parties to conflict have obligations
with regard to respecting human rights and protecting
civilians, including humanitarian workers, as well as
equipment and goods that are not for military purposes.
But, as the Security Council, we also have a duty to
do whatever is in our power to protect civilians caught
in the throes of conflict. Perhaps the most immediate,
powerful and practical way we can do so is by providing
and safeguarding humanitarian access. After all, we can
10/33

25/05/2022

raise all the funds and donate all the food and medical
supplies in the world, but it will not matter if it does not
get to those in need.
The Security Council has the power to forge paths
for humanitarian access where it is most desperately
needed. We did this last year when we unanimously
voted to renew the mandate for United Nations crossborder assistance in Syria (resolution 2585 (2021)). That
was an important, life-saving decision for millions of
people. It demonstrated the best of what we can do
when we work together.
But now, in 2022, the United Nations estimates that
14.6 million Syrians need humanitarian assistance — a
nearly 10 per cent increase over last year. We therefore
have to renew the mandate again, and we have to
expand it and increase the number of crossing points to
meet the rising demands for humanitarian aid in Syria.
I look forward to travelling to Bab Al-Hawa crossing
soon and seeing the current needs on the ground with
my own eyes.
This year’s report (S/2022/381) shines a spotlight
on another critical impediment to the protection of
civilians: disinformation. For example, in the Central
African Republic and Mali, disinformation targeting the
United Nations has seriously threatened peacekeepers’
safety and security and undermined the ability of the
United Nations to reach civilians and protect them. We
must ensure that the United Nations has the capabilities
it needs to counter disinformation that impedes the
work that it has been charged to do.
Every year, this annual debate is sobering, but this
year it is especially so. Fortunately, the steps are clear.
As our briefers outlined, there are practical steps we
can take right now to protect civilians. We know exactly
how we can provide humanitarian access and break the
cycle of despair. So let us just get it done.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Director Ramesh Rajasingham, Director-General
Robert Mardini, President David Miliband and Director
Rachel Boketa for their inspiring briefings.
There is only one effective way to protect civilians
in armed conflict, and that is not to engage in or incite
armed conflict. And if armed conflict does occur, we
must mobilize to stop it immediately. And, as long
as a war has not been started, it must be prevented
22-36047

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

by attacking the well-known roots that could lead to
its outbreak.
This effective means of sparing civilians from the
scourge of war, of saving them from fear or indignity, is
engraved in indelible ink in every provision of the United
Nations Charter. It is the matrix vocation of the United
Nations and the raison d’être of the Security Council.
It is obvious that the Council will be judged
faithful to its mandate if it effectively protects civilian
populations everywhere in the world from the scourge
of war. In contrast, the Council will have failed in its
mission as long as civilian populations are victims of
hostilities. The Council falls short when its response
to civilian casualties is rhetoric or fragmentation tied
to geopolitical or geostrategic interests and influence.
There are too many wars in the world. According to
the International Committee of the Red Cross, there are
about 50 wars involving States and more than a hundred
involving armed groups. Each of these wars results in
the death of civilians and leaves the survivors maimed,
tortured, raped, forcibly displaced or suffering serious
violations of their fundamental rights. In each case,
women and children pay the highest price in blood, fear
and indignity.
Africa remains the region of the world most affected
by armed conflict. In the trenches and refugee camps of
a dozen countries of the African continent, Africa Day,
which we celebrate today, will be marked by the same
distress and terror as any other day.
If we cannot contain or prevent wars, we must be
able to limit their effects on those who do not take part
in the hostilities and prevent attacks, bombings and
the targeting of populations. This, of course, requires
strict adherence by belligerent parties to the five
fundamental principles of international humanitarian
law: humanity, distinction, precaution, proportionality,
and the prohibition of unnecessary suffering and harm.
To be lax in the application of international
humanitarian law is to inflict double punishment
on civilian populations. The moving testimony that
Ms. Boketa has just shared with us certainly reminds
us of our humanity. But above all, it must activate our
thirst for action.
Protecting civilians is the responsibility of
every member of the international community and a
requirement for every member of the Security Council.
We must do so boldly, to the extent prescribed by the

S/PV.9042

normative instruments at our disposal — among them
resolution 1674 (2006) on the responsibility to protect,
resolution 1738 (2006) on the protection of civilians
in times of conflict, which condemns attacks against
journalists, and resolutions 2467 (2019), 2427 (2018)
and 1325 (2000), which guarantee the protection of
specific groups, children and women — in order to
ensure their implementation in times of war.
The conflicts of our time are essentially internal
and urban and therefore constitute factors of fragility in
civilian populations, which suffer both from the direct
effects of the conflicts and from their indirect effects
resulting from the destruction of civilian infrastructure
used for production or transformation or distribution of
public services. Not only do these attacks undermine
the capacity of States to protect civilian populations,
but they also have a significant and lasting impact on
the State’s ability to recover and rebuild, resulting in
the need to ensure unhindered humanitarian access, the
protection of humanitarian personnel and the securing
of refugee camps. We deplore and condemn in the
strongest terms the recent attacks on humanitarian
workers in Yemen, South Sudan, and the Central
African Republic, and reiterate our commitment to
respect for international humanitarian law, which
is essential to ensure safe access for humanitarian
assistance to populations in distress.
People who are not taking part in the fighting or who,
because of their condition, can no longer take part in it,
should not be the targets of armed attacks. However, it
has become very common for heavy artillery, shelling
and such indiscriminate weapons as cluster munitions
and other explosives to be targeted directly at civilians
or civilian infrastructure. The effects of such weapons
are disproportionate and can extend beyond the period
of conflict and beyond the protocols of specialized
United Nations agencies and entities. The ban on the
use of weapons of mass destruction must be respected
by all.
Another area where civilians must be protected
is in the area of human rights abuses. From rape,
sexual and gender-based violence, to trafficking of all
kinds, networks of traffickers find civilians fleeing
the battlefields, especially women and children, to be
the easiest prey because they are exposed and fragile,
without resources or protection. In this regard, again,
we have an obligation to fulfil our commitments and
ensure compliance with international conventions and
Security Council resolutions.

22-3604711/33

S/PV.9042

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We must be uncompromising in the context of
armed conflict in order to prevent the use of civilians
and civilian infrastructures for military purposes.
Our mobilization must be unwavering in the face of
increasingly recurrent attacks against humanitarian
personnel and journalists, as well as violations of
the right to information. Similarly, the international
community must also ensure that civilians’ digital
data is protected and that their rights continue to be
respected in situations of armed conflict. This is
particularly relevant for displaced civilians who, in
some cases, may be exposed to retaliation because of
their ethnicity or religion or for any other reason.
Urgent, coordinated and targeted actions must
be taken to strengthen the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to civilian populations, all within a framework
of new funding schemes that can accommodate both
short-term and long-term actions, as well as individual
and systemic approaches. A one-size-fits-all approach
does not work here, and humanitarian preparedness must
therefore be adapted to respond to specific situations.
It is crucial to ensure that impunity for attacks on
civilians is stamped out. The perpetrators of war crimes
and other violations of the laws of war must be brought
to account and held responsible for their actions. And
independent, impartial and free investigations must of
course be conducted in order to establish the facts and
attribute responsibilities.
In conclusion, I would like to express my country’s
rejection of all forms of war, as well as to underscore
our commitment to the peaceful resolution of conflicts.
We must redouble our efforts to exorcise the logic of war
and reconnect the Council with the goal of protecting
civilians from war.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): At the outset, let me thank
you, Madam President, for convening this annual open
debate today on the important theme of the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts. I would also like to thank
Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Director of Coordination
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs; the Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Robert Mardini;
Mr. David Miliband, President and Chief Executive
Officer of the International Rescue Committee; and
Ms. Rachel Boketa, Country Director of Women for
Women International in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for their remarks.
12/33

25/05/2022

We are witnessing a resurgence in armed conflicts
around the globe. They have further compounded the
effects of pressing challenges such as the ongoing
coronavirus disease pandemic, climate change and food
security, driving millions towards a dire humanitarian
situation. The humanitarian consequences of armed
conflicts are severe. We are witnessing the debilitating
effect that conflicts have on the issue of access to
humanitarian aid, whether in Afghanistan, Yemen,
Mali, the Sudan or Ukraine. The report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/381) paints a distressing picture of
civilian suffering. There were more than 11,000 civilian
casualties in various conflicts in 2021, more than 45 per
cent of them in Afghanistan; 140 million people were left
reeling from conflict-induced hunger; and 84 million
were forcibly displaced, with women and children
forming a large majority of the internally displaced.
It is very worrying that parties to armed conflicts
seem to consider civilian populations and civilian
infrastructure to be legitimate targets. Vulnerable
groups, including women, children and minorities, as
well as essential civilian infrastructure, hospitals and
irreplaceable cultural heritage, have been among the
first casualties of attacks in recent armed conflicts.
The ongoing conflict in Ukraine has resulted in the
loss of lives and countless miseries for its people,
particularly women, children and the elderly, with
millions becoming homeless and forced to take shelter
in neighbouring countries. Since the conflict in Ukraine
began, India has consistently called for an immediate
cessation of hostilities and an end to the violence. We
have emphasized the importance of pursuing a path of
dialogue and diplomacy as the only way out.
The primary responsibility for ensuring the safety
and security of populations, including the maintenance
of essential services, rests with national Governments.
However, we have in place international principles
and jurisprudence that lay just as much responsibility
on the parties to conflicts for ensuring that civilians
and civilian infrastructure are not targeted in such
situations. Civilians in conflict-affected areas need
safe, unhindered, rapid access to basic services, which
are often provided by humanitarian workers. We note
with concern the spike in attacks on humanitarian teams
and the increasing obstacles they face as they respond
to conflict-ravaged communities. As we have reiterated
in the Council, all humanitarian aid and assistance
must be primarily guided by the universal principles
22-36047

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence.
Those measures must not be politicized.
Terrorism today is the greatest threat facing
humankind. It exacerbates social tensions and pushes
societies towards instability and violence. Any debate
on the protection of civilians would therefore be
incomplete without taking into account the carnage
wrought by terrorist forces, particularly those backed
by State actors pursuing political objectives. Having for
decades suffered the scourge of cross-border terrorism
in which thousands of innocent civilians have lost their
lives, India has always been at the forefront of global
counter-terrorism efforts. The international community
should stand firm in its opposition to terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations and reject any attempt to
provide any justification for terrorist acts. We should
remember that the consequences of any relaxation of our
guard on that count would be borne not only by civilians
but by our security forces, who take on terrorists in
extremely difficult conditions in urban areas.
I would like to urge the Council to focus on
another key issue, the increasing challenges faced by
peacekeepers in United Nations missions around the
world in executing their mandate to protect civilians. The
protection of civilians is primarily the responsibility of
host Governments, an established operating principle
in the United Nations peacekeeping architecture. The
role of United Nations peacekeeping operations is to
supplement national efforts to advance peace and
security. Peacekeepers cannot and should not be a
substitute for the primary responsibility of protecting
civilians, which rests primarily with host Governments.
In cumulative terms, India has contributed the
world’s highest number of troops to peacekeeping
operations. Our troops and police personnel have been
at the forefront of translating the Council’s words into
action on the ground across several peacekeeping
missions. They were protecting civilians long before
the term came into common usage in the Council.
We have provided a cutting edge in many United
Nations operations where civilians were under threat.
India therefore brings to the table a certain quantity
and quality of experience in protecting civilians in
peacekeeping missions that is unique in its relevance,
variety and depth.
We need to ensure that United Nations peacekeepers
are adequately equipped and trained to take up the
tasks involved in protecting civilians, especially by

S/PV.9042

leveraging cutting-edge technologies. Moreover,
with the increasingly multidimensional nature of
peacekeeping missions, there is a risk of diluting the
focus on protection-of-civilians mandates. We need
to simplify peacekeeping mandates. Peacebuilding
activities such as the promotion of human rights,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
electoral assistance should be suitably separated from
peacekeeping missions. We should resist the temptation
to add even more to peacekeeping mandates, or we
may see civilian and peacekeeping casualties increase,
which should be avoided at all costs.
Finally, while it is important to deliberate on
the devastating consequences of armed conflict on
civilians, we should not ignore the fundamental issues
and international power politics that exacerbate armed
conflicts. Today we should reaffirm our commitment
to the principle of non-interference in the internal
affairs of States. We should also reaffirm that the
contemporary global order has been built on the Charter
of the United Nations, international law and respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I would like to express our
condolences to you, Madam President, as well as the
Permanent Mission of United States and the entire
American people, for the horrendous crime that occurred
yesterday in Texas, in which innocent people, most of
them children, were killed, as well as for the recent hate
crime incident that preceded it. Unfortunately, that also
pertains to the protection of civilians, even if not in the
context of armed conflict.
We welcome our briefers to the traditional May
debate on the issue of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. Last year, the Security Council
adopted two important resolutions, resolution 2573
(2021), on the protection of civilian infrastructure
and installations, and resolution 2601 (2021), on the
protection of schools and education in armed conflict.
The international community continues to expand
its arsenal of international instruments to ensure
compliance with international humanitarian law and
the protection of civilians.
The annual report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/381) provides a holistic picture of the situation
of civilians in armed conflict. It is encouraging that
the situation in Afghanistan has started to improve
since the withdrawal of United States troops from

22-3604713/33

S/PV.9042

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Afghanistan last summer. Unfortunately, the first half
of 2021, during which time American troops remained
in Afghanistan, saw the tragic record of more than 5,000
Afghans killed and wounded. The report also rightly
notes the high number of civilian casualties in Nigeria,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Syria.
Concerning Syria, despite significant progress
in combating international terrorism, fully achieving
peace and stability in the country is being hindered by
the illegal United States occupation of large parts of
the State’s territory. In the occupied territories, camps
with inhumane living conditions continue to operate,
and havoc and lawlessness continue to reign.
In addition, the occupying Power has egregiously
plundered natural and agricultural resources belonging
to the people of Syria. The United States is stepping
up its activities involving smuggling and trafficking
in oil and grain. We suppose that is the American
way of dealing with the global energy and food crisis.
Moreover, despite the protracted grave humanitarian
situation in Syria, together with the economic crisis,
the United States and the European Union continue
to impose illegal unilateral sanctions against the
long-suffering people of Syria, which are having
disastrous consequences.
Modern international humanitarian law is a code of
responsible behaviour between warring parties, which
was hard-won as a result of the two World Wars. Russia
stood at the origins of this category of international
law and strictly abides by its principles. In contrast
to the methods of extermination of the adversary and
the civilian population used during NATO’s combat
operations in Yugoslavia, Libya, Iraq, Afghanistan and
Syria, Russia’s current special military operation in
Ukraine fully adheres to the noble goal of protecting
the lives of civilians, who have been held hostage by
the Kyiv regime.
The special operation has clearly highlighted how
cynical and criminal the actions of the representatives
of the Kyiv authorities and their armed forces,
especially the nationalist formations, can be. The
Russian authorities and reputable non-governmental
organizations are carefully documenting Kyiv’s crimes.
It is only a matter of time before it is held accountable.
At the same time, the United States of America
and its allies are not only turning a blind eye to Kyiv’s
crimes against civilians, but are also complicit in the
killing of civilians. The shelling of peaceful towns in
14/33

25/05/2022

Donbas is being carried out with howitzers supplied by
Washington. The Ukrainian armed forces regularly set
up gun posts in schools and hospitals — for example,
the Lisichansk general hospital, in which machine-gun
crews were positioned on the second and third floors;
the Kharkiv oblast regional children’s hospital, in which
machine gunners from the Ukrainian armed forces have
positioned themselves; the Kharkiv municipal hospital
No. 3; and the Volnovakha central hospital. That is by
no means an exhaustive list. The shelling of civilians
by Ukrainian armed forces is taking place on a daily
basis; many witnesses can attest to that. The way in
which the Ukrainian military treat their compatriots is
simply bewildering.
As we are talking on the issue of the protection of
civilians, we would be remiss were we not to mention
the exploitation and manipulation of public opinion
centred upon it. We regularly expound on these issues
in our statements. The most glaring example of that
involves the blatant Ukrainian provocation in Bucha,
which was bandied about by the international media in
early April.
Two days ago, at the Security Council meeting
devoted to information technology (see S/PV.9039),
the representative of the United Kingdom attempted
to cast doubt on our conclusions concerning the staged
nature of the Bucha provocation by referring to satellite
images published by The New York Times. If we are to
believe them, there were allegedly bodies on the streets
of Bucha that could be seen from satellites as early as
11 March.
I will not broach the dubious character of the
images themselves. We have not had the opportunity
to verify their authenticity because Maxar, the satellite
company that produced them, does not sell its products
to Russia. If we assume that the photos are authentic
and that the bodies that Ukrainian correspondents
photographed in the streets of Bucha on 3 April had
indeed been lying there since 11 March, the question
arises: why in the April photos are there no signs of
decomposition or impurities? According to weather
reports, the temperature in the city at that time reached
16°C. Any — even an inexperienced — forensic
pathologist will acknowledge that, by the end of the
second week, a corpse is not only visibly decomposed;
it turns almost black. The bodies shown to everyone by
the Ukrainians show no signs of decomposition, which
means that the assertions by the The New York Times
are false.
22-36047

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Our British colleagues said a great deal more in
their statement. We will respond to them in detail in the
near future, including on social media. I would just like
to note that the obvious inconsistencies concerning the
Ukrainian provocation in Bucha are being challenged
by the United Kingdom, which during its presidency
of the Security Council twice refused to convene the
meeting requested precisely to discuss that provocation.
Moreover, it is remarkable that our Western
colleagues rapidly cooled to the idea of expounding
on the provocation in Kramatorsk, where more than 50
civilians were killed after the Ukrainian military shelled
the railway station on 8 April. That false-flag operation
by Ukraine was apparently too clumsily executed,
which made the responsibility of the Ukrainian side far
too obvious.
I would also like to draw attention to the torture
and abuse of Russian prisoners of war by Ukrainian
nationalists and the Ukrainian armed forces. Many
Ukrainian armed forces who have been captured have
confessed that they had orders to shoot civilians and
not to take Russian soldiers prisoner. Conversely, the
humane treatment of prisoners of war is the norm for
the Russian armed forces, which is attested to by the
recent treatment of the Ukrainian armed forces soldiers
and Ukrainian nationalists of the notorious Azov
Regiment who surrendered and left the Azovstal plant.
As we all know, 2,439 people from various Ukrainian
units surrendered. All of the servicemen and their
commanders were treated with respect, and medical
assistance was provided to the wounded. They and their
relatives, whom we are allowing them to contact, have
themselves confirmed that.
Such treatment is also given, among others, to
fighters who have besmirched themselves by committing
the most heinous war crimes. All those responsible
for deliberately targeting civilians or killing them as
a result of the indiscriminate and disproportionate use
of force in violation of international humanitarian law
will be brought to justice.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): At the outset, I would like
to thank the United States delegation for convening
this open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. We also thank Ramesh Rajasingham, Director
of Coordination in the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, for his insightful briefing
and welcome the additional perspectives provided by
Robert Mardini, Director-General of the International

S/PV.9042

Committee of the Red Cross, David Miliband, President
and Chief Executive Officer of the International Rescue
Committee, and Rachel Boketa, Country Director of
Women for Women International in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
While conflicts and wars may be inevitable realities
of human history, every civilization and generation has
a responsibility for protecting civilians from the cruel
consequences of armed conflict. Throughout our past,
and despite the fervent efforts made to limit the impact
of war on civilians, the world, regrettably, continues
to witness egregious violations of the rights of civilian
populations in many situations of conflict across several
parts of the world, as we clearly heard both from our
briefers and from other delegations this morning.
The cost of the proliferation of conflicts is today
reflected in the many civilian deaths and injuries that
are being recorded; the displacement of millions of
people; the life of indignity they are forced to live;
the starvation and hunger that the destruction of their
livelihoods bring about; the psychological trauma that
many young girls, women and boys face as a result
of conflict-related sexual violence; the deliberate
targeting of civilians as a strategy of war; and the
destruction of critical life-supporting infrastructure
that makes any effort at reconstructing societies an
almost-distant dream.
Amid these ignoble situations that conflicts
create, in recent years we have also had to contend
with the exacerbating effects of climate change
and the coronavirus disease pandemic, which have
worsened the vulnerabilities of civilian populations in
conflict settings and made their protection even more
challenging. It is therefore distressing to witness the
hostile environments deliberately created by parties
to conflicts and armed combatants in order to prevent
humanitarian personnel from effectively carrying out
their noble tasks in service to civilian populations.
The laws of armed conflict must be respected at all
times and cannot be ignored even in the basest of
our human weaknesses. In addressing the challenges
faced by civilians in armed conflict, Ghana believes
that careful consideration may be given to some of the
following priorities.
First, we believe that respect for global conventions
and treaties, including international humanitarian law,
should be reinforced to provide a solid foundation
for protecting civilians in situations of armed

22-3604715/33

S/PV.9042

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

conflict. The commitment of States must be renewed
for the preservation and protection of principled
humanitarian action, including by encouraging both
State and non-State parties to conflicts to comply with
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
In that regard, we must also be unwavering in ensuring
accountability for egregious violations of the laws of
armed conflict.
Secondly, in recognition of the primacy of politics,
the protection of civilians must be an integral part of
any settlement in the resolution of any conflict, not
only in terms of peace agreements and ceasefires, but
even in moments when humanitarian pauses and truces
may offer an opportunity to centre the protection needs
of civilian populations.
Thirdly, the protection of civilians should remain
a critical and integral component of all the parts of
peacekeeping operations and in a manner that not
only provides authorization for missions but also the
capabilities to use all necessary means, including
force, as required to prevent or respond to threats of
physical violence against civilians, without prejudice to
the responsibility of host Governments. We therefore
encourage the further deepening of the policy on the
protection of civilians in United Nations peacekeeping,
and welcome the systematic and meaningful integration
of gender and women protection advisers into planning
for the protection of civilians at the strategic and
operational levels. As we know, while women and youth
are unquestionably critical agents of change in conflict
situations, it is they who are most often subjected to
various forms of abuse, including sexual exploitation.
Fourthly, we believe that the Security Council
can help strengthen the protection of civilians in
armed conflict by improving reporting mechanisms
for monitoring and tracking civilian harm through
the adaptation of tools such as the Monitoring and
Reporting Mechanism for the six grave violations
of children’s rights in conflict and the Monitoring,
Analysis and Reporting Arrangements in response
to sexual violence in armed conflict. We believe that
expanding such mechanisms to cover reporting on
civilian casualties or the use of explosive weapons in
populated areas would provide standards and a clear
methodology for tracking, mitigating and reducing
civilian harm. Attention could also be given to regular
reporting on the gaps and challenges in delivering
humanitarian assistance in areas of armed conflict.
That can be done by ensuring that the reports submitted
16/33

25/05/2022

to the Council include comprehensive recording and
reporting of all types of serious civilian harm, including
records of casualties, and could help build momentum
in the Council for identifying proactive ways to address
the challenges.
Fifthly, the risks to civilians and humanitarian
workers posed by misinformation, disinformation and
hate speech during armed conflict represent a driver
that needs to be managed. Promoting discussions and
exchanges within humanitarian organizations, as well
as awareness-raising programmes among civilian
populations on humanitarian law and human rights law,
would be useful in bridging knowledge asymmetry.
We further recommend including the issues of
misinformation, disinformation and hate speech in
training programmes for stakeholders, and note that it
would be useful to have capacity built for humanitarian
mapping and analysis in a way that extends its reach
among the relevant stakeholders. While digital
technologies such as mobile-phone applications may
create opportunities for effective humanitarian action,
they also expose vulnerable populations to malicious
activities. We therefore underscore the crucial role
of building resilience by investing in understanding
current information-security threats and adopting
strategies to protect data. The 2021 Inter-Agency
Standing Committee Operational Guidance on Data
Responsibility in Humanitarian Action is useful in
that regard.
Lastly, we encourage the strengthening of support
for regional arrangements to help sustain efforts in the
protection of civilians. Such bodies are the international
actors closest to armed conflicts and usually have a better
understanding of how civilian populations can best be
assisted before their situations get out of hand. In that
regard, we note that enhanced partnerships between the
United Nations and the Economic Community of West
African States, for instance, could lead to the effective
implementation of the regional body’s humanitarian
policy aimed at addressing the barriers to humanitarian
assistance in the region of West Africa and the Sahel.
Before I conclude, I want to emphasize that Ghana
reaffirms its belief that strong and genuine political
will and commitment on the part of Member States,
with support from civil-society organizations and other
partners, is indispensable to the urgent enhancement
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict. As a
major troop-contributing country to United Nations
peace operations, Ghana considers the protection of
22-36047

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

civilians a high priority and will continue to ensure that
its troops are given the training and support they need
to carry out their mandate with regard to the protection
of civilians.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): I thank you again,
Madam President, for convening us on this critical
issue today.
We are grateful to our briefers. It was very good
to hear their views on the practical and impactful steps
that the Council and other United Nations Member
States should take if we want to protect civilians and
humanitarians. As Mr. Miliband said, it is not about
us taking new initiatives, but about being determined
to ensure the application and delivery of existing
commitments. That is because wherever there is war
or armed conflict, civilians are always caught in the
middle. Indeed, 2022 has been another devastating
year for civilians in conflict, including in Myanmar,
Syria and Ukraine. As we heard again today, the
number of displaced has surpassed 100 million, a
desperate threshold.
In Ukraine, Russia is targeting civilian
infrastructure and attacking civilians indiscriminately.
No one can evade that fact. In Myanmar, humanitarian
workers are murdered, along with the women and
children they are aiding. And just today, we heard about
the International Rescue Committee humanitarians
attacked in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Our
thoughts are with the victims, but they need more than
just our thoughts. In many conflicts, access to aid is being
weaponized as a military strategy, which increases the
human cost of war. We have also seen parties to conflict
treat with increasing contempt the international rules
and humanitarian law designed to protect civilians in
conflict. Only last month, the Council debated ways to
help reduce the scale of conflict-related sexual violence
around the world (see S/PV.9016). I would like to say
that I was really struck by the very practical approach
that Ms. Boketa’s organization is taking and by the
incredible stories of Solange and Cinama. We owe them
our side of the bargain as they strive to improve their
own situation. Action can also be supported in other
ways by us, as States. I would like to talk about three
ways in which we can do that today.
The first is that States can do more in the area
of prevention by embedding civilian protections into
their own domestic law and operations. That includes
putting in place appropriate legislation and institutional

S/PV.9042

arrangements to comprehensively address violations
and abuses of international humanitarian law and
human rights, and, critically, holding those who commit
such violations and abuses accountable. That is the
really important point. We cannot overstate the power
of deterrence or the cost of impunity.
The United Kingdom continues to produce
voluntary reporting on its own domestic implementation
of international humanitarian law. And we encourage
others to do the same to establish that pattern of
behaviour. With the assistance of the British Red
Cross, we are offering support to other States to
produce their own reports to help identify best practice,
to identify gaps in domestic law and ultimately to
improve compliance.
The second area in which we can take action is that
we, as members of the Security Council, as many of
our briefers said this morning, can make better use of
the tools we already have at our disposal for identifying
and addressing threats to civilians. That includes the
tools established in resolutions 2286 (2016), 2417 (2018)
and 2573 (2021). They are designed to give us timely,
evidence-based warnings when parties to conflict are
blocking access, destroying indispensable civilian
objects or using starvation as a method of warfare.
As Mr. Miliband said, they should not be allowed to
gather dust, and we should all reflect on that. And once
the threats are identified, we have to be ready to take
action. The Security Council must take decisions that
advance humanitarian access. And once again, we call
on the whole Council to renew and expand resolution
2585 (2021), granting the United Nations cross-border
access to millions of Syrians.
And the third and final point is that we need to
do more to protect those working to aid civilians in
some of the highest-risk environments in the world,
including, as we heard again today, through tackling the
dangerous spread of misinformation and disinformation
on the work of humanitarian organizations, which puts
the lives of both humanitarian actors and vulnerable
civilians at risk.
Indeed, when it comes to disinformation, I am
afraid that we have experts on that dangerous technique
on this very Council. The Russians today have followed
their discounted and patent nonsense about biolabs in
Ukraine with more attempts to obfuscate and distract
us with further revisionist accounts of what happened
in Bucha. When it comes to the Russian delegation,

22-3604717/33

S/PV.9042

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

fiction is stranger than the truth. But such distraction
attempts cannot obscure the blood of civilians on
their hands day after day during its illegal invasion in
Ukraine. Frankly, it is remarkable that they have the
chutzpah to speak on this agenda item, and it is no
surprise that they did not address the real issues.
The Security Council has adopted many resolutions
calling for accountability for attacks on humanitarian
workers and civilians. We need to turn those words into
action and ensure those responsible for such attacks are
held accountable.
But the reality is that time and time again, members,
especially some permanent members of the Security
Council block our attempts to protect civilians. They
often use spurious arguments designed to obscure their
real self-interested reasons, and when they do that, they
negate the true purpose of the Security Council — to
save civilians from the horrors of war. And at times
the track record of some States in our work does not
align with the rhetoric that they themselves make in
this Chamber, and we should reflect on that too.
For our part, the United Kingdom will continue
to use its seat on the Security Council to do the
opposite — to support those providing relief and use
the tools we have to take steps to prevent conflicts
before they begin and assist civilians and humanitarians
caught up in them.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to thank the
United States for organizing this year’s debate on the
protection of civilians. I would also like to thank the
briefers for their informative presentations.
Brazil associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians
in Armed Conflict.
The evolution of the Council’s treatment of the
protection of civilians is remarkable. That is attested
by two important resolutions approved by this body
last year alone: resolution 2573 (2021), on objects
indispensable to the survival of the civilian population
in armed conflict, and resolution 2601 (2021), on the
protection of schools and education.
Yet strengthening the protection of civilians
architecture has not been enough to reduce the heavy
civilian toll of armed conflicts. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2022/381) indicates, in 2021, the
United Nations recorded over 11,000 civilian casualties
18/33

25/05/2022

across 12 armed conflicts. The current challenges are
well known: the use of explosive weapons in urban and
other densely populated areas; attacks against civilian
infrastructure, schools and medical facilities; hostilities
against medical and humanitarian personnel; conflictrelated sexual violence; and increased vulnerabilities
faced by women, children, refugees, internally displaced
persons and persons with disabilities. Moreover, the
vicious cycle of armed conflict and hunger continues to
pose challenges to the most vulnerable.
Conflicts not only disrupt food production, but
also cut off trade and distribution. It is no coincidence
that the majority of chronically undernourished people
live in countries affected by conflict. The imposition
of unilateral economic measures in conflict situations
further distorts supply chains and food markets.
According to the Secretary-General’s report, in 2021,
around 140 million people faced acute food insecurity
where conflict and insecurity played a major role
in driving hunger, up from 99 million in 2020. Such
a situation should serve as a reminder of the human
devastation that any armed conflict can cause, and a
call to strengthen efforts to prevent and cease them.
I would like to highlight three points while
addressing the guiding questions outlined in the
concept note of this open debate.
First, peacekeeping operations continue to play
a role in promoting strategies for the protection of
civilians, as more than 95 per cent of United Nations
peacekeepers are mandated to protect civilians. It
is therefore important to explore how best United
Nations peacekeepers can contribute to strategies for
the protection of civilians. In that context, United
Nations peacekeepers should scale up the use of
strategic communications, which can foster local
dialogue and engagement, as well as create a protective
environment. Strategic communications can contribute
to the protection of civilians objectives in several ways,
such as dissuading retaliatory attacks; informing local
communities on the measures that missions are taking;
discouraging local populations from joining armed
groups; clarifying misinformation, as well as missions’
objectives; promoting social cohesion; and countering
narratives that exacerbate violence.
Secondly, all parties to armed conflicts should
facilitate safe and unimpeded passage for relief actions
that are humanitarian and impartial in character and
conducted without any adverse distinction, in line with
22-36047

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

international humanitarian law. It is worrisome that some
parties to conflicts have been imposing bureaucratic
measures to hinder humanitarian operations, as outlined
in the Secretary-General’s report. Another challenge
relates to the reports of unintended consequences of
United Nations sanctions on humanitarian assistance.
Brazil encourages the Council to continue its work to
adjust the sanctions framework so that they effectively
minimize the suffering of the civilian population. The
humanitarian carveouts in Somalia’s and Afghanistan’s
sanctions regimes are good examples, which could
be replicated to other situations. Humanitarian actors
should not be impeded from performing humanitarian
and impartial relief actions due to overcompliance or
the possibility of the criminalization of their activities.
Thirdly, international humanitarian law already
provides a solid framework to protect civilians, as
provided for by the 1949 Geneva Conventions and
their Protocols Additional. It is therefore clear that
the problem is not the absence of norms, but the
lack of implementation and respect for them. The
Security Council should call for respect and adherence
to international humanitarian law in a consistent
manner. Any violation must be subjected to impartial
and non-selective mechanisms of accountability,
including through the relevant international criminal
law instruments.
In conclusion, let me once again reiterate Brazil’s
commitment to the protection of civilians’ agenda, in
line with the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the Organization.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
the United States presidency for having convened this
important meeting. I also want to thank our briefers this
morning: Mr. Rajasingham, Director-General Mardini,
Mr. Miliband and Ms. Boketa. Their messages — and,
importantly, I must say, their recommendations — are
just what we need to hear here, but, more important,
what we need to heed.
Let us be clear: ensuring humanitarian access is a
matter of life and death for civilians trapped in conflict.
Reaching civilians in their moment of need could not
be more central to their protection. It could not be more
central to what we believe should be the work of the
Security Council. I will focus on three points relating
to the access challenges facing humanitarians globally.
First, in conflict-afflicted countries such as
Ethiopia, Somalia, Syria, South Sudan, Mali and

S/PV.9042

Myanmar, hostilities and attacks on humanitarian staff
have greatly hindered the civilian population’s access
to life-saving assistance. That insecurity is delaying,
reducing and, in some cases, preventing aid flows. Put
simply, it costs lives. How many times must we repeat
in this Chamber the phrase “humanitarian workers
must never be targets”? How many more times must we
insist that those responsible for attacks against them be
held to account?
Such attacks also force humanitarian organizations
to adjust their practices. They disproportionally
transfer risk to local humanitarians. In some cases,
humanitarian organizations are forced to withdraw
entirely. Mr. Rajasingham elaborated on those
challenges earlier.
In 2021, 98 per cent of humanitarians killed,
injured or kidnapped in conflict contexts such as
the Democratic Republic of the Congo were national
staff. As Ms. Boketa clearly and powerfully pointed
out earlier, women in conflict situations, civilians and
humanitarians face additional challenges and are met
with violence on a daily basis. That is starkly evidenced
in Haiti, where violence and insecurity, particularly
systematic sexual violence, require urgent, survivorcentred responses.
In Tigray, as millions face starvation, humanitarians
have faced major impediments in transporting relief
items, fuel and medicine into the region. We think that
it is shameful that only 11 per cent of what was needed
from July to December last year reached the civilian
population. Visa denials, the expulsion of United
Nations and non-governmental-organization staff and
the targeting of humanitarian personnel have been
a defining feature of that conflict. All the while, the
spectre of insecurity looms large. Our calls have been
clear. The recent improved flow of aid must be expanded
and accompanied by the restarting of essential services
in the region.
Bureaucratic impediments to humanitarian access
can amount to de-facto denials of humanitarian access.
Let us be clear: the arbitrary denial of humanitarian
access is also in contravention of international law.
In countries such as Myanmar, humanitarians are
required to overcome visa blocks, onerous registration
requirements and significant restrictions on their
operations. The veil of bureaucracy cannot be used to
conceal humanitarian suffering from the international
community. In some areas, the denial of access has

22-3604719/33

S/PV.9042

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

evolved from a consequence of conflict to a weapon
of war. David Miliband made that point eloquently
this morning.
Secondly, the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas continues to have a devastating short-, mediumand long-term impact. Civilians represent almost 90 per
cent of casualties when explosive weapons are used in
populated areas. That is compounded by the destruction
of critical infrastructure, such as roads, hospitals and
sanitation facilities.
Where we cannot prevent or resolve conflict,
we must work to minimize harm. That is why it is a
priority for Ireland to continue to lead consultations
to strengthen the protection of civilians from the
humanitarian consequences arising from the use
of explosive weapons in populated areas. We are
determined to deliver a political declaration that leads
to operational changes in practice and in policy — one
that enhances the protection of civilians during armed
conflict. The high level of engagement from States,
including many present here today, international
organizations and civil society is encouraging. We
hope to conclude negotiations in the coming months.
Thirdly, to protect civilians, the Security Council
needs to meet our promises and implement what we
have agreed. We heard that message loud and clear
yesterday at the Arria Formula meeting that we hosted
on the protection of journalists. The Council needs to
implement resolution 2222 (2015).
Resolution 2417 (2018), on conflict and hunger,
provides the tools to alleviate current, and prevent
future, access issues, which block food-insecure
populations from life-saving assistance. What is needed
now, as ever, is implementation.
The renewal of the United Nations cross-border
operation into north-west Syria is critical to ensuring
that humanitarian assistance continues to reach millions
of people in grave need. As co-penholder, alongside
Norway, Ireland will continue to work constructively
with all Member States to ensure that the Council
upholds its duty to the people of Syria.
Sanctions and counter-terrorism legislation are not
intended to have adverse humanitarian consequences.
That is a shared responsibility of all members of the
Council and one that Ireland takes seriously. Resolution
2615 (2021), required in response to the Taliban
takeover of Afghanistan, serves as a demonstration of
20/33

25/05/2022

what can be done when the Council comes together and
acts together.
In conclusion, it is clear that in conflicts such as
in Ukraine, Ethiopia, Syria, Yemen and the occupied
Palestinian territory, the Security Council has failed to
deliver the political protection that we can collectively
offer. Some of our briefers said that bluntly to us
today. At this table, we have a responsibility to protect
civilians. Seventeen years ago, the United Nations
adopted a global commitment on the responsibility to
protect. But vulnerable civilians continue to suffer the
consequences of wars not of their making. That is a
damning indictment.
Let us therefore be frank: if we do not use all the
tools available to us now, next year’s debate will hear of
an even graver situation on the protection of civilians. It
will hear of an even higher toll of death and destruction.
I now want to address those who are parties to
ongoing conflicts and those who support them. They
have a responsibility to protect civilians. International
humanitarian law must be respected. Allow
humanitarians to do their work without hindrance or
interference. Put an end to the suffering of war. It is
never too late to do the right thing.
Mrs. Dime Labille (France) (spoke in French): Let
me first thank the United States for having organized
this open debate on the protection of civilians. I
also thank Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Mr. Robert
Mardini, Mr. David Miliband and Ms. Rachel Boketa
for their briefings and testimony. Their findings are
clear — civilians continue to pay the highest price for
conflict. I would like to highlight three points.
First, the protection of civilians and humanitarian
workers is an obligation under international
humanitarian law that is binding on parties to
conflicts. That obligation to protect extends to civilian
infrastructure essential to the survival of populations,
in particular hospitals and medical facilities, facilities
providing access to water and electricity, as well as
agricultural crops and infrastructure. Regrettably,
we see parties knowingly incorporating violations
of international humanitarian law into their military
strategy. Those violations increase the suffering of the
population and multiply the humanitarian needs.
In Ukraine, Russian forces are using the same
methods as those used in Syria alongside the Al-Assad
regime: first, encircling cities, massively bombing
22-36047

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

them and then besieging them, trapping civilians,
targeting essential civilian infrastructure and using
foreign mercenaries. In Mali and the Central African
Republic, local armed forces and mercenaries from
the Russian Wagner Group are committing numerous
abuses against the civilian population.
Secondly, we must also step up our efforts to address
the shrinking humanitarian space, which prevents
populations in need of humanitarian aid from receiving
it. Because of its special commitment to that issue,
France organized a Security Council meeting in July
2021 (see S/PV.8822) on safeguarding humanitarian
space. As it is a prerequisite for the survival of
populations, safe and unhindered humanitarian access
must be guaranteed, without conditions. Moreover, we
cannot and must not tolerate or accept the harassment,
arrest or killing of humanitarian personnel. We must
strengthen civil-military coordination and the use of
humanitarian deconfliction mechanisms wherever
necessary. The protection of civilians must remain at
the heart of peacekeeping operations.
We must also create, in the texts we adopt in the
Council and in our national legislation, an environment
conducive to the operations of neutral and impartial
humanitarian actors, in accordance with international
law — for example, by combating over-compliance
with bank practices and by ensuring that humanitarian
actors cannot be sanctioned or prosecuted for the sole
reason of having carried out humanitarian activities in
accordance with international humanitarian law and
humanitarian principles. We must sanction violations
of international humanitarian law with regard to the
protection of civilians by making better use of the tool of
sanctions against those responsible for those violations.
Finally, we must redouble our efforts to ensure
that international humanitarian law is respected by all.
Respect for international humanitarian law was one of
the priority themes of the first European Humanitarian
Forum, which France and the European Commission
organized in March 2022 in Brussels. It is also at the
heart of the Call for Humanitarian Action, launched by
France and Germany, which now has 53 signatories.
The Council’s contribution to the fight against
impunity must also be strengthened, as must cooperation
with fact-finding missions, commissions of inquiry and
the instruments of international criminal justice, first
and foremost the International Criminal Court, for the
most serious crimes. We must also continue to use these

S/PV.9042

important tools to combat violence against children and
sexual violence, among other things. France is doing
just that, particularly with regard to sanctions regimes,
in which it is a leader.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): We offer our deepest
condolences to the United States and the families of the
victims of the mass shooting in Uvalde, Texas.
I thank the briefers for their contribution to
this debate.
The principal reason war offends us sufficiently
to form the United Nations is its destruction of human
life, safety and well-being. We established the Security
Council to lead humankind’s united response to threats
to international peace and security. On paper, we have
all the required tools to resolve conflict and ensure that,
where it breaks out, the conduct of the war accords to
international humanitarian law. Unfortunately, our
multilateral tools are collapsing under the weight of
weak political will, the untrammeled pursuit of selfinterest by the powerful and the continuing inequality
among and within nations. The citizens of the world
are losing hope in the United Nations, particularly the
Security Council. We need to show them that we are fit
for purpose.
For this debate, Kenya would like to focus on
terrorism, especially the kind practiced by jihadists
affiliated or inspired by Al-Qaida and the Islamic State
of Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). Their armed assaults are
a form of warfare that is directly aimed at civilians.
Groups such as Al-Shabaab in Somalia and its fellow
travelers do not cause civilian harm as a collateral
result. No, murdering civilians is their primary method
of seeking their political aims. Unless Al-Qaida
and ISIS-affiliated terrorist groups in Africa, such
as Al-Shabaab, are targeted with all the means the
Security Council has at its disposal, the resulting harm
to civilians will be catastrophic.
If multilateralism is to deliver sustained peace and
protection of civilians from terrorism, the Council must
get more serious about facing that challenge in Africa.
Tens of thousands have already been brutally murdered
in the past decade. Livelihoods have collapsed in
multiple areas. Hundreds of thousands of refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs) have been produced
throughout the Sahel, the Horn of Africa and Southern
Africa. The harm to civilians is not an abstract
number on a page. Many have perished from suicide
bombings, improvised explosive devices, vehicle-borne

22-3604721/33

S/PV.9042

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

explosives, torture, mutilation, sexual violence, hunger
and pure misery.
The status quo will not hold. The piecemeal
approaches by the Council will only yield failure and
the mass murder of many thousands more. We all know
the solution but keep resisting its implementation.
Are African lives not precious enough to move the
Council to bold action against terrorist groups who
announce daily their aim to dismember States and
collapse governance?
There are many actions that the concerned
Governments should take — from the inclusive
management of diversity, the delivery of local
development, adherence to human rights protection and
increasing competence. But none of those efforts will
come close to succeeding if there is no robust, sustained
military and police pressure on those groups.
We all know this, and the Council is in a position to
act on that knowledge. We know that we need to deploy
capable regional forces with access to predictable
and adequate funding and with access to appropriate
intelligence and force multipliers. If we do not, we will
only be passive observers of a spreading catastrophe.
If we do nothing, then history will judge us harshly
and the whole world will reap the harvest of multiple
collapsing or collapsed States.
Connected to that is the need for humanitarian
actors to understand the need for robust action against
these groups. Terrorists are exploiting the humanitarian
space and its associated civilian objects. These groups,
understanding the humanitarian concerns over civilians
who are victims of conflict, utilize the population to
generate finances, disguise their operations and recruit
from traumatized, uprooted refugees and IDPs. The
terrorists must be militarily suppressed. Civilians
must be protected from them. And we must work
on development. We simply lack the ability to maintain
multigenerational humanitarian action as a primary
mode of engagement for the international community.
There are a few actions that we can take
immediately if we have the will and want to show that
African lives do matter. One is to apply the full suite of
sanctions to these groups, their funders, recruiters and
facilitators. We must also take seriously humanitarian
carve-outs. We must stop the self-defeating tension
between countering terrorism that causes humanitarian
emergencies and humanitarian work. Secondly, we
must apply sanctions against individuals and groups
22/33

25/05/2022

that exploit the humanitarian space as a key part of their
strategy and operations, to further their terrorist agenda.
Thirdly, we must ensure that peacekeeping mandates
are fit for purpose to challenge these groups, protect
civilians and strengthen national military and police
competencies. We must make sure that peacekeeping
missions have robust public messaging and counternarrative capabilities against terrorist groups operating
in the same territory.
Military action against these groups is not the sole
solution; it should be accompanied by other supporting
initiatives. But I want to focus on what the Security
Council can do and should do. What is untenable is
dragging our feet, reluctantly using the tools at our
disposal and sending the signal that African lives
and emergencies are of secondary importance when
attacked by Al-Qaida and ISIS groups. We urge all
participants to take action now before further lives are
lost, with the Security Council not taking action.
Ms. Juul (Norway): We welcome the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/2022/381), and I thank today’s
briefers for highlighting the continuing challenges to
humanitarian action, clearly demonstrating that we
must make better use of all tools available to us.
Let me start by focusing on five of these tools.
First, the conclusions adopted by the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
must be implemented. They are important practical
measures both for parties to conflict and for the United
Nations to enhance the protection of children. The
children-in-armed-conflict mandate is crucial, and the
Council should look at enhancing the role of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in prevention.
Secondly, we urge all States to endorse and
implement the Safe Schools Declaration, which would
strengthen the implementation of resolution 2601 (2021)
on the protection of education in conflict.
Thirdly, the Security Council should adopt strong
protection mandates for peacekeeping operations and
political missions, including during transition phases.
And adequate resourcing must be ensured, including
for child protection. The Handbook for United Nations
Field Missions on Preventing and Responding to
Conflict-Related Sexual Violence must be part of
training and used in all missions.
22-36047

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Fourthly, resolution 2286 (2016) on protection
of health care must be implemented. The Health
Care in Danger initiative led by the International
Committee of the Red Cross has identified very useful
recommendations and best practices.
Finally, civilian suffering caused by urban warfare,
such as in Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, is
unacceptable. We welcome the political declaration
proposed by Ireland on the use of explosive weapons
in populated areas. Armed forces must adopt and
implement specific policies and practices to avoid
civilian harm.
Persistent challenges to humanitarian action in
conflict must also be addressed. We call for stronger
support for the life-saving response mounted by local
and international humanitarian organizations and for
female responders to take the leading role. Local women
must participate in the design and implementation
of humanitarian responses. Also, neutral, impartial
and independent humanitarian organizations must be
allowed to carry out their mandates safely and without
interference or politicization.
Dialogue with all parties on the protection of
civilians, conduct of hostilities and urgent humanitarian
access and safe passage is at the core of the humanitarian
mission. Moreover, there must be no impunity for
attacks against humanitarian workers. Ensuring
freedom of expression and access to information and
documentation are essential to this end.
Furthermore, parties to conflict must fulfil their
obligation under international humanitarian law
to allow and facilitate safe, rapid, and unhindered
humanitarian access. In this regard, the Security
Council has determined that denial of humanitarian
access is one of the six grave violations committed
against children in armed conflict.
We also want to recognize that humanitarian
actors must be able to, on a daily basis, negotiate and
maintain access locally. The Centre of Competence on
Humanitarian Negotiation is an initiative on front-line
negotiations, which can improve both access and safety
for humanitarian workers.
Finally, counter-terrorism measures and sanctions
are vital tools for protecting civilians and addressing
threats to international peace and security. At the same
time, we must take all necessary measures to avoid
unintended negative impacts on humanitarian action,

S/PV.9042

including through broad humanitarian exemptions
when appropriate.
The Security Council has advanced the protection
of civilians and preserved humanitarian space through
resolutions, mandates and conclusions in the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. Let this
inspire us to hold ourselves accountable and take
further practical steps to fulfil our commitments. This
demands leadership and political will.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for bringing the issue of protection of
civilians to the Security Council for today’s discussion.
There is hardly any other question more important and
more central to the work of the Council. I thank the
briefers for their updates and detailed information and
for their valuable recommendations.
We recognize the significant progress made in
building an international normative civilian-protection
framework. However, and regrettably, compliance
with the laws and norms that safeguard civilians
has deteriorated along with the safety and security
of civilians caught in armed conflict. Mr. Miliband
reminded us of the shocking number of conflicts ongoing
in the world today. Every conflict brings a devastating
impact on civilians, critical civilian infrastructure,
livelihoods, education, health systems, and food and
water security, particularly when explosive weapons
are used in populated areas. In places with poor or
destroyed health infrastructure, civilians continue to
be at a high risk, not only during but also after conflict.
Conflict-related sexual violence and gender-based
violence are occurring at shocking levels.
In Syria, millions of people continue to be deprived
of their homes and livelihoods as a result of a conflict
that has entered its twelfth year. Schools, hospitals and
other protected objects have been indiscriminately and
deliberately attacked. The huge humanitarian needs
underscore the importance of a sustainable long-term
cross-border humanitarian response to ensure that all
Syrian people in need receive assistance.
In Ukraine, civilians continue to suffer the
consequences of the Russian aggression, which today
has entered its fourth month. More than 14 million
people have been uprooted from their homes and forced
to leave everything behind. More than 200 health-care
facilities, more than 1,600 schools, numerous shelters
and thousands of residential and apartment buildings
have come under continued, deliberate and devastating

22-3604723/33

S/PV.9042

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

attacks with thousands — and mounting — civilian
casualties. These crimes are documented, including in
United Nations reports.
We know that conflict is the main driver of
hunger worldwide. The war in Ukraine is no exception,
but with tremendous magnifying effects. It has seriously
disrupted food systems and markets worldwide, with
sharp price rises everywhere, and exacerbated foodinsecurity challenges for several developing countries.
All parties to armed conflict are responsible for
ensuring that the civilian population is protected.
They must guarantee compliance with international
humanitarian and human rights law; provide safe
passage and ensure humanitarian access; and ensure
protection to civilians without discrimination.
In the face of mounting civilian casualties,
war crimes and crimes against humanity, we must
do everything to ensure accountability by ending
impunity. Perpetrators everywhere must be held to
account. Accountability for violations must be concrete,
systematic and universal. Crimes not punished breed
yet more crimes.
The Council has adopted resolutions calling for
accountability for those who target health-care and
humanitarian workers and critical infrastructure. It
should uphold its decisions. That is its responsibility.
We must support international independent
investigative and prosecution mechanisms, and, when
the Council is blocked or taken hostage, we must seek
other ways. We cannot and must not become familiar
with impunity.
In every conflict, women, children, persons with
disabilities and other marginalized groups suffer
disproportionately. The situation becomes even more
desperate when those working to help civilians in need
are themselves the targets of attacks. We have witnessed
the deliberate denial of humanitarian access, including
through the blocking of the passage and delivery of
humanitarian assistance. Hampering humanitarian aid
workers in their efforts to reach those most vulnerable
and in dire need is tantamount to a death sentence for
those who need it immediately. We should neither accept
nor allow the weaponization of humanitarian aid.
Humanitarian workers save lives; they should be
welcomed, not confronted or threatened; their work
should be facilitated, not complicated or denied; and
24/33

25/05/2022

they should be free to operate safely, everywhere, and
for all those in need.
The best way to protect civilians is, of course, to
prevent and resolve armed conflicts before they escalate.
In the absence of dialogue and political solutions,
weapons take central stage, with the catastrophic
consequences we have seen so many times.
We have the laws and the tools to protect civilians.
We must use them. It requires political will and resolve.
That is what is expected from every one of us, from the
Council and every State Member of the United Nations.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): As today
is Africa Day, I should like to extend warm, festive
greetings to the representatives of the African Member
States present here, to all African countries and to all
of our African brothers and sisters. The independence
and self-reliance of Africa embodied in Africa Day has
become our shared spiritual treasure.
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Rajasingham;
Director-General Mardini; Mr. Miliband; and the
civil-society briefers for their statements. What they
described is both disconcerting and sobering.
Parties to conflict are obligated to protect civilians
under international law. The Council has adopted a
number of resolutions and presidential statements on
this very subject. Many peacekeeping operations have
prioritized the protection of civilians in their mandates.
However, to this day, countless civilians have fallen
victim to the disasters brought about by armed
conflict. That harsh reality serves as a reminder that
the international community must continue to make
unremitting efforts to protect civilians.
First, it is vital to strictly abide by international law
and international rules. It is important to implement
international humanitarian law, including the Geneva
Conventions, resolution 1265 (1999), and other
resolutions on the protection of women, children and
medical workers. All parties to conflict must refrain
from harming innocent civilians or civilian facilities,
prioritize protecting vulnerable groups such as women
and children, and provide safe, unimpeded humanitarian
access. International humanitarian actors should comply
with General Assembly resolution 46/182; adhere to the
principles of neutrality, impartiality and independence;
work together to maintain the humanitarian nature of
aid and avoid politicizing humanitarian assistance. They
22-36047

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.9042

must ensure the safety and security of humanitarian
workers and prevent all acts of violence against them.

protecting civilians, which could lead to greater civilian
suffering due to turmoil and war.

It must be pointed out that double standards
severely undermine efforts to protect civilians. The
protection of civilians applies to all parties and all
armed conflicts, without any distinction, and all forms
of exceptionalism must be abandoned. Those countries
that have engaged in the largest number of foreign wars
and for the longest period of time should the specially
reflect on themselves.

Thirdly, committing to the peaceful settlement of
disputes is key. All parties to conflict must actively
resolve their differences through dialogue, negotiation
and other peaceful means and support all efforts
conducive to the peaceful resolution of crises. Following
the concept of common, comprehensive, cooperative
and sustainable security, and upholding the principle of
the indivisibility of security, all countries need to work
together to build a balanced, effective and sustainable
security architecture and strive to create a peaceful and
stable international environment. The Council should
earnestly assume its primary duty for the maintenance
of international peace and security, facilitate the
political settlement of hotspot issues and bring peace
and hope to people in conflict-affected areas.

Secondly, following a membership-owned and
membership-led approach, Member States bear
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians.
The international community should focus on both the
current reality and the long-term future and provide
targeted assistance to the countries concerned so as to
strengthen their capacity in the protection of civilians.
The Council should respond to the appeals made by the
Governments of the countries concerned and regional
organizations, especially the African Union, and
adjust arms embargoes in the light of developments,
so as to create favourable conditions for the countries
concerned to assume their primary responsibility for
the protection of civilians.
The arbitrary freezing and diversion of foreign
exchange reserves and the organized theft of energy
and agricultural resources by some countries have not
only deprived the countries concerned of life-saving
monies for relaunching development but have indirectly
taken away valuable resources for humanitarian aid.
The international community should jointly urge those
countries to immediately stop such actions.

It must be pointed out that the current international
security landscape has become more volatile, with
hegemony and power politics prevailing and cold war
thinking and confrontational ideology rising. That will
bring more challenges to efforts to protect civilians.
We urge the countries concerned to stop creating
divisions and geopolitical confrontation around the
world, including in the Asia-Pacific, stop drawing
demarcation lines based on ideology, and stop coercing
other countries to take sides.

The civilian protection mandate of United Nations
peacekeeping operations should be realistic and
feasible. It is important to closely cooperate with the
countries concerned in the implementation process,
fully guarantee their resources and capacity, make
full use of good offices and mediation as a means of
implementation, and only use force as a last resort.

Fourthly, pursuing development is a top priority.
Poverty and underdevelopment are major root causes
of conflict. Owing to the impact of the coronavirus
disease and geopolitical factors, a global food and
energy crisis and a global financial crisis are looming.
Global poverty-reduction efforts have encountered
new challenges, and developing countries are facing
greater needs. Developed countries must abide by their
commitment to allocate 0.7 per cent of their national
income to official development assistance and provide
tangible assistance for developing countries to achieve
sustainable development.

The efforts made to protect civilians should
not be denied just because there have been tragic
cases of massive civilian deaths owing to ineffective
international intervention. Denying the ownership and
leadership of Member States would open up a Pandora’s
box and make it convenient for a few countries to
interfere in the internal affairs of other countries, or
even bring about regime change under the pretext of

This is a time when the development and
humanitarian needs of a large number of developing
countries are rising sharply, while certain developed
countries are experiencing a steady decline in funding
for official development assistance and have even taken
decisions to drastically cut such assistance. We call on
the countries concerned to heed the call of SecretaryGeneral Guterres and reconsider their decisions.

22-3604725/33

S/PV.9042

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates): I thank you
and your team, Madam President, for having organized
this important open debate, and we thank the briefers
for their informative presentations.
As we have just heard, despite significant progress
over the years in the applicable legal framework, the
global state of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict remains bleak. Civilians continue to pay the
price of armed conflict, with high levels of death and
injury and disproportionate impacts on women and
children. Sexual violence continues to be used as a
tactic of war, along with torture and terror. Indeed,
97 per cent of the recorded victims in 2021 were women
and girls.
For the first time in history, the number of forcibly
displaced persons has now passed 100 million. Terrorist
groups have continued to deliberately target civilians,
including homes, schools, hospitals and even our
natural environment. That is unacceptable.
The scale of the challenges facing humanitarian
efforts is also alarming. That includes severe limitations
on humanitarian activities, access constraints and
a disturbing number of humanitarian actors killed,
injured or kidnapped. The Council cannot fail those
serving our most vulnerable. We therefore welcome the
special focus of this debate on humanitarian access.
In the light of the human suffering across armed
conflicts, the United Arab Emirates would like to
reiterate its commitment to protecting civilians and
calls on all parties to conflict to comply fully with
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
That includes their obligation to allow and facilitate
rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access as well as to
protect humanitarian workers.
We would like to make the following recommendations.
First, we must consider how we can adjust the
mandates of peace operations to enhance the vital role
that they play in protecting civilians. Properly addressing
threats to civilians requires a comprehensive approach.
In designing the mandates of peace operations, we
should consider whether and how they can foster a
secure environment to enable humanitarian assistance.
We should also give appropriate consideration to
unarmed approaches to complement the fundamental
physical protection provided by peacekeepers. For
example, in order to tackle the root causes of conflict,
including misinformation and hateful narratives, peace
26/33

25/05/2022

operations could be mandated to promote local dialogue,
reconciliation and peaceful coexistence among
community members. Additionally, we should seek
to strengthen outreach activities within each country
context as well as to ensure effective coordination with
the rest of the United Nations presence in the country.
Secondly, States and the private sector must
redouble their efforts to detect, assess and respond to
online misinformation, disinformation and hate speech,
so as to effectively protect civilians and humanitarian
workers. That can be done through fact-checking,
content-moderation tools, regulations and further
research on how misinformation and disinformation
proliferate online.
The scale of online misinformation, disinformation
and hate speech and the speed at which they proliferate
has deadly consequences. It exacerbates conflict,
put civilians at risk and complicates protection. We
are deeply concerned at the fact that the distortion
of information related to humanitarian needs has
weakened the ability of humanitarian workers to
conduct their operations. We are also alarmed at the
distorted information on social media that questions
the neutrality of impartial humanitarian workers, thus
endangering their safety and threatening their access
to those in need. Today we reaffirm the importance
of protecting both online and offline humanitarian
workers, upholding humanitarian principles.
Thirdly, we must continue our efforts to ensure that
the sanctions measures that the Council imposes do
not impede humanitarian actors in the undertaking of
their essential work or prevent humanitarian assistance
from reaching those in need. That is important in
both the design and implementation of sanctions. In
practical terms, that means considering humanitarian
carve-outs that exclude the application of sanctions
to humanitarian activities. We should also consider
requesting independent evaluations on a case-by-case
basis, for example, by the groups of experts assigned to
sanctions committees to report on the impact of sanctions
measures on humanitarian operations. That could help
the Council to appropriately adjust its sanctions to
prevent adverse humanitarian effects. Moreover, while
listing those responsible for obstructing humanitarian
assistance, the Council could use sanctions as leverage
and send a clear message to support humanitarian
efforts and ensure accountability.
22-36047

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Finally, it may be stating the obvious, but it bears
repeating that the most effective way to protect civilians
is to prevent and resolve conflict, as was stated by many
Council members. The United Arab Emirates, from its
side, is committed to redoubling all efforts that support
political processes and dialogue to that end.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to express Mexico’s
condolences to the families of the victims and to the
Government of the United States in connection with the
shooting that took place yesterday in Uvalde, Texas, a
community with a large population of Mexican origin.
I thank Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Mr. Robert
Mardini, Mr. David Miliband and Ms. Rachel Boketa
for their outstanding briefings.
Once again, the Secretary-General’s report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2022/381)
reflects very worrying trends. The continuing attacks
on humanitarian personnel and civilian infrastructure,
including critical facilities, as well as the use of
explosives in urban areas, the widespread availability
of weapons and the effects of unilateral sanctions are
extremely alarming challenges. They are compounded
by the additional challenges that the coronavirus
disease pandemic has posed in terms of the protection
of the civilian population in recent years.
The war in Ukraine represents a new challenge
in terms of protecting civilians. That is why, together
with France, we promoted initiatives to address the
humanitarian challenges arising from the conflict,
resulting in the adoption of resolution A/ES-11/2. We
take the opportunity of this debate to once again stress
the need for an immediate ceasefire.
We heard the delegation of the Russian Federation
say that their country has contributed to the
development of international humanitarian law. Indeed,
that is true. The first treaty in that area, known as the
Saint Petersburg Declaration of 1868, prohibited the
inflicting of unnecessary suffering on parties to armed
conflict and constitutes the antecedent for the principle
according to which death is not inevitable and that the
legitimate use of force must be aimed at weakening the
enemy, never at its annihilation.
And how could we forget the legacy of the famous
Russian jurist Fyodor Fyodorovich Martens, author
of a central tenet of contemporary international
humanitarian law. Let us hope that those antecedents

S/PV.9042

will inspire all of those who are involved in the
56 ongoing conflicts.
This new conflict in Ukraine comes in addition
to the long list of situations outlined in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, which include the cases of Syria,
Yemen, Afghanistan, Myanmar and the Horn of Africa,
where prolonged cycles of violence continue and whose
main victims are always civilians, disproportionately
affecting women, girls and boys, as well as people
with disabilities.
The number of people affected by those conflicts
has been multiplied even further owing to the food
crisis, which has increased the number of people in
situations of food insecurity, including famine. I should
like to highlight some of the issues of greatest concern
to my delegation.
First, it is paradoxical, if not absurd, that in a world
where the pandemic is still ongoing, attacks on medical
and humanitarian personnel persist, whether through
kidnapping or other forms of targeted attacks, which
in 2021 alone claimed the lives of 219 medical workers.
In 14 countries, more than 143 incidents against
humanitarian workers were recorded in the same year.
Meanwhile, more than 3 billion people still had not
received a first dose of vaccine by the end of last year.
How can we achieve universal vaccination when those
in charge of administering it are attacked?
It is undeniable that there is a crisis in the
implementation of the obligations derived from the
norms of international humanitarian law and the
resolutions of the Council. The Council plays a central
role as the custodian of respect for international
humanitarian law, together with the commendable
work carried out day after day by the International
Committee of the Red Cross.
It is not enough to make calls for compliance. It
is necessary to reinforce measures at the internal level
to ensure their implementation, such as the adoption
of national legislation, military manuals and ongoing
training. That requires working hand in hand with
civil-society organizations.
It is also key to combat the politicization of
humanitarian activities and disinformation, as has
been mentioned here. Similarly, it must be ensured that
unilateral sanctions, as well as measures to combat
terrorism, do not impact humanitarian activities or
violate international humanitarian law.

22-3604727/33

S/PV.9042

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

On the other hand, the wide availability of weapons,
including small arms and light weapons, as a result of
negligent practices in the arms and ammunition trade
as well as of their illegal trade, fuels conflicts and the
spiral of violence. For that reason, last year Mexico
promoted the adoption of resolution 2616 (2021), which
seeks to strengthen the control of that type of weapon
in a cross-cutting manner. The implementation of the
resolution will strengthen control and help reduce the
possibility of weapons falling into the wrong hands.
Likewise, the use of explosive weapons in urban
or densely populated areas remains a worrying trend
given its major impact on the civilian population. Such
weapons have excessive and indiscriminate effects,
causing serious injury, long-term mental-health effects
and damage to civilian infrastructure such as medical
facilities, water installations or schools. Mexico
therefore is actively participating in the consultations
under way to achieve a political declaration on that issue.
Finally, it is not enough to point out the serious
violations committed against the civilian population
in armed conflict. As these constitute war crimes
and crimes against humanity, it is imperative that
such acts not go unpunished. For accountability
to become a reality, there must be consequences
for those responsible. In line with the principle of
complementarity, the Council has the power to refer
situations to the International Criminal Court.
In that respect, the Franco-Mexican initiative on
the restriction of the veto in cases of mass atrocities
could represent a first step to avert such atrocities.
We invite those that have not yet done so to join the
105 States that have already signed up to that initiative.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collar of the
microphone will prompt speakers to bring their remarks
to a close after four minutes.
I now give the floor to the State Secretary at the
Federal Foreign Office of Germany.
Ms. Baumann (Germany): I thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this important meeting. I
also thank the briefers for their enriching contributions.
Russia’s unprovoked and illegal aggression against
Ukraine, the horrible crimes committed in Bucha and
in many other places and the siege of Mariupol all are
28/33

25/05/2022

grim reminders of the fact that it is first and foremost
civilians who suffer when international law and
international humanitarian law are blatantly violated.
The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights has recorded
more than 8,000 civilian casualties so far, but the
real number is much higher. Many of them are the
victims of Russia’s indiscriminate use of explosive
weapons in populated areas, such as shelling from
heavy artillery as well as indiscriminate missile and
air strikes. Summary executions, sexual violence and
enforced disappearances, including of public officials,
journalists and civil-society activists, violate the basic
rules of international humanitarian law.
We all have the haunting pictures of Russia’s victims
in Mariupol, Kharkiv and Bucha in mind — women,
children and elderly persons. Equally haunting is the
fate of civilians in Syria, in Yemen, in South Sudan,
in the Congo, in Afghanistan, in Myanmar, in Ethiopia
and, unfortunately, in so many other places.
More than 70 years after the adoption of the
Geneva Conventions, it is high time to act. I will make
three points.
First, we need full accountability for all violations
of international humanitarian law. We must use all
instruments at hand to establish accountability for
Russian perpetrators in Ukraine at the International
Criminal Court and in the Human Rights Council and
its Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on Ukraine. National investigations will support those
efforts, and Germany is proud to contribute to all of
them. All perpetrators must be held accountable,
wherever their crimes were committed.
Secondly, we need to strengthen the humanitarian
space. We need safe, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian
access and safety for humanitarian workers. The
steep rise in the number of health workers killed in
armed conflict is alarming. Along with France, we
have launched the call for action for the protection of
humanitarian space and invite others to join that call.
Thirdly, we need to put survivors’ rights and needs
first. That is true for children pressed into armed forces
and for victims of sexual and gender-based violence,
in line with the women and peace and security agenda
and resolution 2467 (2019), introducing a survivorcentred approach.
22-36047

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Last but not least, United Nations peacekeeping
remains crucial for protecting civilians in many
conflicts. That is why Germany has just decided to
continue its significant contribution to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
Germany is also supporting the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative. We attach particular importance
to two instruments: first, digital transformation to
achieve real protection-of-civilians gains on the
ground, and, secondly, supporting MINUSMA’s work
on conflict-related sexual violence.
Effectively implementing protection mandates
remains a major challenge, but civilians count on the
Blue Helmets, in Mali and in so many other conflicts.
I would like to close by thanking the courageous
men and women in the field who do everything to
help civilians in need and too often risk their lives by
doing so.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Keçeli (Turkey): At the outset, we wish to
express our condolences to the families of the victims
of the shooting that took place yesterday in Texas.
We thank you, Madam President, for convening
this annual open debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. It is indeed a sorry reflection of the
global protection crisis that we must continue to speak
on this most basic tenet of international law.
Today 100 million people are on the move, forcibly
displaced from their homes. They are innocent civilians
fleeing persecution and conflict. We have seen mass
graves in Tarhuna, Libya; starvation used as a weapon
of war in Yemen; and violence perpetrated by security
forces since the coup in Myanmar.
The war in Ukraine has resulted in one of the
starkest humanitarian crises of our time. Attacks on
Ukrainian civilians have resulted in the disruption of
agricultural and food supply chains, showing the world
that an attack against one civilian is indeed an attack
against all of humankind.
And of course, the war in Syria rages on. Just last
month, footage from 2013 provided detailed evidence
of horrific crimes committed against civilians in
the Tadamon neighbourhood of Damascus. In Idlib,
civilians and civilian infrastructure are routinely

S/PV.9042

targeted by the regime and its backers. In Al-Atarib, a
hospital was attacked, killing civilians and cutting off
vital health-care services for the community. The attack
on the Arshani pumping station interrupted access to
water for a quarter of a million civilians. The regime
deliberately deprives people in the Al-Bab region of
drinking water and water for agriculture.
We also wish to remind the Security Council
once again of the atrocities committed by the terrorist
organization Kurdistan Workers’ Party/People’s
Protection Units and its offshoot, the so-called Syrian
Democratic Forces, for it bears repeating. They
attacked Al-Shifa hospital in Afrin. They continue
to abduct and forcibly recruit children in Syria. They
release Da’esh detainees for their own financial gain.
They indiscriminately attack civilian areas, using
mortar shelling, rocket launchers and car bombs. They
prevent civilians, including Kurds and Yazidis, from
returning home. They have even cut off electrical
power in Al-Dirbasiyah, disrupting the Allouk water
station. Those who support terrorist organizations,
including in Syria, must cease their association with
immediate effect.
It is clear that the status quo will not suffice. We
need a renewed and principled approach to protecting
civilians in conflict. The international community
and the Security Council must step up. Unhindered
humanitarian access is a core element of protecting
civilians in conflict and an essential element of the
maintenance of international peace stability. In that
context, we renew our call for the extension of the
mandate of United Nations cross-border humanitarian
operations to Syria.
We hope that, by the time of next year’s open debate
on the protection of civilians, some of the 100 million
people who have been forcibly displaced will have
returned home and restarted their lives in safety. We
also hope that the perpetrators of all attacks against
civilians will have been brought to justice and held
accountable for their actions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Larbaoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the presidency of the
Security Council for convening this open debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict and for
its sound conduct of the work of the Security Council
during the month of May.

22-3604729/33

S/PV.9042

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2022/381), in which he clarifies that
civilians are still suffering from the scourge of armed
conflict and stresses the need for greater efforts to
provide them with the necessary protection. We look
forward to more comprehensive reports covering all
conflict situations.
In that context, we welcome the focus on the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to those in need,
given that malnutrition is one of the side effects of
conflict and that preventing access to humanitarian
assistance and using hunger as a war tactic constitute
gross violations of international humanitarian law and
the Geneva Conventions.
We also believe that the current humanitarian access
crisis is a reflection of the already dire situation based
on the increased humanitarian needs resulting from
our collective failures. Regrettably, the international
community has failed to find political solutions to
put an end to armed conflicts. We have witnessed
the deterioration of the humanitarian situation in
recent times due to the international circumstances
surrounding the coronavirus disease pandemic, which
disrupted production, supply and distribution chains,
thereby exacerbating the suffering of those trapped in
armed conflict situations. Civilians are also suffering
due to further political instability and turmoil, all
of which have direct and destructive impacts on the
protection of civilians.
My country appreciates the leading role of the
Security Council in the protection of civilians,
especially following the adoption of resolution 1265
(1999), which gave top priority to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. That resolution is one of the
pillars of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
civilians in conflict situations are usually subjected to
violations of their dignity and safety, as well as threats
to their life.
My country also stresses the need to provide
humanitarian assistance to all those in need, while
ensuring full respect for international humanitarian
law and relevant United Nations resolutions, in
particular General Assembly resolution 46/182, which
provides for the principles of humanity, neutrality and
impartiality and the need to respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States in line with the Charter
of the United Nations. That would ensure the best
protection for civilians in situations of armed conflict.
30/33

25/05/2022

In that regard, I would like to highlight the
following essential elements, as set out in the report of
the Secretary-General.
First, we must ensure full respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
which are cornerstones for guaranteeing the delivery
of humanitarian assistance to those in need. In that
vein, we stress the importance of adopting a working
mechanism that automatically informs the Security
Council of any gross and documented violation of
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
Secondly, all those who obstruct the delivery of
support to people in need must be held accountable,
as delays in, or reductions of, food supplies and other
basic needs would exacerbate the situation.
Thirdly, we must adopt a comprehensive approach
whereby all efforts at all levels aim to facilitate
coordination and communication in order to ensure
the delivery of the necessary humanitarian assistance.
In that regard, we call for the participation of all
actors in considering how best to respond to those in
need and taking decisions related to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.
Fourthly, mobilizing the necessary capabilities and
assistance is crucial in order to meet the growing needs
of civilians in conflict areas. In that connection, we
stress the need for all donors to meet their pledges so
that the necessary assistance can be provided and the
priorities of international relief work can be met.
Fifthly, economic development is the most
important requirement for meeting the basic needs of
civilians. We call for the adoption of an approach to
development that reduces the reliance of individuals on
assistance and instead enhances their livelihoods.
In conclusion, all proposals on the protection of
civilians in conflict situations and the facilitation of
the delivery of humanitarian assistance will remain
only partial solutions if we do not also address the
root causes of conflicts and find sustainable solutions
for them. We must ensure the stability and safety of
States and promote sustainable development in all its
environmental, economic and social aspects.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
22-36047

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Mr. Eldandarawy (Egypt): I would like to express
our appreciation to the United States for its presidency
of the Security Council this month and its convening
of this timely annual open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. I also thank the briefers for
the informative analyses they provided to the Council.
We are holding this open debate at a time when
we continue to witness a concerning global increase
in armed conflicts, which has vast implications for
the protection of civilians and adds further challenges
to the application of international humanitarian law.
As a result, long-term challenges continue, including
displacement, food insecurity and obstacles to
accessing water, health care, education and other
essential services, which further burden the plight of
civilians. Unfortunately, women and children continue
to be especially severely impacted by the negative
effects of such instability.
The recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/381) further illustrates the challenges
associated with armed conflict, including the continued
loss of civilian lives, increasing food and energy
prices and further pressures on supply chains, which
were already impacted as a result of the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
The report also highlights that medical workers
and facilities continue to come under attack, which
has led to the deaths of health-care workers and the
destruction and damage of health-care facilities. That is
unfortunately taking place at a time when the pandemic
continues to have grave effects on conflict-stricken
countries and efforts aimed at ending armed conflicts.
It is therefore essential that we continue to advocate
for the importance of ensuring safe access to, and the
delivery of, health care in situations of armed conflict
and to protect humanitarian and medical personnel and
peacekeepers during such conflicts so as to ensure that
they continue to operate towards the fulfilment of their
mandates and contribute to the protection of civilians.
As such, Egypt worked with other Security Council
members in 2016 to introduce resolution 2286 (2016),
on the protection of medical personnel and facilities
in armed conflicts, which was adopted unanimously.
That important resolution draws on existing legal
frameworks that bind parties to armed conflicts and
condemns violations of international humanitarian law.
It also urges Members States to adopt practical measures

S/PV.9042

to prevent the occurrence of such violations and calls
for ensuring unimpeded access to medical care.
The continuation of armed conflicts highlights the
need for a comprehensive approach that addresses the
immense challenges involved, taking into account the
root causes of such conflicts and considering methods
to enhance the protection of civilians on a longer-term
basis, including by promoting sustainable development,
job creation, economic growth, poverty eradication
and the provision of sustainable and effective political
solutions to conflicts, as well as ensuring that they do
not reoccur. That can materialize only by recognizing
the need for enhancing regional and international
stability and taking collective action to counter the
threats posed by international terrorism to already
volatile regions.
The role of non-State actors in armed conflicts
and targeting civilians adds further challenges to the
prolongation of conflicts, threatening regional and
international stability and increasing the risks of the
smuggling of weapons and other illicit materials.
That reflects the continued importance of enhancing
the role of relevant State institutions and the national
mechanisms responsible for addressing conflict in order
to promote stability and adherence to international law.
Moreover, peacekeeping operations continue to
play an instrumental role in the protection of civilians
by providing assistance, capacity-building and
strengthening State institutions, while focusing on
promoting national ownership.
Egypt continues to be a major contributor to
peacekeeping operations, in recognition of their
valuable role in protecting civilians, advancing stability
and assisting countries in transitioning from conflict to
peace. It is therefore important to provide peacekeeping
operations with adequate human and material resources
and to meet all commitments to ensure they are provided
with sufficient resources.
In conclusion, it is imperative that the international
community continue its efforts towards promoting
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. As the
Secretary-General’s report mentions, the most effective
way to protect civilians is to prevent the outbreak of
armed conflicts and settle them peacefully. The
growing global challenges further complicate the
plight of civilians, which necessitates a joint effort to
alleviate their suffering and bring about development,
stability and economic growth. For its part, Egypt will

22-3604731/33

S/PV.9042

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

continue to call for the promotion of peace and stability
and advocate for advancing the protection of civilians
within the United Nations multilateral system.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland): I am honoured to take
the floor on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict, a crossregional network of 27 Member States.
We thank the United States for organizing this
important debate, and the briefers for their contributions.
As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/381)
highlights, the global state of the protection of civilians
is grim. In Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Ethiopia, Mali, Syria, Ukraine, Yemen
and too many other places, civilians suffer most
from the consequences of armed conflict. That must
change — and it can change only as a result of strict
respect for international humanitarian law on the part
of all parties to armed conflict in all circumstances.
We would like to particularly highlight the
importance of incorporating and implementing
international humanitarian law at the national level.
Fundamental services such as medical care for the
wounded and sick are hampered or willingly attacked
in many contexts. The Group of Friends recalls the
provisions of international humanitarian law and
resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection of the medical
mission, both of which must be rigorously implemented
by all parties to armed conflict.
Furthermore, with the trend that saw more
conflict-driven hunger last year, more efforts are
urgently needed to prevent and alleviate hunger in
situations of armed conflict, in line with international
humanitarian law, resolution 2417 (2018), on conflict
and hunger, and resolution 2573 (2021), on critical
civilian infrastructure.
In addition, the number of forcibly displaced
persons is at a record high, and almost two thirds of
them are internally displaced persons. We therefore
welcome the development of the Secretary-General’s
Action Agenda on Internal Displacement and encourage
all relevant actors to implement its recommendations in
close consultations with the Member States concerned.
In some contexts, entire generations of children
are growing up without ever having lived in peace. The
32/33

25/05/2022

Group of Friends calls on all actors to prevent grave
violations against children’s rights and ensure their
specific protection needs. In that regard, we welcome
last year’s adoption of resolution 2601 (2021), which
places particular focus on safeguarding the right
to education.
Conflict-related sexual violence affects children,
women and men, with 97 per cent of recorded victims
being women and girls. The stigmatization of survivors
must end, so that survivors feel able to come forward,
access services and seek accountability. In that regard,
strengthening judicial systems is also essential.
Preventive measures to ensure that such horrible acts
do not recur are paramount.
The Group of Friends stresses the importance of
respecting international humanitarian law and the
need to enhance the protection of civilians, including
from the humanitarian impacts that could arise when
explosive weapons are used in populated areas. The
Group of Friends takes note of the ongoing consultations
led by Ireland.
Turning to peace operations, we acknowledge
the important efforts made to improve the protection
of civilians by peacekeeping operations through the
Action for Peacekeeping and Action for Peacekeeping
Plus initiatives. Furthermore, we emphasize that
transitions to other forms of United Nations presence
require a particular focus on the protection of civilians.
We call on the Council, the United Nations and Member
States to ensure that protection is anchored as a priority
in the early planning and implementation of transitions
in order to avoid gaps in the security of civilians.
This year’s report describes the overlapping
challenges for humanitarian operations. I would like to
stress two points in that regard.
First, the security of humanitarian actors and
their assets must be improved. That is one of the most
important prerequisites for ensuring rapid, safe and
unimpeded access for all those in need.
Secondly, the non-criminalization of contact with
all parties to armed conflicts, including all armed
groups, with the aim of negotiating access and respect
for international humanitarian law, is paramount.
Finally, we echo the Secretary-General’s
recommendations contained in the report and strongly
encourage the Council, Member States and the United
Nations to implement them.
22-36047

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

(spoke in French)
Let me add two points in my national capacity and
endorse the following words of the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross,
“The very essence of humanitarian work and the
Geneva Conventions is that neutral and impartial
organizations can act in times of war”.
In upholding that affirmation, Switzerland would
first like to emphasize that there is ample evidence that
sanctions and counter-terrorism measures can have
unintended negative consequences for humanitarian
efforts. As the adoption of resolution 2615 (2021), on
Afghanistan, confirms, where there is political will,
there are solutions to mitigate that challenge, such as
full humanitarian exemptions. We call on the Council
to include such exemptions in all sanctions regimes and
counter-terrorism measures, and on Member States to
implement them accordingly.

S/PV.9042

Secondly,
climate
change,
environmental
degradation and armed conflict are mutually reinforcing
and cause a negative spiral that threatens the safety
and security of the affected population. The adverse
impact of climate change can also prolong ongoing
conflicts. It not only increases the number of civilian
victims but also poses a threat to long-term peace and
development efforts. Those issues must be addressed
comprehensively and without delay.
As a candidate to the Security Council, Switzerland
is committed to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and the full implementation of international
humanitarian law. We work to be a plus for peace and a
plus for human dignity in times of war.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
remaining on the list for this meeting. Given the lateness
of the hour, with the concurrence of the members of the
Security Council, I intend to suspend the meeting until
2.15 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

22-3604733/33
