United Nations

A/RES/60/137

General Assembly

Distr.: General
2 February 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 64

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 16 December 2005
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/60/503)]

60/137. United Nations Development Fund for Women
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/125 of 14 December 1984, by which it established
the United Nations Development Fund for Women as a separate and identifiable
entity in autonomous association with the United Nations Development Programme,
as well as its resolution 56/130 of 19 December 2001,
Reaffirming the Beijing Platform for Action adopted by the Fourth World
Conference on Women, 1 which recognizes the special role of the Fund in the
promotion of the economic and political empowerment of women, and the outcome
of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly entitled “Women 2000:
gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first century”, 2
Welcoming the declaration adopted by the Commission on the Status of
Women at its forty-ninth session, 3 which emphasizes that implementation of the
Beijing Platform for Action is essential to achieving the Millennium Development
Goals,
Welcoming also the commitment of Heads of State and Government gathered
at the 2005 World Summit to promote gender equality and the empowerment of
women, as set out in the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 4
Reaffirming the primary and essential role of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, as well as the central role of the Commission on the
Status of Women, in promoting the advancement of women and gender equality,
Reaffirming also all relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Commission on the Status of Women, as well
as Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000 on women and
peace and security,
_______________
1

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
2
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
3
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum
(E/2005/27 and Corr.1), chap. I, sect. A; see also Economic and Social Council decision 2005/232.
4
See resolution 60/1.

05-49582

A/RES/60/137

Recognizing the importance of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women, 5 and noting that the number of States parties to
the Convention is among the highest for human rights conventions,
Welcoming the contributions that the Fund has made in supporting initiatives
of Member States, United Nations organizations and non-governmental
organizations to formulate and implement activities that promote gender equality
and the empowerment of women,
Recalling its resolution 59/250 of 22 December 2004 on the triennial
comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the United
Nations system, and stressing the need for all organizations of the United Nations
development system to implement their global, regional and country-level activities
in accordance with their mandates,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council agreed conclusions 1997/2 of
18 July 1997 6 and Council resolution 2004/4 of 7 July 2004 on mainstreaming the
gender perspective into all policies and programmes in the United Nations system,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 2005/54 of 27 July
2005 entitled “United Nations Development Fund for Women”,
Noting the importance of the work of the Consultative Committee on the
United Nations Development Fund for Women in policy and programme directions,
as stipulated in the annex to resolution 39/125,
Welcomes the note by the Secretary-General on the activities of the
1.
United Nations Development Fund for Women, containing a results-focused report
on progress in implementing its multi-year funding framework 2004–2007; 7
2.
Commends the focus by the Fund on strategic programmes in its four
core areas of work, namely, reducing feminized poverty, ending violence against
women, halting and reversing the spread of HIV/AIDS and achieving gender
equality in democratic governance and in post-conflict countries, and on supporting
innovative programming in the context of the Beijing Platform for Action1 and
commitments made at the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly2 and
at the forty-ninth session of the Commission on the Status of Women; 8
3.
Notes with appreciation the increased synergy between the United
Nations Development Fund for Women and other funds, programmes and
organizations of the United Nations system, as well as the Office of the Special
Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, the Division for the
Advancement of Women of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the
Secretariat and the International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women, and calls upon those entities to continue their
collaborative efforts;
Calls upon all organizations of the United Nations system, within their
4.
mandates, to mainstream a gender perspective and to pursue gender equality in their
country programmes, planning instruments and sector-wide programmes and to
_______________
5

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/52/3/Rev.1),
chap. IV, para. 4.
7
A/60/274.
8
See E/CN.6/2005/2 and Corr.1.
6

2

A/RES/60/137

articulate specific country-level goals and targets in this field in accordance with
national development strategies;
5.
Encourages the Fund to continue to contribute to the harmonization and
coordination processes of United Nations reform through, inter alia, strengthened
partnerships with other funds, programmes and organizations of the United Nations
system and through the promotion of development, including technical cooperation,
women’s human rights and a gender-equality perspective in the policies, guidelines
and tools developed by the United Nations Development Group;
Emphasizes the importance of continuing grass-roots work, and, in order
6.
to achieve better coordination with other United Nations bodies, encourages the
participation of the Fund in relevant high-level inter-agency coordination
mechanisms;
Recognizes the efforts of the Fund and other United Nations funds and
7.
programmes to strengthen the gender-equality and women’s empowerment
perspective in formulation, implementation and evaluation processes related to
national development plans and programmes aimed at eradicating poverty, including
poverty reduction strategies, the Millennium Development Goals and the United
Nations development assistance frameworks where they exist, and urges the Fund to
support these processes;
Encourages the Fund to support strengthened and coordinated action on
8.
gender equality at the country level, in collaboration with the resident coordinator
system, including by advocating and building the capacity of gender theme groups
within United Nations country teams;
Urges the United Nations development system to avail itself of the
9.
technical and coordination experience of the Fund on gender issues while
undertaking efforts to implement gender mainstreaming internally;
10. Encourages Member States and United Nations organizations to explore
with the Fund possible innovative representational arrangements, including through
the use of seconded staff, project offices and other means;
11. Notes the activities undertaken by the Fund in follow-up to resolution
56/130, including activities relating to the impact of armed conflict on women and
the role of women in peacebuilding, and the support it provides for the participation
of women in peace processes, and urges the Fund to increase its efforts and enhance
its capacity to support a coordinated approach of the United Nations system to
strengthen gender justice in peacebuilding and post-conflict recovery and
reconstruction, including cooperation, as appropriate, with the Department of
Political Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat
as well as Member States, regional organizations and other United Nations partners;
12. Emphasizes the importance of the Trust Fund in Support of Actions to
Eliminate Violence against Women, established by General Assembly resolution
50/166 of 22 December 1995, as a critical response to the deep concern expressed at
the fifty-ninth session of the Assembly regarding the persistence of violence and
crimes against women in all parts of the world, and urges all Governments, nongovernmental organizations and the public and private sectors to consider
contributing or increasing contributions to the Trust Fund;

3

A/RES/60/137

13. Encourages the Fund to continue to support the gender-equality and
women’s empowerment goals and targets of the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS adopted by the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth special session, 9 by
working closely with women who are affected by or infected with HIV/AIDS to
develop their capacity to influence programmes and policies, building on its
partnerships within the United Nations system, in particular with the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS;
14. Also encourages the Fund to respond to country requests for the
development or strengthening of accountability mechanisms for gender equality,
including by building the capacity of Governments to undertake gender-responsive
budget analysis and to use sex-disaggregated data as a basis for gender-responsive
public policy formulation;
15. Welcomes the role of the Fund in promoting the strategic importance of
the empowerment of women in all of the regions in which it operates, and notes
with appreciation the enhanced programme activities of the Fund in the African
region;
16. Encourages the Fund to strengthen cooperation with Member States and
with United Nations programmes, funds and relevant agencies, as well as nongovernmental organizations, and to provide assistance in order to implement the
commitments on gender equality contained in the 2005 World Summit Outcome;4
17. Also encourages the Fund to continue to assist Governments in
implementing the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women,5 in order to advance gender equality at all levels, including by
reinforcing the cooperation between Governments and civil society, especially
women’s organizations, and by supporting efforts to follow up, as appropriate, the
concluding comments of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women;
18. Recognizes with appreciation the increases in core contributions and,
particularly, non-core contributions to the Fund made by Member States, private
organizations and foundations, whose increased contributions demonstrate their
commitment to the issues on which the Fund is working;
19. Invites, accordingly, Member States, non-governmental organizations and
members of private organizations and foundations that have contributed to the Fund
to continue to contribute and to consider increasing their financial contributions, and
urges others that have not yet done so to consider contributing to the Fund to enable
it to reach the targets for core resources in its multi-year funding framework.
64th plenary meeting
16 December 2005

_______________
9

4

Resolution S-26/2, annex.
