United Nations

S/PV.6389

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6389th meeting
Thursday, 23 September 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gül . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Turkey)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Fischer
Mr. Silajdžić
Mr. Amorim
Mr. Wen Jiabao
Mr. Kouchner
Mr. Bongo Ondimba
Mr. Kan
Mr. Sleiman
Ms. Espinosa Cantellano
Mr. Jonathan
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Museveni
Mr. Hague
Ms. Clinton

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Ensuring the Security Council’s effective role in maintaining international
peace and security
Letter dated 1 September 2010 from the Permanent Representative of Turkey
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/461)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-54839 (E)

*1054839*

S/PV.6389

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Ensuring the Security Council’s effective role in
maintaining international peace and security
Letter dated 1 September 2010 from the
Permanent Representative of Turkey to the
United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/2010/461)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
distinguished Heads of State and Government, the
Secretary-General, Ministers and other distinguished
representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence is an affirmation of the
importance of the subject matter to be addressed.
The Security Council summit will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw Council members’ attention to
document S/2010/461, containing a letter dated
1 September 2010 from the Permanent Representative
of Turkey to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
Before I give the floor to the Secretary-General,
allow me to say a few words on the rationale behind
this important meeting. First of all, it is not very often
that the Security Council convenes at such a high level,
so I wish to express my gratitude to all of you for
accepting my invitation and attending this meeting. I
truly believe that our gathering today represents an
opportunity for an exchange of views on the evolving
security environment and the effectiveness of the tools
available to the Security Council.
In this regard, we have to admit that the world
has changed dramatically since the foundation of the
United Nations in 1945. The core threat that the United
Nations was created to prevent — war between
States — has now been overtaken by new regional and
global security threats. Indeed, in recent decades the
Security Council has been preoccupied with extremely
complex issues, such as intra-State conflicts, failed
States, the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, terrorism and transnational organized

2

crime. Within this new strategic environment, security
and peace can no longer be maintained by military
means alone. Historical, social, cultural, political,
demographic and economic factors are increasingly
entering into play and inform our actions and reactions.
In particular, addressing the complex linkages among
the notions of democracy, development and security
has become a core necessity for sustainable peace.
That, in turn, compels us to adopt a more
comprehensive and cooperative approach to peace and
security.
The Security Council, which has been entrusted
by the United Nations Charter with primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security, should lead by example in this direction. That
is precisely why we wanted to have this summit, in
order to undertake a broad review of the international
security environment and to display a renewed
commitment to dealing with the evolving challenges.
Now, two decades after the cold war and 10 years into
the twenty-first century, is the best time to do that.
Therefore, I am confident that our meeting today
will help us take stock of our actions so far, provide
firm guidance for our future endeavours and lay out a
bold vision for peace and collective security. I hope the
meeting will also provide fresh additional vigour for
the Security Council and enable it to forge ahead in the
maintenance of global peace and security.
At the end of this meeting, I hope we will be able
to give three key messages to the international
community. The first message is about the need for a
comprehensive approach to peace and security. The
operational tools at the Council’s disposal — namely,
preventive diplomacy, peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding — must be used in a coherent and
strategic framework.
The second message should emphasize the need
to constantly adapt our responses and actions in the
face of evolving circumstances.
And the third and final message should underline
the need for new and stronger partnerships among all
major stakeholders — particularly the Security Council,
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council,
the Peacebuilding Commission, regional organizations
and international financial institutions — in meeting
contemporary security challenges. Let me stop here and
start our deliberations.

10-54839

S/PV.6389

I now invite the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to take the floor.

staff who risk their lives every day to improve the lives
of others.

The Secretary-General: I commend the
Government of Turkey for having convened this
Security Council summit and for its focus on
preventing and ending conflict and building peace.

These incremental yet significant changes are
making our engagement in troubled areas more and
more effective. But we must do more. Let me focus on
four critical areas.

Since the end of the cold war, violent conflict has
declined. Success in peacemaking and peacekeeping
has played an important role in this development. Yet,
we still live in a troubled world, with new threats and
flashpoints. Often, when violence breaks out, the world
turns to the United Nations. We are at the centre of
crisis management in hotspots throughout the world.

First, we should move beyond the idea of a clearcut sequence of peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. These tools should be deployed in
integrated fashion, not kept in separate silos. Conflict
seldom follows a tidy path. We must continue to evolve
towards a faster and more flexible architecture of
response that allows us to customize our assistance to
the real and immediate needs on the ground. With
respect to peacekeeping, we will continue to work in
close partnership with the Security Council and others
to advance the New Horizon initiative.

We — this Council and we in the Secretariat —
have come a long way in responding to these diverse
challenges. We have reinvigorated preventive
diplomacy and upgraded the United Nations mediation
capacity. We are more nimble in responding to brewing
trouble from Guinea to Kyrgyzstan. We continue to
make our peacekeeping operations more efficient and
effective, including through the New Horizon process.
That initiative — which includes the global field
support strategy — is designed to help us better adjust
to complex situations involving difficult terrain and
volatile political contexts, and to better address the
resource and technological implications of this work.
We have more instances in which peacemaking
and peacekeeping are being carried out simultaneously,
as in Cyprus. We continue to enhance our pool of
envoys, deepen our cooperation with regional partners,
help Member States build up their capacities, and
support our field missions and regional offices. We
have deployed 122,000 civilian and uniformed
personnel in 15 peacekeeping missions, and a further
4,000 personnel in 14 political field missions. They
continue to deliver on wide-ranging mandates.
We have strengthened peacebuilding in order to
ensure the sustainability of such efforts. Allocations
from the Peacebuilding Fund are increasingly targeted
and timely. We are working to protect civilians in
armed conflict, both as part of peacekeeping mandates
and in our humanitarian assistance. Last month’s
shocking mass rapes in Eastern Congo remind us of the
difficulty of this challenge. I have asked my Special
Representative on this matter, Ms. Margot Wallström,
to help us develop more vigorous mechanisms in
tackling these atrocities. We have also taken steps to
improve the security of the many thousands of our own

10-54839

Secondly, there is no quick fix for broken
societies. It demands patience, resources and a longterm commitment. The United Nations core business
must be helping people to solve their conflicts, not just
serving as a band-aid to keep troubles in check.
Thirdly, we need to further develop the
peacebuilding architecture, empower the Peacebuilding
Commission and Fund, and promote greater coherence
among the many pieces of the United Nations system
that make up the peacebuilding picture.
Fourthly, we must expand our work on
prevention, in particular to improve our ability to read
the warning signs and trigger early action.
The world needs the Security Council to uphold
its responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security fully, fairly and without delay. We must do
more, and be equipped to do more, to fulfil this
cardinal mission.
In closing, allow me to note that just yesterday
we gathered to recommit ourselves to the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). Let us recognize the
close links between that summit and this, and between
the MDGs and the work of this Council. Building
peace and advancing development are mutually
reinforcing. On all these fronts, the Security Council’s
leadership will be crucial. Its unity is essential. I
pledge my full support as we move forward together.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.

3

S/PV.6389

I invite the Premier of the State Council of the
People’s Republic of China, His Excellency Mr. Wen
Jiabao, to take the floor.
Mr. Wen Jiabao (China) (spoke in Chinese): It
gives me great pleasure to attend this meeting of the
Security Council. I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for your initiative and the Turkish delegation for its
efforts in preparing for the meeting.
We live at a time when the trend towards a
multipolar world and economic globalization is gaining
momentum. New changes are taking place in the global
economic and political landscape. The international
security situation is generally stable, but due to the
impact of the world financial crisis, destabilizing
factors and uncertainties are on the increase.
Traditional security issues, such as local conflicts, arms
races and territorial disputes, remain unresolved and
even deteriorate from time to time. Terrorism,
transnational crime, cybersecurity, the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and other non-traditional
security issues are becoming more pronounced.
Faced with these complex and diverse security
threats and challenges, we must intensify multilateral
cooperation and take stronger collective action in
response. That is the consensus of the States Members
of the United Nations.
China believes that, as the heart of the collective
security mechanism, the Security Council should
further enhance its authority and assume greater
responsibilities, make greater efforts and play a greater
role in maintaining international peace and security. In
that connection, I wish to make the following four
proposals on the work of the Council in the new
circumstances.
First, we must hold high the banner of peace and
promote the peaceful settlement of disputes. That is a
fundamental principle that the Security Council should
always follow. In a globalized world where the
interests and destinies of all countries are intertwined,
peace is what we all desire and war is what we all
detest. History has shown time and again that dialogue,
negotiation and other diplomatic means are the only
effective way to settle disputes and achieve enduring
peace. In keeping with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter, the Security Council
should strengthen its good offices and mediation role
and make vigorous efforts to persuade the parties
concerned to defuse tensions, iron out their differences

4

peacefully and prevent the outbreak or escalation of
conflict.
Secondly, the Council must improve its working
methods and enhance its problem-solving abilities.
United Nations peacekeeping is one of the major
resources at the Council’s disposal to address conflicts.
The scale and mission of United Nations peacekeeping
operations have been expanding in recent years, and
mandates and functions have become more diverse. It
is important to sum up experience and improve the
efficiency and effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations. The Security Council must adhere to the
Hammarskjöld principles of impartiality, consent of the
parties and non-use of force except in self-defence. It
should consult closely with the parties concerned, step
up cooperation with regional organizations, make
overall arrangements for entry and exit strategies,
coordinate military and political efforts and authorize
the deployment of peacekeeping missions at an
appropriate time on the basis of thorough analysis of
all factors. The Security Council may decide to impose
sanctions under the United Nations Charter, but it
should exercise caution in doing so. Sanctions are not
an end in themselves, and, more often than not, the
wilful imposition of sanctions and pressure does not
help improve the situation at all. The only right
approach is to follow an integrated strategy that
accords top priority to diplomacy.
Thirdly, we must strengthen coordination and
remove the root causes of disputes and conflicts.
Disputes and conflicts often go hand in hand with
poverty and backwardness. The Security Council
should enhance coordination with the relevant United
Nations agencies to form synergies and help poor
countries afflicted with conflicts accelerate post-war
reconstruction,
realize
economic
and
social
development and improve the livelihood of the people.
This can help remove the breeding ground for conflicts
and prevent conflicts at the source, thus laying the
foundation for enduring peace and security. That
should be the direction of the Council’s efforts.
Fourthly, we must highlight priorities and resolve
hot-spot issues in Africa. Most issues on the Security
Council’s agenda relate to Africa, and most of the
United Nations peacekeeping missions are deployed in
Africa. To achieve world peace and stability, hot-spot
issues in Africa must be addressed and security and
stability in Africa must be realized. The international
community should be more attentive to the needs of

10-54839

S/PV.6389

Africa, accommodate the concerns of African countries
and respect their will and their choices. The Security
Council
should
strengthen
coordination
and
cooperation with the African Union, take more active
measures to help settle hot-spot issues in Africa and
work with other United Nations agencies to channel
more assistance to African countries.
The Chinese people love peace, and China is a
responsible member of the international community. As
early as 2,500 years ago, the Chinese thinker
Confucius said, “Peace is the most valuable”. As a
nation repeatedly plagued by the scourge of war, we
fully appreciate the value of peace, and also the
wisdom of “Do not do unto others what you would not
have others do unto you”. We have followed an
independent foreign policy of peace and committed
ourselves to building friendly and cooperative ties with
all countries of the world.
We stand for the five principles of peaceful
coexistence, advocate a new concept of security based
on mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality and
coordination, and endeavour to build a harmonious
world of lasting peace and common prosperity.
As a permanent member of the Security Council,
China has vigorously called for and worked for the
peaceful settlement of disputes and has played a
important and constructive role in a range of major
regional hot-spot issues, including the Korean nuclear
issue, the Iranian nuclear issue, the Middle East and
the Sudan.
China has taken an active part in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. China is the largest
contributor of peacekeeping personnel among the
permanent members of the Security Council. We have
sent a total of more than 14,000 peacekeeping
personnel to 25 missions. We have also sent escort
fleets as part of the international effort to combat
piracy off the Somali coast.
China is fully engaged in multilateral arms
control and disarmament affairs in an effort to uphold
the international nuclear non-proliferation regime.
China has also done a great deal of productive work in
the global effort to fight terrorism. China is firmly
committed to the path of peaceful development. We
pursue a national defence policy that is defensive in
nature. We will never seek hegemony or harbour
expansionist intentions. We will contribute to regional

10-54839

and international development and peace through our
own development.
We will earnestly fulfil our international
obligations and shoulder our due responsibilities. We
will continue to uphold the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter and become more deeply
engaged in the peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts of the Security Council. We will
work with other Member States to enable the Council
to play a greater role in maintaining international peace
and security.
Through our experience over the years, we have
come to realize that, even as peace and security may
seem a distant dream, if we all abide by the purposes
and principles of the United Nations Charter, keep in
mind our solemn resolve to combine our efforts to
accomplish those aims and strengthen our conviction
and cooperation, we will move ever closer to the
objective of common security and enduring peace for
all humankind.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the
Republic of Uganda, to take the floor.
President Museveni: I would like to thank
President Abdullah Gül for convening this meeting of
the Security Council on ensuring the Security
Council’s effective role in maintaining international
peace and security.
The United Nations was founded as an
organization that would act to prevent conflicts
between nations, avert future wars and strengthen
cooperation among its Members. In order to ensure
prompt and effective action by the United Nations, its
Members conferred on the Security Council the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The emphasis was on
quick and strong action. It is that emphasis that makes
the theme for this meeting pertinent.
In connection with Africa, however, I want to
make two points. First, where the United Nations has
acted alone, it has made mistakes, such as in Congo in
the 1960s and in Rwanda in the 1990s. Secondly, all
the major problems that have been solved in Africa
have been regionally led, with the United Nations and
other bodies from outside Africa playing a supportive
role.

5

S/PV.6389

The first point is clear enough. It does not need
elaboration. It is enough to point out the death of
Patrice Lumumba in United Nations hands and its
tragic consequences for Congo. Coming to the second
point, it should be clear to all that all the major African
problems that have been solved have been regionally
led: the independence of Mozambique, the
independence of Zimbabwe and even majority rule in
South Africa, the defeat of Idi Amin, the defeat of
Mobutu, the addressing of the Sudan problem, the
stopping of the genocide in Rwanda, the resolution of
the problem of Burundi, and the addressing of the
problem of Somalia, the problem of Liberia and the
problem of Sierra Leone. Where the United Nations
works with the regional organizations or internal forces
within each country, the results are better and durable.
There are still several intractable conflicts around
the world, as well as new threats such as transnational
organized crime, drug trafficking, terrorism and piracy
that have to be dealt with more resolutely. The Security
Council needs to work on new ways to tackle those
challenges
through
a
more
concerted
and
comprehensive approach at the global, regional and
national levels. We should avoid situations where the
United Nations is unable to act or shows indifference
in dealing with any conflict situations or threats,
because that will undermine confidence in the United
Nations.
It is also essential that the Security Council
continuously evaluate its diagnosis of conflict
situations and reflect on whether the solutions
prescribed are correct. There are cases of countries
where United Nations peacekeeping operations lasted
many years and then wound up, but had to return to
address the same concerns. That implies that the
approaches used in such countries did not address their
core problems.
We welcome the ongoing efforts to enhance the
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping by
ensuring that the mandated tasks are appropriate to the
situation on the ground. However, more attention still
needs to be paid to supporting fragile and post-conflict
countries in building the capacity of their national
institutions to effectively address security and other
challenges.
The Security Council should also take interest in
human security issues, including social and economic
development, that matter to many developing

6

countries. In this regard, priority should be given to
strengthening support for national ownership and
capacity development, based on priorities identified by
the national authorities. Only national actors can
address their society’s needs in a way that can enhance
sustainable peace, security and prosperity.
We welcome the strengthening of the Security
Council’s strategic partnership with the African Union
and with other regional and subregional organizations,
which also play an important role in the maintenance
of peace and security. The United Nations should
optimize the contribution by those organizations,
which have advantages of proximity and the capability
to mobilize and respond quickly. In the recent past, the
number of missions carried out in pursuit of peace by
such organizations has increased.
The African Union has shown its commitment to
conflict prevention, mediation and resolution in Africa,
as demonstrated by its response to conflict situations
on the continent. African ownership has been shown
through the contribution of political leadership and
troops, logistics, and financing, according to the
capacity of its member States.
However, the major challenge that inhibits the
effectiveness of African Union peacekeeping
operations, such as the African Union Mission in
Somalia, is lack of adequate financial resources. That
is one area where more support from the United
Nations and other international partners is urgently
needed.
It is imperative that the long-standing concerns
about the need to reform the Security Council be
addressed to foster its effectiveness. The Council needs
greater credibility, legitimacy and representation. It is
an injustice that the entire continent of Africa — 53
Member States, with a population of over 1 billion
people — has no permanent representation on this
Council. I am here in a seasonal capacity. The Council
should also strive to be more even-handed and
transparent in its approaches and decisions in order to
dispel the perception that on some issues under its
consideration, vested interests override fairness.
In addition, the Council should engage more with
those countries on its agenda or whose situations it is
considering, to afford them an opportunity to express
their views and concerns.

10-54839

S/PV.6389

Since the Security Council acts on behalf of the
Members States in the maintenance of international
peace and security, it is imperative that it live up to
expectations by acting promptly and effectively in
addressing the current and new threats to international
peace and security.
The President: I now invite the Federal President
of the Republic of Austria, His Excellency Mr. Heinz
Fischer, to take the floor.
Mr. Fischer: Emerging from the biggest
catastrophe of the twentieth century — a war in which
altogether 50 million people lost their lives — the
United Nations was founded to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. The Security
Council was entrusted with the responsibility to
maintain international peace and security. Over the past
65 years the Council has made an enormous
contribution to that noble goal. For those affected by
armed conflict, this often is a question of life and
death, of security and development and of respect for
the rule of law and human rights. No continent has
been spared.
While in its early years the Council had to deal
primarily with inter-State conflicts, the nature of
conflicts has changed significantly in recent times.
Intrastate conflicts involving non-State actors, as well
as transnational threats such as terrorism, organized
crime, drug trafficking, proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, et cetera, have created new
challenges for the United Nations and the Security
Council.
Peacekeeping, which as far as I know was not
foreseen in the Charter of the United Nations, has
developed into a particularly successful crisismanagement tool. Over the past decades the character
of peacekeeping has changed. After monitoring
ceasefires and interpositioning, peacekeepers today
find themselves in the midst of conflicts and facing
complex tasks and challenges.
Recognizing the importance of United Nations
peacekeeping, Austria began contributing troops,
police and experts to United Nations operations
immediately after joining the Organization. Altogether,
90,000 Austrians in the service of peace since 1960 are
proof of our unwavering commitment to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

10-54839

Our willingness to assume global responsibility
furthermore manifests itself in our third term as a
member of the Security Council. Confronted with
today’s threats, we identified the protection of civilians
in armed conflict as one of the key priorities. The
effective protection of the civilian population is the
precondition for sustainable peace, and as long as
United Nations peacekeeping missions are involved, it
is also a question of the credibility of the Council.
Resolution 1894 (2009) provides a solid basis for
further enhancing the protection of the most
vulnerable.
Creating
a
favourable
protection
environment goes beyond protection from physical
violence. It must be complemented by activities in the
fields of the rule of law, human rights, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, and the empowerment
of local society. The swift implementation of resolution
1894 (2009) will therefore make an important
contribution to the Council’s effectiveness in this core
area.
An equally important topic is the role of women
in peace and security. We must seize the unique
opportunity of the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000) this October to renew our commitment and
work
towards
the
increased
participation,
representation and full involvement of women in
preventive diplomacy, mediation, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. In this context, I would like to
commend Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
strong leadership and encourage him to continue to
promote the cause of women.
These efforts must be accompanied by an
increased protection of women and girls, especially
from sexual violence. The Security Council has several
times reaffirmed its role in fighting impunity for such
violations. Let me also thank Uganda for its
commitment to further advance the implementation of
this landmark resolution during its presidency of the
Council in the month of October.
The systematic consideration of topics like the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, children and
armed conflict or woman, peace and security
demonstrates the ability of the Council to respond
effectively to today’s challenges. Peacekeeping and
peacebuilding need to go hand in hand.
Finally, I would like to emphasize that prevention
is the most effective and efficient way to manage
conflicts. We therefore highly welcome the efforts by

7

S/PV.6389

the Secretary-General to strengthen the United Nations
capacity in early warning and conflict prevention and
to continue his good offices and mediation activities.
As a member of the European Union, we strongly
believe in the partnership between the United Nations
and regional organizations in this regard.
In conclusion, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on organizing this summit and preparing
a presidential statement that enjoys our full support.
Let me close by reiterating that the Council will
exercise its role in a most effective and credible
manner when the guiding principle of its actions is the
rule of law — clear and foreseeable rules equally
applicable to everybody.
The President: I invite the President of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria, His Excellency Mr. Goodluck Ebele
Jonathan, to take the floor.
Mr. Jonathan: I commend your delegation,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting to undertake
a strategic review of the evolving international security
environment. During this review, it is essential for us
to agree on a shared vision and provide the highest
political direction necessary for the Security Council to
more effectively maintain international peace and
security.
Our evolving security landscape is marked with
multiple threats that respect neither borders nor
nationalities. They include the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, the illicit trade in and proliferation
of small arms and light weapons, and drug and human
trafficking, as well as the use of sexual violence as a
weapon of war.
Ours is also a world of extreme inequality,
deprivation, marginalization and exclusion. These
problems are compounded by systemic issues such as
underdevelopment, pressure on natural resources and
difficulties related to social cohesion and governance.
The viral nature of conflict spillovers adds to the
international security paradigm.
These complex challenges call for vision,
creativity, commitment and leadership from the United
Nations and Member States. The Council should
consider repositioning itself to deal with the changing
international environment.
The recent review of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the discussion of the New Horizon
Initiative in the Special Committee on Peacekeeping

8

Operations — the C34 — make the case for greater
cooperation among the various organs of the United
Nations to ensure effective service delivery on the
ground. The Council should therefore enhance its
collaboration with the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council and also build
partnerships with other relevant stakeholders,
especially the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund, in finding solutions to the interwoven
challenges of peace, security and development. The
Council should more readily deal with smaller-scale
challenges as it does with big picture issues like global
terrorism.
Our current security architecture is not the best
model for addressing today’s multiple security
challenges. The growing human, material and financial
cost of peacekeeping is unsustainable. The competing
demands of growing poverty and the spread of diseases
cannot be ignored. Those factors make a compelling
case for a coherent strategic framework to integrate
security and development imperatives. We have seen,
in Sierra Leone and Liberia, how United Nations
agencies can work with political actors to foster
stability through the creation of opportunity, the
promotion of good governance and the rule of law.
Nigeria has learned many lessons about the
evolving security paradigm and the causes and
consequences of violent conflicts. Within West Africa
in the last two decades and in Africa as a whole, we
have witnessed the value of preventive approaches to
conflict management — a concept this Council
embraced under Nigeria’s presidency in July. We are
encouraged by the Council’s recognition of the need to
optimize the use of the full range of preventive
diplomacy tools.
By refining our understanding of conflict
management, we afford ourselves the opportunity to
reflect critically on the tools we need to respond
adequately to the task at hand. We are already
witnessing the green shoots of change as conflict
management models adapt to incorporate preventive
perspectives in their design.
Through the use of preventive methods, actors
such as the Department of Political Affairs and its
Mediation Support Unit are making significant
contributions to the building of confidence among local
communities. The Secretary-General, with the support
of the Security Council, is on a right track to establish

10-54839

S/PV.6389

a United Nations Office in Central Africa. The office
will, we hope, replicate the peacebuilding gains
witnessed in West Africa through the work of the
United Nations Office for West Africa. However,
continued instability in places like the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Sudan and the Middle East
are stark warnings against complacency.
We must acknowledge today that the Council will
have little success in freeing peoples from the scourge
of war without the contributions of regional and
subregional actors, in accordance with Chapter VIII of
the Charter. Working together, they can significantly
support United Nations efforts to secure stability, as we
have seen from the contributions of the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States.
Nigeria is willing and well positioned to be a driver for
such enhancement efforts.
We must consolidate our efforts based on the
foundation of what has already been accomplished.
Recently many Council members have propelled this
process. The United Kingdom and France initiated the
ongoing peacekeeping review; Nigeria has pressed for
a focus on preventive diplomacy; and the United
States, Japan and Turkey initiated a focus on
peacekeeping and troop contribution. We encourage the
Council to now build in a mechanism to monitor the
progress of objectives identified at summit meetings
such as this.
The vulnerable, the marginalized and the
oppressed are calling upon the United Nations for
leadership to end the torment of conflict. In answering
this clarion call, we must allow the United Nations to
serve as
“the indispensable common house of the entire
human family, through which we will seek to
realize our universal aspirations for peace,
cooperation and development” (General Assembly
resolution 55/2, para. 32).
I therefore urge my fellow leaders to be bold,
imaginative, pragmatic and unwavering in purpose. Let
us be particular in setting our objectives; let us be
concrete in marking out our goals. Above all, we must
translate our lofty words into concrete action without
let or hindrance.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Haris Silajdžić, Chairman of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, to take the floor.

10-54839

President Silajdžić: I would like to thank you,
President Gül, and the delegation of the Republic of
Turkey for convening this high-level meeting in order
to make a strategic review of the Security Council’s
growing role in the maintenance of international peace
and security. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for
his excellent presentation. I sincerely hope that the
outcome of our meeting today will serve as a useful
tool for future Security Council deliberations.
The primary role of the Security Council under
the United Nations Charter is to maintain international
peace and security. We should live up to expectations
and send a unanimous message today that we commit
ourselves to developing the means to fulfil this
responsibility.
Coming from the perspective of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, I cannot stress enough how crucial it is
that the lessons learned in the past are applied
appropriately. The Security Council has erred in the
past, and Bosnia and Herzegovina is the most
illustrative example of that in modern history. By
imposing and maintaining the arms embargo on Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the Security Council added to the
overwhelming military advantage of Milošević’s
regime, which intended to expand his country’s
territories, at the expense of the surrounding States,
through genocide and ethnic cleansing, regardless of
human cost.
As a result, according to the data from the
International Committee of the Red Cross, 200,000
people were killed, 12,000 of them children, up to
50,000 women were raped, and 2.2 million were forced
to flee their homes. May I also remind the Council that
1,350,000 citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina still live
outside the country as a consequence.
At the time, some powerful members of this
Council justified that course by arguing that the lifting
of the embargo would add oil to the fire. The result was
that the fire was essentially quelled with the blood of
the innocent.
And then the horrors culminated in the genocide
that was committed in Srebrenica in July 1995. In fact,
the Secretary-General’s report on Srebrenica from 1999
unequivocally admitted:
“Through error, misjudgement and an inability to
recognize the scope of the evil confronting us, we

9

S/PV.6389

failed to do our part to help save the people of
Srebrenica from the Serb campaign of mass
murder ... Srebrenica crystallised a truth
understood only too late by the United Nations
and the world at large: that Bosnia was as much a
moral cause as a military conflict. The tragedy of
Srebrenica will haunt our history forever.”
(A/54/549, para. 503)
We cannot bring back the dead, but we can give
dignity and justice to the survivors. What we say today
is not aimed at the past, but at the future. We owe it not
only to the victims and survivors, but to our own
common humanity. The message that the Security
Council sends to the would-be perpetrators of crimes in
the name of twisted ideologies must be crystal clear:
“your crimes will not pay off”.
The errors that were made in Bosnia and
Herzegovina have hardly been corrected. To the
contrary, the peace and security established by the
Dayton Agreement and the progress made in many
fields are now destabilized by open calls for secession
of one part of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This
destabilizing rhetoric was preceded by the testing of
the international community’s patience for the last
15 years. Inadequate responses to the constant blocking
of State institutions, return of refugees and provocative
rhetoric have been tolerated long enough for the
perpetrators to believe that the time has come to turn
the territories where they committed atrocities, ethnic
cleansing and genocide into their own fiefdom. That is
a threat not only to the peace, security and stability in
which the international community invested so much,
but also a test of the international community’s resolve
to prevent the escalation and the opening of fresh
wounds in my country.
It would be a repetition of the mistake to dismiss
open calls for changing international borders as
election campaign rhetoric. Our ability to prevent is
tested once more. As President John F. Kennedy once
rightly said, “an error does not become a mistake until
you refuse to correct it”.
I would also like to say a few words about postconflict peacebuilding operations. Although all
relevant national and international actors should be
involved in the process, we consider the political will
of the host country and national ownership to be sine
qua non conditions for the success of peacebuilding

10

operations. The peacebuilding process is primarily the
national responsibility of post-conflict countries.
Promotion of dialogue between the parties to a
conflict, particularly between decision makers and civil
society, is critical for national institutions’ capacityand confidence-building and for the reconciliation
process. Holding all those who committed crimes
accountable and bringing them to justice is of crucial
importance to the reconciliation process.
Another unpleasant reminder is in order here:
Ratko Mladić, the chief executioner of the genocide in
Srebrenica, is still at large. That does not bode well for
prevention and our credibility.
Peacebuilding operations should be based on an
integrated approach that includes establishment of
good governance, rule of law, promotion of human
rights, institution-building, security sector reform,
economic reconstruction and development, and full
reintegration of refugees and internally displaced
persons. Furthermore, the role of women and their
involvement in peacebuilding efforts should be
strengthened in post-conflict societies.
In our increasingly interconnected world, the
issues of peace and security are inseparable. New
threats and challenges emerge on a daily basis. No
country can isolate itself from them or tackle them
individually. The Security Council therefore must be
prepared to deal with challenges in a coherent,
comprehensive and just way. The Security Council
must meet the expectations and fulfil the hopes of
millions of those in need throughout the world. They
expect nothing less from us.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Ali Bongo Ondimba, President of the Gabonese
Republic, to take the floor.
President Bongo Ondimba (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to commend you, Sir, and
through you your country, Turkey, for taking the
initiative to organize this summit meeting, which gives
us an opportunity today to assess the role of the
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security.
With developments in the international context,
new threats to peace and security in our world have
emerged. These include, inter alia, climate change,
arms proliferation, international terrorism, piracy, drug
trafficking and its corollary, transnational organized

10-54839

S/PV.6389

crime. The complex nature of these new threats and the
now obvious interdependence between security issues
and those of development make the role of the Council
increasingly difficult and the mandates of its
peacekeeping missions less and less effective. If it is to
confront these new challenges, the Council must
reconsider its methods of operation.
From this perspective, I am pleased to propose
some ideas that I believe could help the Council to
make its action more effective. I urge the Council to
emphasize prevention. As members will agree, it is
better to prevent crises and conflicts than to have to
resolve them. To that end, I exhort the SecretaryGeneral to pursue his mediation efforts and to do
everything possible to improve the Organization’s early
warning mechanism.
On 8 March, at the International Peace Institute
here in New York, I emphasized the importance that
Gabon attaches to the role of preventive diplomacy.
That idea prevailed, for example, when we
implemented mechanisms in our subregion to prevent
and manage crises and conflicts such as the early
warning mechanism for Central Africa, headquartered
in my country, and the Council for Peace and Security
in Central Africa. Within the framework of its
preventive action in Central Africa, the Council would
do well to strengthen the capacities of all these
mechanisms. I wish here to welcome the imminent
opening in Libreville of the United Nations Office for
Central Africa, the mandate of which will encompass
this mission.
Given the complexities of the new crises the
Council faces today, the Council must reconsider its
approach to peacekeeping. My country therefore
supports the Secretary-General’s New Horizon
initiative, aimed at making peacekeeping operations
more robust. When peacekeeping is inoperative, the
Security Council must find a way to impose peace.
Such an approach would have been useful in particular
in Somalia.
Beyond their operational content, peacekeeping
missions must have a global and multidisciplinary
nature. We thus welcome the inclusion of new
components in these operations, such as offices for
child soldiers, victims of sexual abuse and the
protection of civilian populations. A smooth transition
towards peacebuilding requires the Council to take into
account both the basic conditions for sustainable peace

10-54839

and the expectations of populations. That is why it is
important to establish peacekeeping operations with
clear and achievable mandates. These mandates must
be endowed with crisis exit strategies based on
benchmarks to enable performance evaluations and the
fulfilment of identified objectives.
Ensuring international peace and security is an
immense task that requires increased cooperation
between the Council and regional organizations,
especially because the latter are more familiar with
realities in the theatres of operation. I therefore
welcome the existence of an official consultation
mechanism between the Security Council and the
African Union (AU) Peace and Security Council on
questions of common interest. I am also pleased to see
that these two organizations are working together to
find solutions for peace in Darfur and in Somalia.
Africa being the main theatre for peacekeeping
missions, consolidating cooperation between the
Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council is a strategic goal. Such cooperation will
strengthen the action of the Peace and Security
Council, and this Council will benefit from having a
partner whose knowledge and mastery of the
challenges on the ground will be an indispensable
asset.
Peacekeeping must be pursued through
peacebuilding in order to prevent the resurgence of
crises and conflicts. It is thus important that
peacebuilding missions in post-conflict countries
increasingly include programmes to help re-establish
political, juridical, security and socio-economic
institutions.
I believe that these comprise the foundation for
vigorous action by the Council that is more adapted to
realities in the field and the expectations of populations
facing the multiple scourges that threaten peace and
security in the world.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
General Michel Sleiman, President of the Lebanese
Republic, to take the floor.
President Sleiman (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to express my appreciation to you, Sir,
for convening this summit-level. Such an initiative
makes perfect sense in the light of Turkey’s pivotal
role. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his valuable preliminary remarks.

11

S/PV.6389

In the first year of this century, the world
witnessed a devastating terrorist attack on the World
Trade Center in this city, which is host to the United
Nations. In its eighth year, the world faced a global
financial crisis. Despite their severity, these crises did
not lead to a general economic collapse. Nor did they
portend the outbreak of a world war, as had been the
case at the start of the twentieth century. In large part
that is thanks to the fact that the international
community agreed on common approaches to
addressing those global crises through mechanisms for
action and solidarity that were based on institutions for
joint action on the regional and international levels,
most prominently the United Nations and its
specialized agencies.
Nevertheless, the successive political and
economic have revealed flaws and shortcomings in this
international system. For one thing, the United Nations
in general, and the Security Council in particular,
require reform. The global financial system too must
be improved.
Nuclear deterrence and the balance of terror
between the two super-Powers prevented global
confrontation after 1945. They did not, however,
prevent the outbreak of small, unjust and lethal wars
which led to the occupation of territories, the division
of States, the displacement of peoples and the death of
millions. Among the most salient of these unjust and
painful crises is the tragedy of Palestine, which is at
the core of the conflict in the Middle East.
Indeed, Israel continues to occupy the Arab
territories by force and deprive the Palestinian people
of their inalienable rights, to carry on with the
Judaization of Jerusalem and the blockade on Gaza and
to cling to its nuclear arsenal. Israel maintains its
occupation of Lebanese territories, violating Lebanon’s
national sovereignty. It persists in its threats,
implanting spy networks and agents. That calls for a
firm and deterrent position from the international
community.
The Security Council can settle disputes
peacefully, in accordance with Chapter VI of the
Charter, including through preventive diplomacy and
peacebuilding. Improving performance requires a
transition from a reactive mode to a proactive mode,
notably by trying to address the root causes of
oppression and poverty-induced conflicts, and
preventing aggressor States from achieving their

12

covetous designs on the territories and resources of
others.
Such efforts should include consolidating
democracy, spreading enlightened and moderate
thinking and promoting an environment conducive to
good governance, far from fanaticism, racism and
arrogance. They should also involve maintaining
initiatives to promote dialogue between and
rapprochement among civilizations, cultures and
religions. Lebanon wishes to become an international
centre for the management of such dialogue.
We must mention the fact that there are tasks that
require only adequate pressure by the international
community and the Security Council in particular. Such
is the case in south Lebanon, where Israeli forces must
withdraw from all Lebanese territories still under their
occupation, without any conditions, in accordance with
relevant resolutions of the United Nations, particularly
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). In this
context, I would like to commend the efforts and
sacrifices in south Lebanon by the troops of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Lebanon will
always be keen to mobilize all its national capabilities
in order to defend its sovereignty, independence and
safety and to protect its land and waters and its marine
resources.
Having participated in the 1991 Madrid Peace
Conference, Lebanon still looks forward to a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, on all tracks,
based on the Madrid terms of reference, the relevant
resolutions of international legitimacy and the Arab
Peace Initiative, in all its provisions. These all preserve
Lebanon’s right to regain all its occupied territories
without conditions.
While Lebanon closely follows initiatives
undertaken to reach partial solutions, or beginnings of
solutions,
made
outside
the
aforementioned
comprehensive approaches, it reiterates that it would
not agree to any solution for the Middle East cause in
which it does not participate or which contradicts its
high national interests, particularly its sovereign right
to oppose any form of resettlement of Palestinian
refugees in its territories. Such resettlement would
actually contradict the refugees’ legitimate and human
rights. It would run counter to the Taif Accord, which
was approved by the Security Council, and to the
preamble of the Lebanese Constitution and the Arab
Peace Initiative. Furthermore, it would lead to an

10-54839

S/PV.6389

unjust and tense situation, fuel violence and undermine
stability in Lebanon and the Middle East.

enable us to work in a comprehensive and integrated
manner on political, security and development issues.

We should also recall that the international
community assumes a huge responsibility to increase
the budget of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), which was established in 1949 to address
humanitarian issues and aspects of daily life for
Palestinian refugees.

It is worthwhile for world leaders to engage in
discussions on peacebuilding on this occasion. It is
testimony to the fact that peacebuilding is an urgent
issue and a common goal of the international
community. I appreciate the initiative of President
Abdullah Gűl of Turkey in this regard.

The Security Council can adopt coercive
measures such as sanctions and the use of force when it
acts within the framework of Chapter VI of the Charter.
However, most oppressed peoples often complain
about the Council’s inability to enforce its own
resolutions or about its double standards that depict
Israel, for example, as a State beyond accountability
and above international law. They also depict the
United Nations as incapable and paralysed. That
requires effective consideration of the causes of such a
negative perception and how it might be redressed so
as to reactivate the Council’s role and gain the peoples’
confidence it its ability to champion them and bring
about justice in a way that dissuades them from
resorting to resistance as a legitimate means of selfdefence.
What we share as nations is the obligation to
respect the rules of international law and the spirit of
justice. We do believe that the rule that maintains
international peace and security and ensures equality
and respect for human rights is the force of law and
justice rather than the law of force and fait accompli.
The President: I now invite the Prime Minister
of Japan, His Excellency Mr. Naoto Kan, to take the
floor.
Mr. Kan (Japan) (spoke in Japanese; English text
provided by the delegation): Today, threats to the
security of human beings are diversifying, as
exemplified by issues such as the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, terrorism and acts of
piracy. Furthermore, the context in which such threats
originate is becoming more complex. To cut off those
threats at the root, we need to fully understand their
causes and carefully choose the most appropriate
policy options.
In April this year, Japan hosted a ministerial
meeting in this Chamber, and we came to the
conclusion that a peacebuilding strategy is necessary to

10-54839

What does true peace mean? Can we call the
mere absence of the state of war or conflict "peace"?
No, that is not the case. Restoring peace and the lives
of people destroyed by war, conflicts and natural
disaster leads to true peace. Japan fully supports the
people who strive for the reconstruction of societies
and the economies in this process of restoration.
That is why I firmly believe that the most
important role of State leaders is to reduce, to the
extent possible, sources of human suffering such as
diseases, poverty and conflict. I call this concept the
realization of a society where human suffering is
reduced to a minimum. I also introduced this idea as a
fundamental philosophy during my speech yesterday at
the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General
Assembly. Japan will take proactive and concrete
action towards the realization of true peace.
Based on these thoughts, Japan will promote its
assistance through focusing on four pillars, namely,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding, conflict prevention and
human security.
First is peacekeeping. As Chair of the Security
Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
Japan will lead discussions on enhancing cooperation
among countries contributing to peacekeeping
activities and on securing the necessary resources for
peacekeeping operations. Japan itself is actively
contributing to peacekeeping and other related
operations. This year, we expeditiously dispatched
Japanese self-defence forces to the disaster-affected
countries of Haiti and Pakistan. We also decided to
dispatch military liaison officers to the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste.
Let us next consider peacebuilding. The common
assumption is that peacebuilding is to begin after
peacekeeping ends. However, in order to realize true
peace, it is imperative to engage in peacebuilding in
tandem with peacekeeping activities from the early
stages of the latter. Japan has learned the importance of

13

S/PV.6389

a comprehensive and integrated approach to
peacebuilding through its experience with long-term
assistance in peacebuilding in Cambodia, where we
were fully engaged from the outset, hosting a peace
conference and donors' conferences, and where we
continued to provide support through the final stage of
the peace process, the Khmer Rouge trials. In the
nation-building
efforts
in
Timor-Leste,
our
contributions based on such prior experience are about
to bear fruit. We attach great importance to
peacebuilding efforts employing similar approaches in
other areas, such as Afghanistan, Iraq, the Middle East
and Africa.
Of all of these, it is Afghanistan that presents the
greatest challenge to the international community in
terms of peacebuilding, and it is that country to which
Japan is providing the most intensive assistance. In
cooperation with various partners, Japan has extended
comprehensive and integrated support for the Afghan
Government's efforts, focusing on three pillars: the
improvement of security, including police training;
reintegration through vocational training and job
creation for former Taliban rank-and-file soldiers; and
sustainable and self-reliant development by means of
agricultural assistance, among other programmes.
Japan will cooperate with the Republic of Turkey
in assisting Afghan police training by providing
funding as well as police personnel, with a view to
improving security in Afghanistan. We also recently
disbursed $50 million in assistance for the
reintegration of insurgents. It is our intention to
provide assistance, in cooperation with the
international community, in such a way that the people
of Afghanistan will be able to perceive a tangible
improvement in their lives.
In the area of conflict prevention, the third pillar,
creating a safe and secure environment for people to live
their lives and implementing continued confidencebuilding measures are essential in vulnerable or postconflict States.
The Security Council also must continue exerting
its utmost efforts to halt the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction in order to prevent terrorist groups or
other organizations from acquiring those weapons.
Japan will implement the action plan agreed at the
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. During a
meeting of foreign ministers yesterday, Japan and

14

Australia, together with other like-minded countries,
launched a new group on this issue. We will also
continue to work on nuclear disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation efforts in cooperation with the
international community.
The concept of human security, the fourth pillar,
is useful in helping the Security Council to cope with
these matters. True peace can be sustained only when
each individual human being achieves freedom, secures
dignity and leads a fulfilled life. Relying on this
philosophy, we will continue to contribute to
international efforts to protect and empower vulnerable
States and people.
Finally, it has been 65 years since the birth of the
United Nations. The world situation has changed
drastically since then. If the Security Council is to
continue to play an effective role in maintaining
international peace and security in the twenty-first
century, the Council itself needs to demonstrate its
legitimacy by reflecting the reality of the international
community. To that end, Japan will cooperate with
other Member States and work actively for the early
realization of reform of the Security Council.
The President: I invite His Excellency Mr. Sergey
V. Lavrov, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation, to take the floor.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Let me thank the delegation of Turkey and
President Gül personally for convening today's meeting
of the Security Council.
In recent years, the United Nations and many
regional and subregional associations have done
tremendous work in the prevention and settlement of
crisis situations and post-conflict rehabilitation.
Having confronted global and transborder challenges
and threats to international stability, such as the
proliferation of mass destruction, terrorism, drug
trafficking and organized crime, we are now working
on new, more effective mechanisms to ensure
international and regional stability. In accordance with
the United Nations Charter, the Security Council is
taking the lead in these efforts. It is important that the
Council further improve existing mechanisms to ensure
its more effective and prompt response.
The experience of settling a number of crisis
situations points to a number of basic conclusions. The
first and the most important conclusion is that modern

10-54839

S/PV.6389

conflicts cannot be resolved by force. They should be
resolved first and foremost at the political and
diplomatic levels through the involvement of all parties
in dialogue and negotiations, with none being isolated.
We all witnessed in August 2008 the result of unilateral
disruption of agreed peacekeeping formats and reliance
on force.
Secondly, we should spare no effort, material or
intellectual, for the early prevention of conflicts and
the strengthening of United Nations potential in the
area of preventive diplomacy and mediation. It is well
known that the prevention of conflict situations is
considerably less expensive than solving them
subsequently. To this end, active support should be
extended to the United Nations Regional Centres for
Preventive Diplomacy, relevant regional organizations
and associations that provide assistance in the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the prevention of
transborder threats to security.
Thirdly, the success of our peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts in the Middle East, Afghanistan,
Africa, Haiti, East Timor and elsewhere hinges on our
ability to take the interests and priorities of the host
party into account. No assistance of the international
community should be imposed.
Fourthly, modern conflicts require complex
strategies and comprehensive solutions based on the
unity of objectives; the predictability of material,
technical and financial support; the effective
combination of military and civil stabilization efforts;
and close coordination, taking into account regional
contexts and the optimal involvement of the potential
of regional organizations pursuant to Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter. It is important to avoid
duplication of efforts and, even worse, rivalry. Based
on this understanding, we promote cooperation
between the United Nations and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization.
We welcome and fully support regular dialogue
between the Security Council and countries
contributing troops to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Such dialogue helps us to develop more
realistic mandates, adequately assess existing resources
and ensure appropriate control.
In that respect, we consider the practice of
inviting to Council meetings the commanders of
military contingents of peacekeeping operations, which

10-54839

we introduced last month during the Russian
presidency in the Security Council, to be of particular
use. The Russian proposal to further intensify the
activities of the Military Staff Committee remains
relevant and has enjoyed a positive response from a
growing number of States. It provides for the further
development of practical cooperation between the
Military Staff Committee and the Security Council, the
Secretariat and all interested Member States, in full
compliance with the United Nations Charter and its
Article 47. This would ensure a systemic and
professional
military
expert
assessment
of
peacekeeping activities.
In the light of the upcoming drawdown of
operations in Chad and East Timor and the downsizing
of operations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Côte d'Ivoire and Liberia, it is especially important to
develop effective exit strategies. Such strategies should
help to optimize costs and to focus efforts and existing
resources on creating conditions favourable to
strengthening political settlements, preventing the
recurrence of conflicts and ensuring effective postconflict peacebuilding.
Additional attention should be given to the
question of how peacekeeping and peacebuilding
mandates can be rationally combined and how and
when to engage the Peacebuilding Commission, the
United Nations specialized agencies and regional
organizations.
Russian peacekeepers participate in the
operations in the Middle East, various regions of
Africa, Kosovo, East Timor and Haiti. Our helicopter
units have been deployed as part of the United Nations
missions in Sudan, Chad and the Central African
Republic. Russia provides tangible material, technical
and transport support to United Nations peacekeeping
operations and conducts training of civil police officers
from various regions of the world, including from
African countries. This policy is supported by our
annual contribution to the Peacekeeping Fund in the
amount $2 million. Russia will continue to increase its
practical contribution to the peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities of the United Nations.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Ambassador Celso Amorim, Minister of External
Relations of Brazil, to take the floor.

15

S/PV.6389

Mr. Amorim (Brazil): I would like to commend
President Gül and the Turkish delegation for their
initiative to hold this high-level meeting.
Sixty-five years ago, the United Nations was
founded to prevent another war of great proportions.
For many, however, real peace has never come about.
Millions still live in a world where conflict and poverty
nurture each other. International efforts to promote
stability have been hindered by a narrow view, in
which peace was only seen as the absence of armed
conflict.
Today it is clear that peace, security,
development, human rights and the rule of law are
interrelated. Peace can never flourish where there is
hunger and poverty. As much as an exit strategy,
peacekeeping operations must have a strategy of
sustainability, a strategy that will deliver the real
dividends of peace: stability, development and strong
national institutions.
Peacekeeping and peacebuilding should, to the
extent possible, go hand in hand. Let me be clear: we
are not advocating that the Security Council be given a
mandate to promote development. But, in most cases,
the Security Council would benefit from the advice of
the Peacebuilding Commission. Other bodies of the
United Nations system must also be involved. The
coordination between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council foreseen in Article 65 of
the United Nations Charter should be fully exercised.
Let me give a couple of examples.
In Haiti, where Brazil is proud to have
contributed to the United Nations-led stabilization
efforts, it is clear that there will be no lasting peace if
extreme poverty and deprivation are not adequately
addressed — and that was true even before the
earthquake. Real stability will prevail only if the
window of opportunity created by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti is seized to strengthen
institutions and to improve the living conditions of the
Haitian people. This will require deep involvement of
various bodies dealing with economic and social
matters, as well as of the international financial
institutions, all under appropriate coordination by the
United Nations.
Guinea-Bissau presents another situation in
which poverty and institutional instability hamper
peace. The reforms needed by that country, especially

16

reform of its armed forces, will require courageous
decisions on the part of its authorities. But it cannot
dispense with substantial international cooperation.
And in order to achieve these combined goals, proper
attention by the Security Council may be needed.
Interaction with other United Nations bodies and
the ability to cope with complex situations are
indispensable to make the Security Council more
effective. But that is not enough. It needs to be more
representative and legitimate. Its working methods
must become more transparent. Security issues that
concern the whole of the international community
cannot be dealt with as the private domain of a limited
number of Powers.
Improving the effectiveness of the Security
Council depends also on the role of non-permanent
members. They must fully participate in the decisionmaking process. Non-permanent members can bring a
diversity of views and regional experiences to the
Council. It is not appropriate to call upon them only to
ratify decisions already taken by the permanent
members.
It is also impossible to discuss the Council’s
effectiveness without addressing the question of the
veto. We are realistic. We are not proposing to abolish
the veto. However, imaginative formulas that make its
use more difficult or encourage self-restraint are
necessary.
All of the measures I have set out — a holistic
approach to crises, the reform of the Council’s
composition, increasing the role of the non-permanent
members and restraining the use of the veto — should
contribute to making the international community more
engaged in the Council’s decisions.
Finally, let me say a word on sanctions.
Sanctions, in particular economic sanctions, are
foreseen in the United Nations Charter for special
intractable situations. Therefore, there should be
nothing illegitimate about them in principle. But, more
often than not, the imposition of sanctions brings about
unintended effects and has a negative impact on the
civilian population, especially on its more vulnerable
sectors. So, sanctions constitute an instrument to be
used with great caution and only when all avenues of
dialogue and understanding have been exhausted.

10-54839

S/PV.6389

The President: I now invite Her Excellency The
Honourable Hillary Rodham Clinton, Secretary of State
of the United States of America, to take the floor.
Ms. Clinton (United States of America): I
commend the Security Council, the Turkish leadership
and the Secretary-General for the important statement
that will be issued at the end of this Council meeting,
and for the emphasis placed on the centrality of
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. I think
we have heard today — and will hear from the rest of
our colleagues — how important it is to improve these
functions as both a humanitarian and a strategic
imperative. I am pleased that the statement itself
emphasizes reducing and resolving conflicts and also
providing better protection to civilians from violence,
including protecting women and children from sexual
violence. And I am very glad that it is clear-eyed about
the current limitations of the United Nations and that it
recognizes that all of us, as Member States, have a
responsibility to work together to improve this core
function.
I have seen the good that the United Nations has
accomplished all over the world, and I have been
privileged to meet many of the dedicated men and
women who work under the blue flag in troubled lands
very far from their homes: places like Liberia, where
United Nations forces have provided the space and
security that that war-torn country needed to begin
putting itself back together; Pakistan, where United
Nations aid workers are assisting people whose homes
and livelihoods have been washed away by the floods;
and, of course, Haiti, where United Nations
peacekeepers, led by Brazil, were immediately back on
the streets after the earthquake, despite having suffered
grievous losses themselves. Their presence has
provided much-needed order, stability and hope in so
many places, and we should never forget the sacrifices
and service of these soldiers, police officers, advisers
and aid workers who do the hard work and face the
danger far from this Chamber that we are in today.
Last year, President Obama met with the leaders
of top troop- and police-contributing countries to thank
them and discuss how to make United Nations
peacekeeping more effective. And I would like to take
this opportunity to reaffirm our appreciation for the
contributions of all of the nations that have made
financial commitments. We will do our best to work
together to improve every aspect of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

10-54839

As the presidential statement says, these
undertakings have become increasingly complex. It is
no longer enough to just provide peacekeepers. That
must be accompanied by effective mediation,
peacemaking and peacebuilding. We are concerned
about the growing gap between multifaceted mission
requirements and the resources available to meet them.
Too often, despite their ambitious mandates, United
Nations missions lack key capacities. They do not have
enough helicopters; they do not have enough medic
units; they do not have enough police mentors or crisis
response tools. And they are often hampered by
inadequate efforts to improve governance and the rule
of law. Sending out these missions without the
resources and support they need undermines their
effectiveness and jeopardizes the safety of United
Nations personnel.
I also very much wish to associate myself with
the comments of the President of Uganda, concerning
the fact that we need to do more in cooperation with
regional forces and with countries themselves.
Ultimately, the countries we are trying to help stabilize
and the civilians we are trying to protect, pay the price
of our inadequate financing, organizing and executing
of these missions. So improvement begins with clear,
credible and achievable mandates for all United
Nations missions — and, of course, that starts right
here.
The United States also strongly supports
operational reforms that would enable United Nations
field missions to deploy more rapidly, with adequate
numbers of well-equipped and well-trained troops and
police, and with the quality of leadership and civilian
expertise they require. We also support management
reforms for improved efficiency, accountability and
transparency. The United States is expanding its efforts
to help other countries train and supply formed police
units that have the skills and experience to fulfil these
difficult missions. These police units provide a critical
bridge between short-term security operations and
long-term work on governance and the rule of law. And
there should be a special focus on boosting the number
of women police officers and peacekeepers, like the
Indian women I met who were serving so well in
Liberia.
The United States is also funding new United
Nations efforts to integrate the protection of civilians
into every facet of its missions, from strategic planning
to on-the-ground operations. It is heartbreaking when

17

S/PV.6389

we receive reports, either from the United Nations
itself or through the press, that civilians near where
United Nations troops are stationed continue to suffer
horrific attacks and violence. One place where we need
better coordination, and where it is absolutely urgent,
is the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), where
sexual and gender-based violence against civilians has
reached unimaginable proportions. Last year, after
visiting the DRC and meeting with women who were
brutally assaulted and raped, I chaired the Council’s
adoption of resolution 1888 (2009), to combat sexual
violence in conflict zones. I regret to say we have not
made progress. Today I am announcing that the United
States will provide new funding to help implement that
important measure of resolution 1888 (2009), including
the establishment of a Special Representative’s office
and the ramping up of its efforts to support justice and
accountability. We will also contribute to training and
protection to those who work for accountability on the
ground in the DRC, and to help the DRC develop and
implement its own justice mechanisms.
The United States is, as we have been from the
very beginning, committed to improving United
Nations operations — not just because we think it is
the right thing to do, and not just because the
humanitarian imperative is so strong in our own value
system — but because we actually think it is smart and
strategic as well. These missions can help contain and
resolve conflicts that would otherwise engulf nations
and regions. They can help prevent fragile States from
becoming failed States and sources of wider instability.
And they can help struggling countries start on the road
to becoming productive partners. I look around this
Chamber and I see representatives from countries that
have known war in the very recent past, that have been
torn apart, and still are, by conflict. They have
re-emerged, and they have sustained themselves,
against great odds; and they are now nations
contributing to solving their own and other problems.
So, Mr. President, I hope the discussion that you
have brought to the forefront by chairing this summit
here in the Security Council is not just another
meeting, but that we will follow through and do
everything we can to make one of the most important
missions of the United Nations — peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding — more effective. The
United States will do its part, but we must all do
everything we can so that we are supporting those
brave men and women wearing those wonderful-

18

looking blue berets — when we see them we are proud
of them — and not just sending them to do a mission
that from the very beginning is impossible.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. William Hague, Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, to take the floor.
Mr. Hague (United Kingdom): I begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this
summit. Given the new security threats and economic
constraints we face, this debate provides an
opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to improving
the ability of the United Nations to prevent conflict, to
forge sustainable peace agreements and to keep and
build peace.
Instability and conflict have a devastating impact
around the world. They affect the lives of millions of
people and the prosperity of countries and whole
regions. Twenty-two of the 34 countries furthest from
achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
are in the midst of, or are emerging from, violent
conflict. Instability and lawlessness provide fertile
ground for extremism, organized crime and
terrorism — threats that reach beyond the borders of
single States. Delivering national security has become
a global effort and a global responsibility. Tackling
conflict requires a cohesive, strategic and integrated
response. In the United Kingdom, one of our first acts
in the new Government was to establish a national
security council to coordinate efforts across foreign
affairs, defence and international development. In the
United Nations we have supported reform to ensure
coherence across conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, something that the Security Council,
and the whole United Nations system, has collectively
sought to deliver in recent years.
But the real test is whether such reforms are
making a difference on the ground. We strongly
commend the dedication of United Nations
peacekeepers around the world. In the year ahead,
major challenges will continue to place significant
demands on these dedicated men and women.
Peacekeepers will play a critical role supporting the
referendum in the Sudan; and in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo we will require still greater
effort and innovation from our peacekeepers as they
seek to halt attacks on civilians, and in particular on
women and children.

10-54839

S/PV.6389

But peacekeeping alone cannot deliver long-term
stability in fragile States. Peacebuilding is critical if we
are to address the underlying causes of conflict, such as
corruption, ethnic hatred and marginalization. It is
critical if we are to strengthen national capacity to
manage political disputes peacefully. And it is critical
if we are to be better at helping countries re-establish
the rule of law, reform security services, shore up good
governance and begin economic development.
Peacebuilding needs to happen as soon as possible, in
order for belligerents and the wider population to have
the confidence to invest in a peace agreement.
In the year ahead we need to see the conclusion
of reform that remains incomplete. The United Nations
review of international civilian capacities should set
out bold recommendations on how the United Nations
can much more quickly deploy the right expertise to
post-conflict countries. This includes making much
better use of the capacity of regional organizations and
Member States, particularly those of the South. We also
need to see more effective use of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We support the recent review, but we
now need to encourage the Commission to take on the
really difficult challenges to peacebuilding and provide
advice to the Council, and others, on the course of
action required to resolve them. In the year ahead
Liberia will be a proving ground for the Peacebuilding
Commission. It must help build local capacity to
maintain the rule of law so that the United Nations can
transfer responsibility for security to national
authorities.
If we are serious about tackling conflict, then the
Security Council, along with the rest of the United
Nations system, needs to develop a genuine culture of
prevention. This is a question of political will. The
Council must be prepared to take up fast-moving
situations in countries that are not on its agenda. We
must support regular analysis of potential conflict by
the Secretary-General and his senior staff. We should
encourage experts across the United Nations system to
share information on potential precursors to conflict.
Our human rights specialists must be able to share their
concerns with those looking for early signs of conflict,
and we must have a stronger dialogue with regional
and subregional organizations on ways to prevent
conflict, including on issues that drive conflict, such as
illicit extraction of natural resources.
In the year ahead, if we are to tackle these new
threats to security, we will need to deliver regular

10-54839

improvement and lasting impact on the ground. We
will need to demonstrate that we are tackling potential
conflict in this Council. We will need to show that, by
the decisions we take and the actions we mandate, we
are reducing the impact of violence on civilian
populations, and we will need to be confident that we
are building national security sectors so that we can
withdraw peacekeeping operations, strong in the
knowledge that we have supported sustainable peace.
The President: I now invite Her Excellency
Mrs. Patricia Espinosa Cantellano, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Mexico, to take the floor.
Mrs. Espinosa Cantellano (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We wish at the outset to thank you,
Mr. President, for having taken the initiative to
convene this meeting of the Security Council to debate
at the highest level the issue of strengthening of the
role of the Council in the maintenance of peace and
security. We also thank your delegation for its guidance
of the work of the Council.
The evolution of the international context
requires the Council to adapt its skills and mechanisms
to cope effectively and comprehensively with the new
international challenges and threats, recognizing the
clear interdependence between development, respect
for international law, human rights and security. Today,
we face threats — such as international terrorism and
transnational organized crime, including illicit
trafficking in drugs, arms and persons — that affect the
world in a transversal manner. No country remains
unaffected, and no one can face them on their own.
The Security Council, as the highest legitimate
body responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security, in accordance with the prerogatives
conferred on it by the Charter of the United Nations,
should continue to strengthen its mechanisms and the
reach of its decisions in order more effectively to
address threats that affect contemporary global
stability, instead of being overtaken by reality.
Mexico believes that we live at a time when we
have the tools and opportunities to promote an
environment conducive to tangible improvements in
peace and security. As it has rarely done before, the
Council now works to reach consensus based on
negotiations within the framework of the international
law. There is also a positive and constructive
relationship among the permanent members, as well as
an exceptionally consistent group of non-permanent

19

S/PV.6389

members
security.

committed

to

international

peace

and

These elements show us that it is possible to
strengthen the peacekeeping agenda, emphasizing
conflict prevention and peacebuilding, and providing
the political support necessary to ensure lasting peace.
Our work should seek to ensure that the Security
Council’s efforts have a positive impact on the field as
part of a comprehensive and coherent long-term
strategy that builds and strengthens lasting peace and
promotes the safety of the civilian population,
particularly women and children. We must also
continue to encourage respect for the international
legal framework, ensuring compliance with the
Council’s decisions and confronting impunity, in
particular for violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights.
We believe that there should be a greater
emphasis on conflict prevention. Dialogue and the
peaceful settlement of disputes are essential to
strengthening international cooperation in maintaining
peace and security, eradicating the structural causes of
conflict and encouraging the development and use of
resources in a more rational way. In the course of our
participation in the Council’s work, we have
particularly emphasized the peaceful settlement of
disputes, preventive diplomacy, respect for the rule of
law, and transparency in the Council’s working
methods, all of which are needed to promote the higher
efficiency of this organ’s capacities.
Mexico has always promoted the peaceful
settlement of disputes and remains convinced that the
genuine strengthening of the role of the Organization
in the world depends on the validity of Chapter VI of
the Charter of the United Nations. Throughout its
history, Mexico has been one of its most active
promoters, resorting to arbitration and international
courts and encouraging the peaceful settlement of
disputes through mediation in our region. To a large
extent, and thanks to mediation, for several decades
Latin America and the Caribbean has been one of the
most peaceful regions of the world. Mediation has led
to the resolution of political and ideological conflicts
and territorial and border disputes. Thus, in 2009 we
convened a debate of the Security Council on
mediation and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Conflict prevention and post-conflict attention
must remain among the primary objectives of the

20

Organization, which must address the causes in a
comprehensive and long-term manner. Peacekeeping
and post-conflict capacity-building, in particular of
civilian capabilities, are key components of the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law.
We believe that, in 2010, important progress has
been made in maintaining the relevance of the topic on
the agenda of the Security Council. The debate on the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security, held
in June, is one example of that. It is also important to
highlight the Council’s resolutions urging the parties to
armed conflicts to comply with international
humanitarian law and to protect vulnerable groups.
With respect to international humanitarian law,
the Council has assumed the role of collective
guarantor under the Protocol Additional I to the
Geneva Conventions. With full conviction, we have
convened two meeting on child protection in conflict
situations aimed at protecting their rights and ensuring
their return to a safe environment with prospects for
growth and development. Also, with the support of the
members of the Security Council, in 2009 we have
strengthened the tools of this Council through
resolution 1882 (2009), among others.
As an elected member of the Security Council,
and also within the General Assembly, Mexico will
continue to contribute in creating conditions of
stability and lasting peace at the international level, as
we have done since the founding of the Organization,
acting under the principles of transparency,
democratization and accountability.
I conclude by expressing my delegation’s support
for the draft presidential statement to be adopted at the
end of this meeting, which will undoubtedly strengthen
the work of the Council in maintaining international
peace and security.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Bernard Kouchner, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
France, to take the floor.
Mr. Kouchner (France) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Sir, for your initiative to convene this
meeting so that we might consider together the ways in
which we undertake the United Nations most essential
mission — that of maintaining international peace and
security.

10-54839

S/PV.6389

We must be clear-headed. Peacekeeping
operations are often criticized, even rejected, by host
countries, as we have witnessed recently. Sometimes,
they struggle to fulfil their mandates. They are
expensive. They are not always as responsive as they
should be. And we were all appalled by the impunity
with which, even very recently, mass rapes were
perpetrated in the Kivus, despite the deployment of a
United Nations operation with significant assets. All of
this is true. But do not let the trees hide the forest.
What would we do without peacekeeping operations?
No other international organization enjoys the
legitimacy, the capacity and indeed the will to do what
the United Nations does on a daily basis throughout the
world. Clearly, even if all of us clearly favour
prevention, and despite the system’s imperfections, we
have not yet found anything better with which to assist
and strengthen nascent and therefore fragile peace
processes; to assist States in need to restore their
capacities, administer their territory and thus avoid a
return to conflict; to guarantee the international
community’s vigilance and ensure that the most
vulnerable are not left all alone in facing the hangman —
in a word, to involve the entire international community
in the settlement of crises from which we do not want to
avert our eyes.
This mission is extremely bold, perilous and,
some would even say, utopian. If the United Nations
does not meet this challenge, no one can do it in its
place. It is thus imperative that the Council — which
bears, I repeat, the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security —
learn from both its successes and its failures and adapt
its decisions accordingly.
You, Mr. President, rightly voiced the hope that
this meeting would cover all aspects related to the
maintenance of peace, whether it be the prevention of
conflicts, or peacekeeping or peacebuilding when they
have ended. Indeed, increasingly, we need to consider
all of this together.
At the very heart of this process, we have
peacekeeping itself. Of course, we are especially
wedded to this, because this is one of the major
responsibilities of the United Nations, and because the
lives of millions of women, men and children depend
on peacekeeping operations. Thousands of French
soldiers and over 150 gendarmes and police officers
serve as Blue Helmets — as Hillary Clinton said

10-54839

earlier, thinking of our berets — and my country
contributes to the tune of $585 million to the budget
for peacekeeping operations.
We have experienced failure. We have
experienced success. In certain cases, we have reached
the limits of what we could expect of the missions. We
have also witnessed tragedies: in Rwanda, in the
former Yugoslavia and in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We must remember these. We have learned
those lessons.
We are now striving to ensure that peacekeeping
operations be based on specific, clear and prioritized
mandates, with a clear timeline when possible, and that
they be supported by appropriate and sufficient
financial, human and technical resources. I am looking
across the Chamber at the head of peacekeeping
operations, who is looking at me dubiously.
We have also adapted the United Nations actions
to ensure better protection for vulnerable populations
and achieve lasting results. Have we been successful?
Not always. Today, the success of the United Nations
must be gauged by the yardstick of the protection of
civilians. Our credibility is at stake here.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) illustrate the challenges we must
face. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
protection of civilians remains the priority for the Blue
Helmets’ mandate. But the situation is not under
control, as the Council is well aware, particularly in the
east, as shown by the recurrence of terrible violence
against civilians, of which I just spoke — in particular
against women, since it is easier.
The training of the police and army must lead to
law enforcement forces being redeployed to liberated
areas, without a security vacuum, and to the authority
of the Congolese State, including in the judicial field,
being lastingly restored throughout the Territory.
In Darfur, attacks against civilians do not take
place by chance. They are organized and have been
described as crimes against humanity by the
International Criminal Court. In the climate of
impunity that prevails in that battered region,
UNAMID is repeatedly exposed to attacks, which
prevents it from protecting civilians sufficiently, even

21

S/PV.6389

in the camps. The Security Council should reflect on
how to respond to that situation.
Apart from the primary need to protect civilians,
it is also necessary to draw up strategies for emergence
from crisis that ensure a lasting return to peace, in
particular with regard to the economic, social and
political recovery of communities often ravaged by
conflict.
In line with those developments, we have taken
steps to restore the effectiveness of the Security
Council. Change is under way. We must welcome that
and welcome the commitment of the Secretariat, which
was able to adapt to the new modus operandi and the
new relationships that the Council wished to establish
among all actors. However, there remains much to do.
I thank you again, Mr. President, for having
organized this meeting. We must continue our work to
ensure a stronger chain of command in operations,
which has started, in order to improve cooperation
among troop-contributing countries and also to ensure
stricter political, military and financial supervision of
peacekeeping operations. We should improve our work
on resources and implementing budgets, as Celso
Amorim has just said, by ensuring that when it takes
decisions, the Council has a sound understanding of
their operational and financial impact and of their
future. We should also regularly review the strategy,
balance, composition and size of operations.
Peacekeeping operations are the expression of the
international community’s commitment. I pay tribute to
all those who are in charge, involved and sometimes
victims. Such operations must establish lasting peace.
That is easy to say, but they are not meant to last
forever. It is necessary to then secure those
achievements and ensure the implementation of a true
transition strategy.
That is why it is critical that we learn to better
manage the transition and withdrawal phases in
peacekeeping missions. At that level too, considerable
effort has been made in recent years and there have
been successes, seen in the gradual transfer of
responsibilities to national authorities and the orderly
withdrawal of several peacekeeping operations. I am
thinking of Burundi, Sierra Leone and Cambodia.
Faced with legitimate criticism, we forget the
successes.

22

However, we need to make more progress. We are
counting on the Peacebuilding Commission, which has
been mentioned, to come up with a response to the
need to ensure better coordinated activities of the
international community in the phases of emerging
from a conflict. One thinks that once the operation has
ended, the problems are over. They are just starting.
The stakes in peacebuilding must be taken into
account from the first stages of crisis management in
order to anticipate the conditions and mechanisms to
emerge from the crisis. That compels us today to assess
the risks associated with new threats, such as drug and
human trafficking, organized crime and even
corruption, which are very likely to destabilize fragile
countries.
Finally, it must be said, the efforts undertaken by
the international community in mandating a
peacekeeping operation require resolute commitment
by the host State. The political contract entered into
must be severed only once lasting peace has been
restored. It is never acceptable for a Government to
give notice to a United Nations mission or decide on its
withdrawal without consultations, in particular without
providing credible assurances that it is capable of
taking over. I know that it is not easy and that we are
faced with similar situations.
This debate, which you, Mr. President, have taken
the initiative to organize and which will be
complemented by an outstanding statement, affords us
another opportunity to reiterate our commitment to
peacekeeping and our desire to further improve its
effectiveness. Rest assured that France will spare no
effort in advancing the implementation of our common
road map.
The President: I shall now make some brief
remarks in my national capacity.
Having listened to the members of the Council
and the valuable insights they have presented based on
their own experiences, I can easily state that the
purpose of the meeting has already been well served.
This exchange has proven to be particularly important
for my country, since Turkey is situated at the
crossroads of a host of conventional and asymmetrical
risks and threats dominating a vast geography ranging
from the Balkans to the Middle East, from the Black
Sea and the Mediterranean to the Caucasus and Central
Asia. Therefore, Turkey often finds itself dealing with
a great diversity of issues affecting its own security

10-54839

S/PV.6389

and beyond, and tries to help generate peace and
stability in that broad area.

is essential for these efforts to be sustained throughout
the implementation of peace accords, too.

In doing so, we, like many other members of the
international community, rely on and resort to a wide
range of tools, including mediation, preventive
diplomacy, peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding.
Indeed, Turkey has recently become particularly
recognized for its active mediation and facilitation efforts.
This is no coincidence, because we see such preventive
efforts as the most cost-effective and efficient way of
resolving potential and existing disputes. We also have
the comparative advantage and capacity to do so. As such,
we attach great importance to building and improving the
preventive capacities of the international community.

Similarly, peacekeeping, which has become an
increasingly complex and robust undertaking, should
not be confined to stabilization operations carried out
by police and military forces. In order to ensure lasting
success, our peacekeeping mandates must incorporate
an early and long-term peacebuilding perspective. In
this regard, the critical linkages between security and
development, or between human rights, democracy and
security, should be taken into account. The root causes
of conflicts ought to be addressed early on to create the
conditions for sustainable peace and stability.
Likewise, the necessary civilian capacities with respect
to good governance, the rule of law, human rights, and
economic and human development have to be
improved at both the national and the international
levels.

In the case of ongoing conflicts, on the other
hand, we are a significant police- and troopcontributing country in many United Nations and
international peacekeeping missions. Moreover, we are
actively involved in a broad range of peacebuilding
activities, including development assistance schemes,
with a view to helping create the conditions for
sustainable peace. The lessons we have drawn from
these experiences can also shed some light on our
discussion today.
First, starting with preventive diplomacy, the
international community needs to better coordinate its
activities. Given the multidimensional and indivisible
nature of the current security environment, all major
stakeholders need to collaborate among themselves,
starting within the United Nations itself. The Security
Council, in particular, must reach out to its partners
within and outside the United Nations system and
make better use of their comparative advantages in the
pursuit of our shared objectives.
Secondly, the Council’s approach to peace and
security should be of a more comprehensive and
strategic nature. So far, there has been a tendency to
use our operational tools in a more sequential fashion
in the order of preventive diplomacy, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding. Our
experience, however, suggests that pursuing such a
uniform and linear sequence holds us back in each area
and creates inefficiencies. We should instead be able to
forge an overarching political strategy, placing all these
tools within an integrated, coherent framework. For
instance, mediation and facilitation should not be
merely seen as a way of reaching certain agreements. It

10-54839

Finally, we have to admit that we operate in a
rapidly evolving and somewhat unpredictable security
environment. Indeed, the risks and threats facing us
constantly change, requiring us to adapt our actions
and responses accordingly. Despite dedicated efforts,
the Council has so far proven to be somewhat slow in
adapting itself to changing circumstances.
In order to remedy this shortcoming, the Council
needs to interact more with non-member countries and
in a more transparent and forward-looking manner. The
Council should also endow itself with enhanced early
warning and assessment capabilities, as well as flexible
resourcing mechanisms. There are many other related
topics we might discuss in this context, but in view of
the time, let me stop here and reiterate my hope that
this meeting will re-energize the Council’s efforts for
peace and security.
In the uncharted waters of the twenty-first
century, there is no doubt that we need a more effective
Security Council to fulfil its primary responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security. Today’s
debate has demonstrated that this common objective is
well within reach. We now need to take the necessary
concrete steps to materialize it. Turkey will always be a
reliable partner of the Council and the international
community in this just and noble drive.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

23

S/PV.6389

The Council has before it the text of a statement
by the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today’s meeting. I thank Council members for their
valuable contributions to this statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members of
the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Security Council agree to the statement, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/PRST/2010/18.

24

It was so decided.
The President: I wish to thank all of the Heads
of State and Government, Ministers and the SecretaryGeneral for their contributions to this important
meeting. The Security Council has thus concluded its
deliberations.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

10-54839
