-.

UMTED

NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTIETH

YEAR

18ii4th

MEETING:

UN
pJp
)I)w
.I
15 DECEMBER

1975

MAY 3 t^i is@!

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1864) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in Timor:
Letter dated 7 December 1975 from the Permanent Representative of Portugal
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1899) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1864

,

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of c&ta1 letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfJicicrl Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which inforI
mation about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of R,molutions
and
Decisions of the’ Security Council. The new system, which, has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1864th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 15 December 1975, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

to participate
vote.

Present: ’ The representatives
of the following
States: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China,
Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania,‘Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of
Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

the right to

3. The PRESIDENT:
Other representatives
have
also expressed their intention of addressing the Council on the item now under consideration.
I have
received letters from the representatives of Malaysia
and Australia requesting that they be invited to participate in the discussion, pursuant to Article 31 of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure. Accordingly,
I shall, in the absence of
objection, invite the representatives of Malaysia and
Australia to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote. In view of the limited number of seats
available around the Council table, I shall ask them
to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber, on the usual understanding that
they will be invited to take a place at the Council
table whenever they wish to address the Council.

>

The situation in Timor:
!
Letter dated 7 December
1975 from the Permanent Representative
of Portugal to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 1899)
The meeting

without

At the invitution of the President, Mr. Anwur Suni
(Indonesia) took a pluce at the Council table:

agenda (S/Agenda/l864)

of the agenda

in the discussion,

MWS called to order ut 3.40 p.m.
LL
Adoption of the agenda

At the invitution
of the President, Mr. Johuri
(Muluysiu)
und Mr. Cumpbell (Austruliu) took the
places reserved for them ut the side of the Council
chumber.

The ugendu wus udopted.
The situation in Timor:
Letter dated 7 December 1975 from the Permanent
Representative of Portugal to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11899)

4. The PRESIDENT:
I should like also to inform
the members of the Security Council that I have
received two letters containing requests that the Council extend invitations under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure. The first letter [S/1/91/], which is
dated 12 December and signed by the representative
requests that an invitation
be
of Guinea-Bissau,
extended to Mr. Jose Ramos Hot-ta, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Information
of the Democratic
Republic of East Timor. The second letter, [S///912],
which bears today’s date and is signed by the representative of Indonesia,
requests that an invitation
be
extended to Mr. Guilhermo Maria Goncalves, member
of the presidium of APODETI
[AssociqZo
Pop&r
Democrdticu
Timorense], to Mr. Mario CarrascalHo,
member of the Central Committee
of UDT [Unilio
Democrdticu
de Timor] and to Mr. Jose Martins,
President of KOTA
[Klibur Oun Timor Aswain].
If no member of the Council raises any objection, I
shall take it that. the Council agrees to extend those
invitations
to the persons named in those letters,
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure,
and at the appropriate
moment, therefore, I shall

1. The PRESIDENT:
In his letter dated 7 December
requesting the convening of this meeting, the representative of Portugal asked to be invited to participate
in the present discussion. In accordance with the
usual practice, I propose to extend an invitation to him
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with Article 3 1 of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitution
of the President,
Mr. Gulvtio
Telrs (Portugal) took u place at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT:
I have also received a.letter,
dated 12 December, from the representative of Indonesia, requesting that he be invited to participate in
the present discussion, in accordance with Article 31
of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure. Accordingly,
if there is no objection,
I
propose to invite the representative
of Indonesia
1

invite them to come to the Council
their statements.
It nm

table and make

so decided.

5. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council has
included in its agenda the question concerning the
situation in Timor pursuant to the request contained
in the letter which the representative
of Portugal
addressed to me on 7 December [S/if899]. I have also
received a letter from the Secretary-General informing
the Council
that the General Assembly,
at its
2439th meeting, on 12 December, adopted resolution
3485 (XXX) on this same subject. The Security Council
has that letter before it [S/11909].
6. The first speaker is the representative
on whom I now call.

of Portugal,

7. Mr. GALVAO TELES (Portugal) (interpretation
from French): Mr. President, on behalf of the Portuguese Government and of my delegation, I should like
to thank you and the other members of the Council
for being kind enough to meet in order to consider the
present situation in Portuguese Timor and to take the
necessary measures to put an end to Indonesia’s
military aggression and to restore conditions permitting
the resumption of the ongoing process of decolonization. I wish also to thank the Council for giving me
this opportunity to speak before it in order to set forth
my Government’s
position on this matter.
8. I sincerely believe that no one can deny Portugal’s fum intention, beginning on 25 April 1974, to bring
about the decolonization
of its colonial Territories
while scrupulously respecting the principle of the free
exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination
and independence, in accordance with the Charter and
the resolutions of the General Assembly. However,
the colonial
situations inherited
from the former
dictatorial Portuguese regime differed substantially one
from the other not only with respect to the degree of
implantation
and experience of the respective liberation movements but above all with respect to the
balance of power existing within the regional political
framework of each country concerned. Consequently,
the decolonization
of each of the Territories under
Portuguese administration,
while based on the same
general principles, has perforce taken place under different conditions.
9. The culmination
of the decolonization
process of
five Territories-Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique,
Cape
Verde, Sao Tome and Principe, and Angola-and
the way that process is being carried out in the last
country still under Portuguese administration,
Timor,
enables us to draw one certain conclusion, that is, that
the internal difficulties encountered by each of the
people of these Territories in the formation and expression of their free will have always been the result
in varying degrees of the influence, claims and plans
of foreign Powers, particularly neighbouring countries.

10. Thus we note that in the case of the aforementioned Territories,
where the neighbouring countries-with
the exception,
in one case, of South
Africa-had
no claim to hegemony, decolonization
could be completed
peacefully by recognizing the
liberation movements, the legitimate representatives
of the peoples of each of these Territories.
11. However, in Angola just as in Timor, decolonization has taken place-or,
rather, is taking place-in
spurts and in the face of serious difficulties, and in
both cases the ambitions of foreign countries regarding
these Territories are evident to all. In view of their
intensity and their extent, these ambitions have made it
possible to interfere in the internal life of the colonized
peoples, making it difficult, if not impossible, to ensure
the proper expression of the will of the peoples. That
is the cause of the tragedy in Angola, where the
interests of neighbouring countries and the claims to
hegemony of the great Powers have prevented the
Portuguese from fully handing over Angola to the
Angolans and where these same interests and claims
may well prevent Angola from fully belonging to the
Angolans. Unfortunately,
Timor also is the victim
of similar expansionist claims. That is why Portugal
has encountered successive difficulties which have
prevented the practical application of the principle of
the right to self-determination
and independence there.
Indeed, my Government planned to establish as soon
as possible a timetable for the decolonization of Timor,
through direct negotiations
with the three political
parties that had emerged after 25 April
1974:
APODETI,
which advocated Timor’s integration into
the Republic of Indonesia, and FRETILIN,
[Frente
Revoluciondria
de Timor Leste Independente]
and
UDT, which called for the Territory’s independence.
12. It must be stressed. however, that none of those
parties had yet been recognized either by any regional
organization or by the United Nations, and that there
had been no liberation
movement
fighting against
colonial domination in Timor before 25 April.
13. In conformity with the principles of the.Charter,
with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and with
other relevant United Nations resolutions, my Government planned to put into effect in Timor the principle
of the exercise by the people of that Territory of
the right to self-determination,
by means of a refer:
endum enabling that people freely to choose the Territory’s future political status. There, as elsewhere,
Portugal feels that, since it is exercising only provisional political power in its capacity as administering
Power, it is forbidden to impose any predetermined
direction for the exercise of that right to self-determination.
14. In that spirit the Governor of Timor took the
initiative,
towards the end of 1974, of bringing the
Territory’s
political
parties into the management
of the Territory’s affairs. He proposed to them that an
Advisory Government Council be established in which

18. For its part, the Special Committee
stated the
following in paragraph 7 of the consensus adopted on
14 June 1975 on the question of the Territories under
Portuguese administration:

the three parties would be represented. But, under
various pretexts, FRETILIN
and APODETI
refused
that offer. Thus, the main goal sought-that
is, to
enable the political forces representing the people of
the Territory to participate in the establishment and
implementation
of a specific plan for decolonization
-was not achieved.

“With regard to Timor and its dependencies,
the Special Committee expresses the hope that the
necessary steps will be taken, as appropriate,
to enable to people of that Territory to attain the
goals set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and the Declaration.“’

IS. The Government
of Portugal, moreover, aware
that the process of the decolonization
of Timor must
take into account the maintenance
of peace and
security in the region, has constantly engaged in very
close contacts with the Governments of the principal
neighbours of Timor: Indonesia and Australia. Thus,
before he came to the General Assembly during the
twenty-ninth
session to set forth my Government’s
plan to hold a referendum
in Timor,
Portugal’s
Minister for Interterritorial
Co-ordination visited those
two neighbouring
countries and had talks with the
respective authorities on the Territory’s future.

19. At the end of that month a meeting took place
at Macau between a Portuguese delegation and the
representatives of APODETI
and UDT-as
I said a
moment ago, FRETILIN
refused to participate in the
talks-during
which, among others, the principle was
laid down that elections would be held for a People’s
Assembly that would have the powers of a constituent
assembly and would represent the will of the majority
of the people of Timor.

16. Meanwhile, the political parties in Timor were
trying to increase their activities and their hold on the
Territory and to establish international
contacts. In
January
1975 a FRETILIN-UDT
coalition
was
announced, and it envisaged negotiations with Portugal for the formation of a transitional government and
then the independence
of the Territory.
APODETI
was criticized by those two parties for advocating
integration with Indonesia. The Portuguese authorities,
for their part, continued to favour the participation
of all the parties in the government of the Territory,
and a new Governor tried-not
without difficulty-to
co-operate with those parties and to ensure respect
for their legitimate political activities.

20. Following that meeting, the Government of Portugal adopted Law No. 7175, issued on 17 July 1975.
That law, while it was based on the principles laid
down at Macau, stressed that since no agreement had
been reached among the three political parties and Portugal, because of the absence of FRETILIN,
Portugal
was forced to define the decolonization
process by
means of a constitutional
law which, at the same time,
would establish machinery for the exercise of political
power until Portugal ceased to have responsibility
for the administration
of the Territory.
21. That law laid down that a People’s Assembly
would be elected in October 1976 by means of a secret
ballot in which everyone would participate, and that
that Assembly would determine the future political and
administrative
status of Timor. It was envisaged that in
October 1978 Portugal’s responsibilities
would end and
would be formally assumed by the President of that
Assembly. During the transitional period Timor would
be administered by a High Commissioner,
designated
by the President of the Republic of Portugal, a Government and an Advisory Council in which the recognized political parties would be represented if they so
desired. The Government of Portugal hoped that that
law would ensure that Timor% decolonization
would
take place in an orderly way. On the one hand, it took
account of the geopolitical balance of the region; on
the other, it contained measures likely to restrain
possible neo-colonialist
ambitions.

17. It was against that background that there was
help at Lisbon in June 1975 a series of meetings of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples
during which, among other questions, the question of
the decolonization
of the Portuguese Territories was
taken up. Speaking to the Special Committee on that
point, the Minister for Interterritorial
Co-ordination
announced that the Government
of Portugal, concerned with establishing as quickly as possible a timetable for the decolonization
of Timor, had reached
an agreement with the political parties that a conference should be held at Macau in mid-June but that in
the meantime FRETILIN,
following a rupture with
UDT, had expressed the most formal opposition to
the participation
of APODETI
in the conference and
therefore refused to take part in it. The Minister
added that, if it turned out that these negotiations
with the political parties were impossible,
Portugal
would unilaterally establish the methods for the process of the decolonization
of Timor-without,
of
course, prejudicing the principle that the choice of the
Territory’s future political status had to be made by
the inhabitants of the Territory, and by them alone.

22. Unfortunately,
it was never possible to put
that law into effect. A few weeks after it was issued,
that is, on 11 August, following a visit to Jakarta
by the leaders of UDT-which,
in the meantime, had
decided to support Indonesia-elements
of armed
forces from the island favouring that political party
staged a military uprising which brought a rapid reaction from FRETILIN.
The fight between UDT and
APODETI,
on the one hand, and FRETILIN,
on the
3

other, spread rapidly throughout the country, causing
serious damage and leaving a large number of victims
and forcing thousands of inhabitants to seek refuge
in Indonesian Timor.

ties for leading.the Territory’s decolonization
process
on the basis of political sohitions are ensured”.
27. Portugal of course could not, and cannot, allow
the situation created by combat ‘in the Territory to
prejudice the fundamental
principle of respect for
the will of the majority of the people of Timor. This
situation,
for which the Portuguese
Government
cannot be held responsible, cannot legitimize the unilateral transfer of power to any one of the parties
concerned. The Government of Portugal at that time
was, and continues to be, the only legitimate authority
in the Territory, and has undertaken all possible efforts,
limited though these must be, to resume the process
of decolonization,
while safeguarding
the free
exercise of the right of the ,people of Timor to selfdetermination.

23. Thus, Portugal was confronted by a serious political; military and humanitarian problem. Its garrison in
the Territory, greatly diminished in size, was made up
principally of soldiers from the island, who deserted,
taking their weapons with them, and joined the fight
at the side of one or the other of the factions. The
great distance between Timor and Portugal made it
extremely difficult to carry out an effective military
intervention
likely to bring an end to a situation of
general civil war. The Governor and several dozen
soldiers and civilians had to leave Dili and seek refuge
in the island of Atauro, a few miles from the coast,
while others were taken prisoner by the combatant
factions. As a result of the fight, FRETILIN
established its control on the largest part of the Territory.

28. Once,again, at the beginning of October, Portugal urged the leaders of the three political parties of
Timor to agree that conversations
should, be held
at Macau, aboard a Portuguese warship outside the
territorial waters of Timor, or in Portugal itself, the
determination
of the date depending only on the time
necessary for the preparation of such a meeting.

24. For humanitarian
reasons Portugal immediately
appealed to the neighbouring
countries, Indonesia
and Australia, and to the International
Committee of
the Red Cross. Shortly after that, in response to the
appeals, the withdrawal of Portuguese and foreigners
from the island began, not without great risk and
much difficulty.

29. I wish to recall here that throughout the period
I have just described, Portugal carefully saw to it that
the United Nations was constantly kept abreast of the
developments in the situation. Thus, in addition to the
information furnished in accordance with Article 73 r
of the Charter and the detailed submission of its
position to the Special Committee
at Lisbon, the
Portuguese Government, in mid-August, in letters the
texts of which appear in official documents of the
Council [S//18/3] and the General Assembly,” alerted
the Secretary-General
to the dangers inherent in the
situation in Timor and requested him to use his good
offices should international
action prove to be necessary. ,However, the development of the situation, and
our desire to do nothing that might jeopardize the
free exercise by the people of Timor of their right. to
self-determination,
persuaded us to make no formal
appeal for international
action of that kind.

25. In August and September
1975 a Portuguese
delegation headed by a persona1 representative of the
head of .State came to Timor with the expectation
of negotiating
with the parties to the dispute and
finding a peaceful solution to the conflict. That delegation also held conversations at Jakarta and at Canberra with the Indonesian and Australian Governments concerning the situation in Timor and the
possibility of restoring peace and order so that there
might ,be a resumption of humanitrarian
operations
and an’accelerated
implementation
of the process of
decolonization.
But despite all the efforts undertaken
by the Governor and by the delegation
to start
negotiations with the political movements for the purpose of achieving a political
solution capable of
guaranteeing respect for the will ofthe people of Timor,
that objective was not attained.

30. At that time, Mr. .Almeida Santos, the special
emissary of the President of the Portuguese Republic,
came to United Nations Headquarters to inform the
Secretary-Genera1 and the Chairman of the Special
Committee
of the situation in Timor and the likely
political consequences. The. possibility of sending a
special mission of the Special Committee
to visit
Timor and the neighbouring countries for the purpose
of gathering information and suggestions on measures
to be taken was brought up in the course of these
conversations.
But it .was the prevailing impression
that, under the existing circumstances, a visit of this
type,would hardly be practical. It was for this reason
alone that Portugal refrained from submitting a formal
request to that end; Subsequently, the text of the telegrams exchanged at the beginning of October between
Portugal and the leaders of the political parties of

26. In Portugal, the National Decolonization
Commission, in a communique
issued on 23 September
which is before the General Assembly at the present
session, stated that “the problem can only be resolved
through political means, that is, through talks with
all the political
parties together or separately”.2
Reaffirming that “negotiations
exclusively with one
of these groups or any solution that does not meet
with the wishes of the people of Timor are out of the
question”, the Committee asked the political parties to
give up their demand for purely bilateral negotiations,
and it concluded by reiterating the desire of the
Portuguese Government
“to continue to honour the
historical and moral responsibilities
of the Portuguese
people for the people of Timor, as long as possibili4

.’

Timor, containing the appea! for negotiations
mentioned a moment ago, was also submitted
Secretary-General.

that

1

to the

31. On 9 October 1975, addressing the General
Assembly during its present session, the Foreign
Minister of my country, Mr. Melo Antunes, referred
to the problem of Timor in these terms:
“As regards Timor, the situation is an extremely
serious one. Portugal has proposed to the political
parties of Timor, APODETI,
FRETILIN
and UDT,
that talks be held with a view to finding a peaceful
solution w.ith regard to the political future of the
Territory.
We are ready to accept a wide range of
political
formulas
which would really cater to
the interests of the peoples of Timor, without failing
to take into account the legitimate interests in that
geopolitical
area, namely those of Indonesia, and
which could be worked out by agreement with the
representative parties of Timor. On the other hand,
Portugal, as of now, declares itself ready to hold
talks with Indonesia,
at the appropriate
level,
with a view to opening the way to a rapid and
negotiated solution
of the conflicts existing at
present and to the determination
of the political
future of the Territory, always with the agreement
of the three parties.“4
32. ,The Foreign Ministers of Portugal and Indonesia
held a,meeting at Rome at the beginning of November
in which the problem of the decolonization
of Portuguese *Timor was examined. The communique
issued
at the conclusion of that meeting stated the following:
“The two Ministers expressed their continued
adherence to the principles of decolonization
as
enunciated in the pertinent resolutions of the United
Nations and to the scrupulous safeguarding of the
principle of respect of the will of the people of
Portuguese Timor.“”
They recognized

also

“that the fundamental responsibility for the decolonization of Portuguese Timor lies with Portugal and
that Portugal, as the legitimate authority in that
Territory,
e.ngages itself to undertake all efforts
towards the speedy and orderly implementation
of
the act of self-determination
by the people of Portuguese Timor.“;
and
“the two Ministers concurred on the necessity to
convene, at the earliest possible time, a meeting
between the representatives
of Portugal and the
representatives of all the political parties in Timor
in order to put an end to the armed struggle and
ensure, peacefully and methodically,
the decolonization of Portuguese Timor.”

33. Shortly after that meeting, the National Decolonization Commission,sent
telegrams to the Chairmen of
FRETILIN,
UDT-which
in the meantime-had become
associated
with the Anti-Communist
Movement
(MAC)-and
APODETI,
suggesting once again that
between 15 and 20 November conversations should be
held at Darwin with a Portuguese delegation headed
by the Minister for Interritorial
Co-ordination,
since
the Australian Government had kindly offered its territory for the holding of the meeting. The Portuguese
authorities were awaiting the agreement of the parties
on the date and place of the meeting and on the
inscription of the following points on its agenda: the
establishment
and maintenance
of a cease-fire; the
establishment of machinery for the transition of Timor
to a state of independence;
and the return of the
refugees from Indonesian Timor. The text of these
telegrams was also transmitted
to the SecretaryGeneral. The latter effort resulted in an agreement of
principle to hold this conference. FRETILIN
accepted
the Portuguese proposals,
but UDT (MAC) and
APODETI
raised difficulties with respect to the time
and venue of the meeting.
34. .On 28 November the Portuguese Government
learned that FRETILIN
had issued a unilateral
proc!amation
of independence for the Territory.
It
justified this attitude by alleging that the Territory
had been the victim of an aggression on the part of
Indonesia and that conversations between Portugal and
the three parties had been deferred; it attributed to
the Portuguese Government the responsibility
for this
postponement.
35.. On the morrow of this unilateral proclamation of
independence by FRETILIN-that
is, on 29 November-the
Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of my country submitted a letter [S/1/887] to
the Secretary-General.
The Portuguese Government
mentioned in this letter the efforts that it had just
undertaken with the three political parties in order to
achieve a meeting or conference which would make it
possible to solve peacefully the dispute between
those parties and to carry forward the process of the
decolonization
of the Territory on the basis of selfdetermination.
It also stressed that the unilateral action
undertaken by FRETILIN
would make continuation of
those efforts particularly difficult, and, in view of the
lack of means available to Portugal for normalizing
the situation, it brought those facts to the attention
of the United Nations, whose effective co-operation
was becoming more and more indispensable each day
to the achievement of a peaceful, negotiated solution
of the problem of decolonizing Timor while respecting
the wishes of the people of that Territory.
36. The following day, in a further letter [.S///89Q],
in the annex to which there was a communique issued
by the National
Decolonization
Commission
on
29 November, my Government announced that MAC
and APODETI
had in turn issued a unilateral declaration, the aim of which, this time, was the integration

of Timor with Indonesia. Refusing to accept those
declarations,
Portugal
expressed
“the
greatest
astonishment
and concern” about such assertions.
It recalled that the agreement in principle reached with
FRETILIN
to hold a conference at Darwin from 15 to
20 November had not been implemented
as a result
of the attitude of APODETI
and MAC-two
parties
closely linked to Indonesia-which
had raised difftculties regarding the proposed date and venue. Portugal
also drew the attention of the Organization
to the
intensification
of the armed struggle and the growing
use of powerful military means.
37. Allow me, in this connexion,
communique:

ment, which should be pursued unhindered, in order
and in peace”. Paragraph 4 of that declaration added:
“So long as the process of decolonization
lasts, the
Indonesian Government
will respect the rights and
obligations of the Portuguese Government as the sole
authority over the Territory”.
41. It should be pointed out that the Indonesian
Government highlighted the acts of force committed,
according to that Government,
by FRETILIN
and
declared that it was “firmly resolved to exercise its
legitimate right to defend its territorial integrity and
sovereignty, and its right to actively ensure the security and safety of its nationals and their property”.
That assertion must undoubtedly
be read in conjunction with paragraph 9 of the declaration, which
refers to violations and provocations allegedly committed by FRETILIN
against the Indonesian people,
located on the other side of the border.

to quote from that

“Portugal also cannot fail strongly to repudiate
and condemn any military intervention in the Territory of East Timor, calling attention to the grave
consequences that may arise from that, not only with
respect to the violation of the right of the people
of Timor freely to exercise their right to selfdetermination,
but also with respect to the threat
to international
peace and security.

42. I should like also to draw the attention of the
Council to the fact that the Indonesian Government
asserts that “it profoundly
regrets” the unilateral
declaration of FRETILIN,
while adding that “it can
fully understand and consider as normal”
the unilateral declaration of integration with Indonesia issued
by the other parties. However, what it does not explain
is how it arrived at the conclusion that respect for
the exercise, in order and in peace, of the right of
the people of Timor to self-determination
permits the
Government
of Indonesia to reserve a privileged
status, as it were, for one of those two declarations.

“Faced with the gravity of the situation and in
order to safeguard the lives and rights of the people
of Timor and international
peace and security,
Portugal will be obliged to resort to the competent
international
bodies in the hope that a peaceful
solution of the conflict can be reached and that
conclusion of the decolonization
process can be
achieved in harmony with the principles defined by
the United Nations.*’ [Ihid., crnnex, pat-us. 7and8.1

43. On the following day, 5 December, the Portuguese Minister
for Inter-territorial
Co-ordination
received the Ambassador of Indonesia at Lisbon and
reminded him that:

38. On 2 December my delegation -spoke on the
question of Timor before the Fourth Committee of the
General Assembly.6 It recalled the actions taken by my
Government
within the framework of the process
of decolonization,
and it reiterated our refusal to accept
the unilateral declarations issued by the political parties and our condemnation
of any armed intervention
in Timor. My delegation at that time emphasized the
constructive role that the General Assembly was still
in a position to play in the process of decolonization
and the importance of sending a visiting mission to
that Territory.

“In conformity with the broad lines of the decolonization process under way, Portugal is pursuing
its action with a view to finding a peaceful and
negotiated solution to the present crisis in Timor,
and that -in this it has the clear and unequivocal
support of the Indonesian Government in conformity
with decisions adopted during the Rome talks.”
The Minister added that Portugal could not accept
affirmations of independence or integration with third
States “made in violation of the fundamental principle
of respect for the forms chosen by peoples for the
exercise of their right to self-determination,
with all its
consequences, including independence”.

39. Speaking once again in the Fourth Committee,
on 5 December, my delegation reaffirmed that ‘the
“free choice [of the people of Timor] could not be
replaced by the imposition
of a solution by force,
by any of those political
parties or by a foreign
Power” .’

44. The support of the Indonesian Government did
not take long to make itself felt. But it assumed a
form hardly compatible with the proclaimed aim of the
search for a peaceful and negotiated settiement of
the problem. Indonesia decided, purely and simply, to
invade and occupy by force the Territory of Timor,
a small, defenceless area with only 650.000 inhabitants.
This was the best manner conceived by the Government of Jakarta to manifest its clear and unequivocal
support of our efforts.

40. In the meantime, on 4 December, the Indonesian
Minister for Information
issued on behalf of his
Government
a declaration which began as follows:
“Concerning
the events which are taking place at
present in Portuguese Timor, the Indonesian Govern.ment wishes to reaffirm that it firmly supports the
policy of decolonization
of the Portuguese Govern6

45. Messages received in Lisbon directly from
Territory indicate that in the early hours of 7 Decem
Indonesian naval and air forces launched an offensr
against the Territory of Timor having as its
objective the capital, Dili. Five units of the In
navy shelled the city, and then landed
Hundreds of paratroopers were also dropped
city, and battles were fought with forces fa
to FRETILIN.
The Australian radio announced
the inhabitants had begun to evacuate the city a
seek shelter in the neighbouring
mountains.
FRETILIN
leaders were also conside
sibility of falling back towards the
their present location is unknown. According to t
most recent information, the invaders are in the pro
of consolidating
their domination
over the Terri
after having conquered its capital.
46. Following those events, the Portuguese Gove
ment addressed an appeal to the International
R
Cross to take all possible humanitarian
action
for by the circumstances. In this connexion I
like to stress the fact that the Red Cross, whi
forced to leave Dili when the Indonesian
attacked the capital, is ready to return
any time in order to aid the civilian population, and
spared no effort to obtain the authorization
of
Indonesian Government for that purpose. Regretta
the latter does not appear to have responded to
request.
47. The Foreign Minister of Indonesia has
edged that his country invaded Timor. He ha
that the troops will be withdrawn “as soon as p
and order are restored”, and added that that mil
action had been taken “at the request of the Un
Democratica
de Timor”.
A few hours earlier
Indonesian delegation to the General Assembly at
current session had become a sponsor of a d
resolution submitted to the Fourth Committee
the question of Timor, the fifth preambular paragr
of which read as follows:

through its represenf%ive to the United Nations-in
the Fourth Committee
of the General Assembly,
claims that it has intervened solely “to restore peace
and order” in the Territory.
Portugal cannot fail to
denounce, and no doubt the Security Council also
will denounce, the inadmissible action of the Indonesian Government which is tantamount to substituting
itself for the Security Council and deciding unilaterally
that a given situation endangers international peace and
security, so as to intervene militarily
in a Territory
over which it has no sovereignty and for which it is
in no way responsible.
50. If the Indonesian
Government
considers that
the situation in Timor represents a threat to the peace
and security of its country, we fail to see why it has
not drawn the attention of this Council to such a
threat, as it is entitled to do under Article 35 of the
Charter. It has preferred to act by force against a
small, defenceless Territory, with 650.000 inhabitants,
totally incapable of undertaking against its neighbour
the least armed action or endangering in any way the
slightest piece of Indonesian territory. If incidents of
the kind described in the communique of 4 December
of the Ministry of Information
of Indonesia really
occurred on the border, why was not Indonesia,
a country of 130 million inhabitants and with powerful
armed forces, able to patrol and watch over the border
areas in order to prevent a recurrence of such events?
It preferred to assault the territory of Timor, conquer
the capital and, according to the international
press,
cause hundreds of deaths-to
say nothing of the
wounded, those who have disappeared and lost their
homes, the victims of the naval artillery of the Indonesian forces. This is a very strange way of “restoring
peace and order” to a foreign Territory which falls
under Chapter XI of the Charter, which is included in
the list of Non-Self-Governing
Territories,
and in
respect of which the Orgamzation and the international
community
therefore have special responsibilities
and obligations.

48. The Indonesian armed aggression
guese Timor constitutes a blatant, unden
of the Charter of the United Nations,
of Article 2, paragraphs 3 and 4, whi
international
disputes shall be settled by
means in such a manner that international
p
security, and justice, are not endangered,
Member States shall refrain from the use
against the territorial integrity or political
dence of any State, or in any other manner inc
sistent with the purposes of the United Nations.

51. Those
responsibilities
and obligations
are
incumbent especially on Indonesia itself, a member
of the Special Committee, that is to say, a body established by the General Assembly to supervise and
promote decolonization
with respect for the principles
enshrined in the Declaration contained in resolution
1514 (XV). And if Indonesia truly felt that the situation
in Timor could endanger peace and security, then my
Government fails to understand why the Indonesian
Government
did not resort to one of the peaceful
means provided for in Article 33 of the Charter, all the
more since the communique
issued after the Rome
meeting of the Foreign Ministers of Portugal and Indonesia states that: “The two Governments will maintain
close co-operation
and continue their consultation
on all aspects and throughout all the stages of the
process of decolonization
of Portuguese Timor”.

49. Indonesia, which acknowledged the invasion
I said earlier, both through its Foreign Minister a

52. Speaking last Monday in the Fourth Committee
of the General Assembly, the representative of Indo-

that any attempt aimed at the par
or total destruction of the national unity and te
torial integrity of a country is incompatible
the purposes and principles of the
United Nations,“.”
“Rcc!ffhling

nesia,y in response to an accusation by my delegation
concerning the events of the last few- days, spoke of
the “criminal
negligence” of Portugal in the conduct
of the process of decolonization
in Timor. As was so
rightly pointed out by the representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania, it is, to say the least, odd
that Indonesia on 3 December should have cosponsored a draft resolution
on Timor,
the fifth
preambular paragraph of which was drafted as follows:

of the Charter of the United Nations, and that, in the
opinion of my Government,
it constitutes an act of
aggression falling under the provisions of Article 39 of
the Charter.
57: As the Council knows, the Fourth Committee
has only recently considered item 88 of the ‘agenda
of the current session of the Genera! Assembfy on the
question of Territories under, Portuguese administration. Not only was the veracity of the accusations
formulated
by Portugal against Indonesia
clearly
demonstrated, but the majority of the countries taking
part in the debate categorically denounced the act of
aggression committed by a country enjoying considerable prestige among the overwhelming
majority of
Members of the United Nations, especially countries
of the third world. Despite efforts by some not to
condemn Indonesia openly-by
submitting
various
amendments, which were rejected in the Fourth Committee-the
Genera! Assembly, in its resolution 3485
(XXX), has declared itself:,

“Taking
note of the positive
attitude of the
administering
Power in making every effort to find a
solution by peaceful means through talks between
the Government of Portugal and the political parties
representing the people of Portuguese Timor.“‘O

53. As can be seen, the opinion of the Indonesian
Government
has changed radically in the space of
four days. Allow me to recall in this connexion that
the Foreign Minister of Indonesia had agreed that-and
these are the very words of the communique
of
2 November, which I quote once again:

“Dec~ply conwrnd
at the critical
situation
resulting from the military intervention of the armed
forces of Indonesia in Portuguese Timor”

“Given the events that have recently taken place
in Portuguese Timor, the two Ministers felt that it
was desirable urgently to restore peace and order
in the Territory,
in order to enable its population
to decide its future freely.

-intervention

which it “strongly
I

deplores”-and

“C&
rrpon .the Government
of Indonesia to
desist from further violation of the territorial integrity
of Portuguese Timor and to withdraw without
delay its armed forces from the Territory,.in
order
to enable the people of the Territory
freely to
exercise their right to self-determination
and
independence.”

“To that end, the two Ministers concurred on the
necessity to convene, at the earliest possible time,
a meeting between the representatives of Portugal
and the representatives of a!! the political parties
in Timor in order ‘to put an end to the armed
struggle and ensure, peacefully and methodically’,
the decolonization
of Portuguese Timor.“”
It
54. And yet we see that Indonesia, in order to restore
peace and order to the Territory, chooses not the path
of negotiation but that of armed invasion. One can
now readily understand why it was precisely the proIndonesian
political
parties, UDT and APODETI,
which at the 11th hour raised difficulties about the
initiation
of talks that the Portuguese Government
was insisting should be held, when even the place
and date-that
is to say, Darwin, from 15 to
20 November-had
already been proposed.

“Drm*s
the (rttcntion
of’ the Security Council,
in conformity with Article II, paragraph 3, of the
Charter, to the critical situation in the Territory of
Portuguese Timor and-recommends
that it take
urgent action to protect the territorial .integrity of
Portuguese Timor and the inalienable
right of its
people to self-determination.”

58. However, in those circumstances, and although
the Genera! Assembly has already pronounced itself
in those terms on the question of Timor, with which
the Council is dealing today, and because the thirtieth
session of the Genera! Assembly is on the point of
concluding. the role that the Security Council can be
called upon to play in the solution of the difficult
problem
of Portuguese Timor assumes a special
significance. I do not believe that the Council can,
by adopting a restrictive interpretation
of its powers,
confine itself to taking measures designed to put an
end to Indonesia’s military intervention in the Territory
of Timor. A mere cease-fire and the .simp!e withdrawal of the troops of the aggressor country,-measures which in any event are urgent and indispensable,
would not in themselves constitute sufficient action to’

55. Must one conclude from this that the Government
of Indonesia, determined to solve a problem which
was already of concern to it, was unable to persuade
parties to sit down at the conference table? That is
not very likely. Let us recall rather the facility with
which the Indonesian troops have already installed at
Dili a so-called Provisional
Government
of Timor,
composed of the two parties.
56. I believe it is unnecessary to dwell further on
these events to show that the armed action of Indonesia against the Territory
of Timor represents a
violation of the fundamental rules of international
law
and international
morality, as we!! as the provisions
8

.i

r-.-

ccmditims,
of action.

solve the problems of Timor, even inregard, to international peace and security. Indeed, as c,an be readily
observed, it is not by chance or by whim that Indo-.
nesia, invaded the Territory of Timor and so easily
envisages its withdrawal. In any case, it is obvious
that it was always the intention of the Government
of Indonesia to effect that strategic withdrawal as
soon as its mission had been accomplished.

prevail Qhich guarantee

absolute freedom

62. Portugal believes that such a course is still possible, without peace and security in the region being
endangered, while ensuring respect for the interests,
customs and aspirations of the local population.
But,
in order that such a course may be pursued, conditions must be created which would allow for a
conference between the Government of Portugal and
the political parties representing the people of Timor,
with a view to reaching an agreement on a mechanism
for the accession of Timor to self-determination
and
independence
while at the same time effectively
ensuring scrupulous respect for the agreement by all
the parties concerned.

59:. What mission would that be? Undoubtedly,
it
would be,, on the one hand, that of destroying
FRETILIN
by force and, if.necessary, destroying its
leaders; of organizing and strengthening, on the other
hand, parties favourable to the integration of Timor
with’ Indonesia; of placing those parties at the head
of the administrative
machinery; and of frightening
the people in order to show them where the force lies
and giving them a glimpse of the inevitable consequences of their refusal to accept that fact. Thus,
as soon as the conditions necessary for the destruction
of the freedom and the’manipulation
of the wishes of
the people were created, Indonesia would hasten to
agree to the withdrawal of its troops and even, I am
certain, to propose to Portugal that the latter should
continue to fulfil its obligations as the administering
Power in order that, through a referendum, .which
would be greatly vitiated, it could achieve the so-called
legal integration
of Timor into Indonesia. In short,
that country clearly does not seek to conquer Timor
militarily
but rather to impose by force conditions
that’would necessarily lead to the merger of the two
Territories,
thus preventing the people from freely
exercisimg their right to self-determination
and independence. Portugal denounces such manceuvres.

63. That is the task which falls to my country at this
historic moment.
But it also falls to a very large
degree within the obligations of the United Nations
to help the administering
Power to do its duty, not
only by making every effort in order that the conference may be held-under
the auspices of the United
Nations, for example-but
also by verifying and controlling the ways and means of application
of the
agreement to be reached at the conference. As to
the extent to which principles and interests of great
importance are at stake, we believe that the Security
Council must act firmly and unequivocally
and in a
well-oriented
manner in order effectively to redress
the consequences of aggression.
64. In these circumstances, we believe that, pursuant
to General Assembly resolution 3485 (XXX), the Security Council must forthwith: first, condemn Indonesia
for the aggression it has committed; secondly, demand
the immediate
cessation of all acts of violence and
intimidation
against the people of Portuguese Timor;
thirdly, demand the withdrawal of all occupation forces
from the Territory of Timor; and fourthly, attempt to
restore, through adequate processes and machinery
-and, in particular, by resorting to the good offices
of the Secretary-General-conditions
which would
allow free accession by the people of Timor to selfdetermination
and independence,
a right that is
undeniably theirs and which is an indispensable factor
for the restoration and maintenance of peace.

60. The mere withdrawal of Indonesian troops from
the Territory
of Timor, without any fundamental
change in a situation created by force, would be
tantamount
to maintaining
the vitiated rules of the
game and preventing the people of Timor from freely
exercising their inalienable right to self-determination.
The people of Timor are poor but dignified, weak
but brave, They will undoubtedly
fight to maintain
their rights. That is why peace and security will not
return to Timor until conditions are created, that
enable the people freely to exercise their right to selfdetermination.
Portugal, as the administering
Power
will do everything it can to ensure the creation of
such conditions. That is its duty. But a similar duty
is incumbent on the United Nations also. Let us hope
that both will be worthy of their responsibilities.

65. The PRESIDENT:
tative of Indonesia.

I call next on the represen-

66. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): Mr. President,
allow me, first of all, to express the great satisfaction
of my delegation at seeing you, Sir, in the Chair when
the Council is discussing this question of Portuguese
Timor. I had the privilege of being associated with
you in the work of the Council during Indonesia’s
last months as a member of this august body. I am
convinced that under your competent guidance the
Council will be able to make a constructive contribution
to the solution of the question before it.

61., In the light of the facts that I have mentioned
there can be no doubt that the military action undertaken on 7 December constitutes an aggression by
Indonesia against Portuguese Timor. That action not
only violates the fundamental principles of the Charter
that I have mentioned but also seriously threatens
the right of the people of Timor to self-determination
and independence,
for it is obvious that the people
will be unable to make a free choice, in full awareness
of the future political status of their country, unless
9

67. This meeting of the Security Council has been
convened at the urgent request of the representative
of Portugal, Sunday night a week ago, on behalf of
his Government. The sense of urgency of that request
has become somewhat diluted by postponement of the
time of the meeting from day to day, without the
representative of Portugal maintaining his insistence.
My delegation cannot escape the impression .that
Portugal is interested really and in the first place not
in what is happening in Timor, but rather in the
opportunity to make the most of the situation in order
to whitewash itself by blaming Indonesia for the
tragedy in Timor, which, in fact, Portugal itself has
created. Moreover, to top it all, it even went as far
as accusing Indonesia of aggression against the Territory.

majority of the population. APODETI desired integration with Indonesia; FRETILIN
had complete independence in its programme;
while UDT wished to
continue some form of relationship
with Portugal.
Unlike the liberation movements in the former Portuguese Territories in Africa, none of them had waged
an armed struggle-as
has been pointed out by
the representative
of Portugal-against
the colonial
Powers. None of them possessed arms.
71. Indonesia’s
reaction to the wish for complete
integration as represented by APODETI
was that it
would welcome such a decision if it were to be the
outcome of a free and democratic exercise of the right
of self-determination
by the entire people of Portuguese Timor in accordance with General Assembly
resolutions
1514 (XV) and 1541 (XV). Indonesia
emphasized that it had no claim on Portuguese Timor,
but that if the people of the Territory decided freely
and democratically
to become independent through
integration
with the unitary State of Indonesia,
Indonesia
would welcome it. It was thus up to
APODETI
to rally the support of the majority of the
people for its stand.

68. Furthermore,
apparently the Portuguese delegation would like to come to the Council armed with
a resolution from the General Assembly to be used
against Indonesia; hence, apparently,
the delaying
tactics. However, although a resolution has been
adopted by the Assembly, there were a large number of abstentions. Moreover, from the statements
made in the debate in the Fourth Committee”
and
in the plenary meeting of the Assembly,i2 my delegation is gratified to note that many countries,
including many of those which voted for the resoiution, have shown understanding
of the Indonesian
position and a deep awareness of the difficulties Indonesia has had to face following the tragic events in
Portuguese Timor, undeniably created by Portugal
itself.

72. Can this be interpreted as an indication of neocolonialistic
ambitions
or hegemonic
pretensions?
I do not think so. It is perhaps well to mention
that the leaders of APODETI
are men who have
earned their spurs in opposing Portuguese colonialism.
Some of them have had the experience of being
imprisoned
by the former colonial administration
because of their opposition
to conditions
in the
colony. The leaders of APODETI
for that reason
certainly qualify as authentic opponents of colonial
domination.

69. Let me.first explain why Indonesia is so vitally
interested in what happens in Portuguese Timor.
Portuguese Timor is part of the island of Timor; the
other part is Indonesian territory, Timor is one of the
islands of the Indonesian archipelago, which is made
up of thousands of islands. The population of Portuguese Timor, a little more than 600.000, is of the same
ethnic origin as the population in the Indonesian part.
The 450 years of division because of colonial domination have not diminished the close ties of blood
and culture between the population of the Territory and
that of Indonesian Timor. This geographical proximity,
and the ethnic and cultural kinship, are important
reasons why Indonesia is so vitally concerned about
peace and stability in East Timor, first of all in the
interest of the local population,
but also in Indonesia’s national interest, as well as in the interest of
the entire region of South-East Asia. A chaotic
situation there would, before long, as we have seen
elsewhere-Angola
being a vivid example, and I hope
our African brothers will not fail to take due note of
this-attract
foreign intervention.

73. Portugal formulated
a plan for decolonization
aimed at the exercise of the right to self-determination
by the people in Portuguese Timor b,y 1978. The
intervening
years could be used by the parties to
rally support of the people for its respective stands.
Indonesia welcomed that Portuguese plan, as it would
guarantee an orderly process of decolonization
in the
Territory.
74. A conference was organized by Portugal with
the three parties of Portuguese Timor in Macau
from 26 to 28 June 1975. However, only APODETI
and UDT were present at that meeting: FRETILIN
refused to attend it, which gave an indication of its
attitude in the months to come. The Portuguese
Government subsequently announced in Macau that a
constituent assembly and a provisional government
would be formed by 1976 for the preparation of the
exercise of the right of self-determination
in 1978.
Indonesia again welcomed that Portuguese decision,
as the new scheme, in its view, would lead to an
orderly process of implementation
of resolutions
1514 (XV) and 1541 (XV) in an atmosphere of peace
and tranquillity.

70. When the former dictatorial regime in Portugal
made way for the new revolutionary Government some
18 months ago, three political groupings or parties
-APODETI,
FRETILIN
and UDT-emerged
in
Portuguese Timor, each claiming to represent the
10

75. We who have taken the right of self-determination
into our own hands and have defende-d it with our
lives and blood have certainly no intention of denying
it to others. We who have strongly affirmed that
right during the 1955 Asian-African
Conference
(Bandung Conference) and. have promoted it at every
forum and supported its implementation
not only by
words but also by deeds cannot deny that right to
our next-door kinsmen,
as some countries
have
accused us of doing in the General Assembly debate.

order in the TerritoPy: En order to give the people the
opportunity
to exercise their inalienable
right of
seIf-determination,
freely and democratically,
in an
atmosphere of peace. The Portuguese Government,
however, turned down the offer.
80. The indigenous population, caught in the bloody
fighting, fled in great numbers to Indonesian territory.
In their flight they were harassed by FRETILIN
gangs, and hundreds of them perished before reaching
safety in Indonesian Timor. The number swelled to
some 50.000. These refugees created a problem for
Indonesia.
A large-scale relief aid campaign had
quickly to be mounted. Shelter, food, clothing and
medical care were provided on an emergency basis,
putting a severe strain on Indonesia’s
finances.
Moreover, the socio-economic
conditions in Indonesian Timor were disrupted as local resources,
meagre as they were, had to be shared with this large
number of refugees as a matter of priority.

76. On I I August this year, however, Indonesia
was taken completely
by surprise by reports that
fighting had broken out in Dili as a result of a coup
and a counter-coup staged by U.DT and FRETILIN.
In this matter, the Portuguese colonial administration cannot be absolved of blame: in fact, the whole
thing appeared to have been arranged with the connivance, if not upon the instigation, of elements-and
1 say “elements”in the colonial administration
itself,
with the aim, which only now has become evident,
of creating conditions
to facilitate
a FRETILIN
takeover.

81. Meanwhile, UDT and two other parties, KOTA
and Trabalhista, joined APODETI
in declaring themselves in favour of complete integration with Indonesia. The decision was announced by the four
parties in a petition issued in Batugade-Portuguese
Timor-on
7 September 1975. Indonesia’s
position
remained the same: it was for the parties themselves
to rally the support of the people for their cause and
their struggle. My Government continued to insist that
such a decision must be the outcome of the free and
democratic exercise of the right of self-determination
in conditions of peace and order. If Indonesia indeed
had the intention to annex East Timor, that was the
best time to act. After UDT, KOTA and Trabalhista
joined APODETI,
it could be concluded that the
representatives of the majority had indeed decided for
integration with Indonesia. However, Indonesia insists
that the exercise of the right of self-determination
by the people should be respected.

77. Prior to the coup and counter-coup, the Governor
apparently was quite aware of what was going on,
particularly
that FRETILIN
elements were going
to raid the arsenals of the Portuguese colonial army.
The Governor, however, while insisting that Portugal
was responsible for the maintenance
of law and
order, took no action whatsoever; thus large quantities
of the colonial army’s weapons fell into the hands of
FRETILIN.
Developments in Timor might have taken
a completely different turn had elements of the colonial administration
not acted in connivance
with
FRETILIN,
or had the Governor taken the necessary
action. What followed is now well known.
78. Bloody fighting broke out. It spread quickly to
other parts of the territory and the population became
the victims.
Metropolitan
Portuguese and foreign
nationals
were evacuated
by sea and air. On
25 August the Governor and the remaining members
of his staff left for Atauro Island 20 to 25 miles off
the coast from Dili. He issued appeals to the
neighbouring
countries
to extend
humanitarian
assistance to Portuguese Timor. Indonesia responded
immediately
by sending ships with 10.000 tons of rice
and other relief goods. However, the goods could not
be unloaded and distributed
because there was no
longer any administrative
apparatus in Dili. The Indonesian Consul remained in Dili as long as he could
after the Governor and his staff had left for Atauro,
and I am proud to say that the only time a ceasefire could be arranged between the fighting parties
was when an Indonesian ship sailed into DiIi harbour
to evacuate the Indonesian Consul and a number of
refugees.

82. As a result of the bloody fighting in Portuguese
Timor, Indonesia was, as I said before, confronted
with extremely serious difficulties.
Let me explain
briefly some of them. First, as I mentioned earlier,
there was the presence of tens of thousands of refugees
who had to be sheltered, fed and cared for. Those
refugees wanted to go home to their villages, but
demanded
that Indonesia
should guarantee their
safety. Secondly, the practice of FRETILIN
of terrorizing the people, brutalizing and even murdering
them, because they opted for integration with Indonesia, created a strong reaction within Indonesia.
The Government was under increasing pressure to take
action to protect those people. What is more, those
people themselves, after having made their choice,
considered themselves to be Indonesian nationals and
therefore entitled to Indanesia’s protection. Thirdly,
incursions by armed bands into tndonesian territory
to rustle cattle and to steal food and property belonging
to the people of the’ border areas, and occasional
mortar fire from the other side of the border, made it

79. Afterwards, Indonesia was in continuous contact
with the Portuguese
authorities
and offered its
co-operation
for the re-establishing
of peace and
II

imperative for Indonesia to take appropriate action
to put an end to the continued violations ofits territory
..,
and the harassment of its people.

parties in Portuguese Timor. The difficulty seemed
to be the question of the venue,.a problem which we
thought would not be so difficult to solve given a
reasonable degree of goodwill and imagination.
In
fact, the Portuguese Charge d’affaires at Jakarta
suggested Bangkok as an alternative. Other matters
regarding the talks could, in our’ view, have been
subject to further discussion once the idea of holding
the talks had been accepted by all concerned. It had
been our sincere hope that the talks would materialize
as planned by the Portuguese Government. However.
the sudden and unexpected unilateral declaration of
independence by FRETILIN
on 28 November dashed
all hopes for any compromise.
It foreclosed all possibilities for, the other four parties to exercise their
right of self-determination.

83. Indonesia ‘exercised the utmost restfaint
in the
face of strong pressures and provocations.
We
remained in communication
with the Portuguese and
continued our efforts to find ways and means -to Stop
the fighting and to find a’way out of the situation
which threatened to become a vicious circle of violence
,I.,
and more ‘violence.
84. The Indonesian
Minister
for Foreign Affairs
met the Portuguese Minister
for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Soares, here in New York during last year’s
General Assembly session. This resulted in the establishment of diplomatic
relations. The Indonesian
Government
sent missions to Lisbon: Then another
meeting was arranged in London.
Views were
exchanged on how io proceed with the process of
peaceful and orderly decolonization
of the Territory,
on the basis
of
resolutions
1514
(XV)
and 1541 (XV).
j
*
85. After the events of last August at Dili, diplomatic
contacts were intensified.
Mr: Santos, the then
Minister
for Interterritorial
Co-ordination,
visited
Jakarta and Canberra in an effort to stop the fighting
and to’find a peaceful solution. While in Australia
he had contacts with some FRETILIN
leaders. However, when in Indonesia he refused to go to the border
area to see the’refugees and to meet the leaders of
APODETI and UDT. Indonesia offered to make a plane
available to fly him to Timor, but Mr. Santos declined.
His argument was that he could ‘not meet. with
APODETI
and UDT leaders as long as 23 members
of the Portuguese military
personnel were being
detained by them. Indonesia was of the,view that he
could have achieved the release of those men if he
had been prepared to discuss it directly with those who
detained .them., Mr. Santos could have had .apprehensions, however, knowing that UDT, the closest party
to Portugal in fact, had become deeply disappointed
with the Portuguese role in the whole affair.

88. Indonesia deeply regrets this unilateral action
because by taking it FRETILIN,
one of the parties,
clearly denied to the people of East Timor the exercise
of their right of self-determination.
FRETILIN
definitely,
by. the same token, pre-empted the possibility of a peaceful solution through talks between
the parties and Portugal as the administering
Power.
The other four political parties favouring integration
with Indonesia-APODETI,
UDT, KOTA and Trabalhista-responded
immediately
to the unilateral act by
FRETILIN
by declaring, on 29 November,‘.that
the
Territory of East Timor had become an integrated part
of Indonesia and they themselves ipsofircto nationals
of Indonesia. This declaration was followed by a joint
solemn proclamation
on 30 November,
issued at
Balibo in Portuguese Timor, which embodied the decision of integration with Indonesia. The text of that
proclamation
was. sent ,by the leaders of APODETI,
UDT, .KOTA and Trabalhista
to the SecretaryGeneral, the Chairman
of the Special Committee
a,nd the President of the Security Council.
89. These four parties represent the’majority
of the’
people of Portuguese Timor. I wish to point out two
facts -which should be borne in mind by the Council
in dealing with this question. First, it was FRETILIN
which attempted to deny the proper exercise .of the
right to self-determination
by the majority’ of the
people of Portuguese Timor. Secondly, the four other
parties’ proclamation was a reaction-in
fact, the only
logical reaction-to
that blatant act of putting the
people of Portuguese Timor and the world before a fait
accompli, as acknowledged by the Charge d’affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Portugal in his letter
to the Secretary-General
of 28 November,
in which
he stated:

86. During the first days of November a, meeting
was arranged at .Rome between the Indonesian
Foreign Minister and’ his Portuguese colleague to
discuss .modalities for restoring peaceful conditions in
Timor, in order to safeguard, the free exercise of the
right, of self-determination
by all groups :of people
of, East Timor. At the Rome meeting the responsibility of Portugal as the administering
Power with
regard to an orderly exercise of the right of selfdetermination
by the people of Portuguese Timor was
reaffirmed and emphasized. Both sides agreed on the
necessity,: for Portugal to hold talks with all the
parties representing the people of the Territory,
in
order to end the fighting and to find a peaceful
solution. Indonesia, for its part, would persuade the
pro-integration
parties to participate in those talks.

“The fait ‘accompli that FRETILIN
intends to
establish with this declaration, .aside from fdreseeably aggravating the conflict between the political
parties, has made difficult, if not impossible, the
establishment of an agreement between the abovementioned parties that would make possible the
development of the decolonization
process of Timor
in harmony with the principles defined ‘by. the

87. It was the impression of my Government that the
idea of having ralks’.:‘fas ncceptable to all the political
12

‘,

,

United
Nations
[S//./887].

and

accepted

by

Portugal”.

milita4 aggression in>?Bnor. It is Portugal that should
be charged with criminalnegligence-as
I said beforeof its responsibilities towards the people of East Timor.,
It is highly cynical for Portugal, after having admitted
its impotence to restore normalcy to the Territory,
to try now to blame Indonesia for wanting to put out
the fire in the Territory which Portugal itself started
by its irresponsible scheming. What the Indonesian
people did was to respond to the request of the majority
of [he people of East Timor, which can certainly not
be termed an act of aggression.

90. The Portuguese Government
had in the meantime publicly. admitted its, inability
to do anything’
under these circumstances, as evident again from the
same letter in which the ChargC d’affaires stated that
“under the circumstances, the Portuguese authorities
do not have the means to assure normalization
of
the situation in Timor”.
In view of this statement of
impotence, of abdication of responsibility,
the Indonesian Government had to reconsider its position. It
could not remain indifferent in the face of the prospect
of the chaos in East Timor developing into a second
Angola. The proclamation by APODETI,
UDT, KOTA
and Trabalhista was in the meantime received with
deep emotion by the Indonesian people. Hundreds of
volunteers responded to their call for help against the
FRETILIN
rkgime of terror and joined them in their
fight against the FRETILIN
forces. A few days ago
the pro-integration
forces entered Dili, the capita1 of
East Timor. A large number of FRETILIN
forces
surrendered and virtually the entire territory is reported
to be now under the control of the APODETIUDT-KOTA-Trabalhista
coalition.

94. ,In conclusion, I should like to say in all sincerity
that Indonesia wishes more than anything else to see
conditions
of peace and stability re-established
in
Portuguese Timor as soon as possible, so that the
people can live and work for its progress and wellbeing and contribute to the development of the region.
Indonesia is vitally interested in peace and stability
in Timor; ii is deeply concerned that the occurrence
of developments in the Territory such as those occurring in Angola would affect not only its own peace
and security but also that of the region of South-East
Asia. Indonesia will continue to participate in every
hontr fi& effort to restore peaceful conditions to the
Teiritory
in order to enable the people freely and
democratically
to exercise its right to self-determination. The future political status of East Timor must
be based on the outcome of such an exercise of the
right to self-determination
by the entire .people.
Indonesia is prepared to co-operate with the United
Nations and countries of the region ‘to achieve that
purpose. Indonesia,
finally, rejects any notion of
aggression being attached to the action of its people
to assist the majority of the people of East Timor
upon its own request against a minoiity which wishes
to impose its will by force of arms and deny the
people the exercise of its inalienable
right to’ selfdetermination
in accoidance with General Assembly
resolutions 1514 (XV) and 1541 (XV).

91.” The Acting Portuguese Governor has,‘according
to press ,reports, left Atauro, the island to which he
and his staff had fled before, thus abandoning the
last semblance of Portuguese authority
in the Territory.,Such is the situatidn in East Timor today. In the
light df this behaviour on the part of Portugal, it does
not behove them to .speak of aggression on Indonesia’s part.
92. Jtist imagine that a fire breaks out in the apartment next door to you. The fireman whose d,uty it is
to put it out says bluntly that he has 90 ,means
@ do so. The people in the apartment-your
own
relatives-request
your help to stop the fire. Would you
Let us telephone the fire-station”
answer: “Wait.
-which you know is half way on the- other side of the
vjorld, ‘and jet the apartment burn down, with the
possibility that the fire will spread to your own place?
Or would you -act and stop the fire from spreading?
I think that you would rather act than wait. That
was exactly what happened in Portuguese Timor.
The Indonesian people reacted in order to put out the
fire started deliberately by FRETILIN.
The combined
forces managed to occupy Dili, the capital of East
Timor, and to gain control of practically the entire
territory with the co-operation of the people. Those
who have sown the wind shall reap the whirlwind.
A temporary local government has now been established at Dili by the four parties in order to take
care,of the administration
of the Territory.

95. .The PRESIDENT:
I have received an indication
from the ‘representative of Malaysia that he would
wish to address the Council this afternoon.
I also
understand from him however, that he woutd prefer
to be the final speaker this afternoon. In the circumstances, I would bow call on Mr. JosC Ramos Horta,
in accordance with the decision that the Council took
at the opening of its meeting this afternoon. I therefore invite Mr. Hofla to take a place at the Council
table and to address the Council.
96. Mr. HORTA: While we are in this house talking
about East Timor, thousands of ‘people have been
killed by Javanese troops. Criminal action is taking
place in East Timor. We are hopeful that from this
house the honourable members of the Security Council
will stop the, war of aggression against the people
of East Timor.

93. It is in this context that Indonesia totally and
emphatically
rejects the sanctimonious
contention of
Portugal implied in the letter of 7 December 1975
from its representative to the President of the Security
Council [S/11899] that Indonesia has committed
a

97. Mr. President, may I, on behalf of the Central’
Committee of FRETILIN,
the Revolutionary
Front for
13

the independence of East Timor, and of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of East Timor,
express our utmost respect to you and to all the members of this Council. Allow me to express our gratitude
for the opportunity given to us to report on the just
struggle of the people of East Timor for national Iiberation. We place great confidence in the United Nations
and we believe that the noble ideals that inspired
the founding of the Organjzation
still prevail among
peace-loving countries.

101. UDT was born at a time when a “federalist
movement”
was inspired by General Spinola in his
book Portrrgd
trnd ths F~~trrre, in which he proposed
what was an obvious neo-colonial “solution”
for the
colonies. Puppet groups were created in Angola,
Mozambique, Guinea-Bissau, Sao Tome and Principe,
and East Timor. These groups attempted to oppose
the vanguards of the great masses of the people:
FRELIMO
[Fwnte
de Liherttrgcio
de Mqwmhiqrrc~],
MPLA [Movimcnto
Populur
de Lihertu@
de An&u],
PAIGC [Ptrrtido Afiictrno
dtr Indcpend~ncicr
&I GuinP
e Ccrho Vu-de], MLSTP [Mrwimento
(kc Lihwto@>
de Sao Tome et Principe],
FRETILIN.
The “federalist
movement”
failed. Then UDT announced a new
programme: independence for East Timor.

98. We learned with happiness and hope of the resolutions of the General Assembly on the situation in
East Timor, resolutions calling upon all States to
respect the right of the people of East Timor to selfdetermination,
freedom and independence;
strongly
deploring the military intervention of the armed forces
of. Indonesia in East Timor; and calling upon all
States to respect the unity and territorial integrity of
East Timor.

102. APODETI,
inspired by Indonesia to serve Indonesia’s interest, was also created. This puppet group
did not hesitate to declare East Timor part of Indonesia. Radio Kupang, a State radio station based in
Indonesian Timor, has for the past 18 months been
referring to East Timor as the 27th province of Indonesia. APODETI;
financed by Indonesia from the
very beginning of its existence, has never enjoyed the
sympathy of the people of East Timor, who have
always considered the leaders as traitors to and sellers
of the nation. Campaigns of intimidation
in the name
of the Indonesian army and campaigns of corruption
in the name of Pertamina have been part of the
APODETI
programme.

99. The people of East Timor have been living under
foreign domination for 500 years, five centuries of cruel
exploitation and oppression, five centuries of struggle
against Portuguese colonialism.
The heroic people of
East Timor always fought against foreign domination,
and the spirit of independence was at all times the
driving force of the history of our country. Many
thousands paid with their lives the high price of independence and freedom. After the fall of the Fascist
regime in Portugal, new historical conditions were
created to enable the people of East Timor to enjoy
freedom and independence through peaceful means;
at this very moment, however, the entire people of East
Timor, after 500 years of colonialism, war and oppression, is engaged in another war-a war of resistance
against a war of aggression by Indonesia.

103. Even after the fall of the Fascist regime in
Portugal, FRETILIN
leaders experienced serious diffrculties, persecution and arrest, torture and murder.
Former Fascist ofIicials, prominent
leaders of the
Acao National Popular, who made up the leadership
of UDT, were able to use the repressive machine
against FRETILIN.
In October 1974 eight FRETILIN
leaders were arrested and tortured. Despite these’
vicious manceuvres of the neo-Fascists and neocolonialists,
FRETILIN
carried on the programme
of political
consciousness-raising
throughout
the
country.

100. The collapse of the Portuguese colonial empire
was basically a consequence of the heroic struggle of
the peoples of Guinea-Bissau,
Cape Verde, Mozambique, Angola, Sao Tome and Principe, and East
Timor-peoples
of different geographical locations but
united by centuries of suffering, struggle and victory
against a common enemy. The fall of the Portuguese
colonial Fascist regime made way for decolonization.
With that new historical situation, East Timor nationalists, whoin the past had been engaged in anti-colonial
underground
activities,
openly initiated a national
front for all patriots of Timor. Yet the programme of
decolonization
started with deep contradictions
when
the Portuguese Administration
encouraged and legalized the formation of puppet groups-UDT,
which
interpreted
General Antonio Spinola’s theory of a
*‘federation of Portuguese-speaking
countries”;
and
APODETI,
which had been an Indonesian inspiration
denying the rights of the people of East Timor to
independence
and freedom. It is relevant to draw
the attention of the Council to the facts that can help
it to understand the just struggle of the people of
East Timor for national liberation and independence.

104. In a period ,of one year, up to 200 schools
were set up by FRETILIN
in a strenuous effort to
eliminate the high rate of illiteracy-up
to 96 per
cent of our people cannot read and write. Co-operatives for production, distribution
and consumption
were organized. Several People’s Shops are now functioning in the villages. In order to struggle against
disease and premature death, medical centres were set
up to teach hygiene and first aid.
105. Those activities won for FRETILIN
popular
support throughout
the country. In view of that
reality UDT agreed to form a coalition in January
1974. That coalition aimed at, first, defending the
independence of East Timor and, secondly, opposing
annexation of East Timor by Indonesia. The coalition
of FRETILIN
and UDT was a historic step towards
independence. The Indonesian Government
saw the
14

prospect of integration.of
East Timor wizh Indonesia
slipping through its hands. Then Indonesian officials
began a vicious campaign to corrupt UDT leaders.
In April this year two separate delegations of UDT
and FRETILIN
were invited to visit Indonesia. On
their return to East Timor the UDT leaders said how
impressed they had been.with Indonesian hospitality,
even confessing that they had been promised high
positions in Jakarta if they broke their alliance with
FRETILIN
and supported integration with Indonesia.
106. In early May UDT broke the coalition unilaterally. Despite that naive action, FRETILIN
leaders
approached UDT and warned it of the Indonesian
manoeuvres to undermine the nationalist movement.
On 26 June the Portuguese Government called for a
conference in Macau to work out a programme of
decolonization.
FRETILIN
refused to accept such a
conference, in which the right of the people of East
Timor
to independence
was to be negotiable.
FRETILIN,
in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, has always made it clear that the right
of the people of East Timor to be independent and free
is not negotiable.
It is a right. It is not surprising
that on 11 August UDT staged a coup against the
Portuguese Government, breaking the agreement it had
entered into at Macau.
107. It is necessary again to draw the Council’s
attention to Indonesian involvement
in the attempted
coup d’etat by UDT. Two weeks prior to the coup
two UDT leaders visited Jakarta. Four days later the
President of UDT, Lopez Cruz, was urgently called
to Jakarta. On 7 August the three UDT leaders-Lopez
Cruz, Juan Carrascalao and Domingos Oliveirareturned to East Timor.
108. In the early morning of II August East Timor
was shaken by UDT action. FRETILIN
leaders,
their lives endangered, retreated to the mountains.
On the same day, FRETILIN
leaders requested the
Portuguese Administration
to force UDT to lay down
its arms and hold peace talks. The Portuguese Govemment took no action, while UDT carried on the
campaign of persecution and murder of FRETILIN
militants. Up to 50 students who were carrying on
literacy work in the villages were murdered. Many
hundreds of persons were massacred. Faced with that
criminal action of UDT. the FRETILIN
Central Committee called for general armed resistance. The result
was an immediate
response from the army and the
people. In a quick operation, UDT was defeated and
driven out of East Timor, to seek refuge in Indonesian
territory.
109. The question must be asked: “Why did the
Indonesians .encourage the UDT coup d’etat?” Was
it because Indonesia would accept an independent
East Timor under UDT? The answer was provided
by Michael Richardson, the South-East Asian correspondent of the Australian Age, when- he wrote that
“the Indonesian veto applied not only to an East

Timor under the control of the radical nationalist
movement FRETILIN,
but also to an East Timor run
by the conservative UDT party”. He said also that
“as long ago as last October Indonesia was talking
about the possibility
of using force to secure its
objective. This objective was the incorporation of East
Timor as advocated by the APODETI
party, which,
by every account except its own and Indonesia’s,
was, and still is, by far the weakest of the three parties
recognized by the Portuguese colonial administration
as being the main contenders for political
power
in the Territory”.
110. But, ‘by giving, tacit support to the UDT coup,
Indonesian strategists were forecasting that the outcome of this would be a long period of bloodshed.
FRETILIN
and UDT would exhaust their forces and
run out of ammunition,
and it would then be the right
time for the Indonesians
to step in as liberators.
The Indonesian military strategy experts failed in two
assumptions. First, they underestimated the organizational capacity of FRETILIN,
its popular support
and the backing of the Timor Army; secondly, they
were misinformed
about the stock of weapons and
ammunition
in the Portuguese arsenal. Jakarta experts
were surprised at the FRETILIN
forces’ quick defeat
of UDT.
111. The situation in East Timor after the defeat of
UDT can be summarized as follows. FRETILIN
had
established political and military control over the whole
of the territory of East Timor; the entire Portuguese
administration
had withdrawn to the island of Atauro;
a provisional administration
had been established by
FRETILIN
to reorganize the economic, social and
political affairs of East Timor; and in Indonesian Timor,
thousands of political prisoners had been kept in
concentration
camps and designated as refugees as
part of the campaign against FRETILIN,
and no
foreign observers or press or aid officials were allowed
to visit them.
112. In normal circumstances,
after defeating the
enemy of our country and exercising full control over
the whole Territory,
with the full support of the
people. FRETILIN
would be recognized by every
Government of the world as the t/l> .jrrrc>government
of East Timor. But FRETILIN
continued to recognize
Portuguese sovereignty over the Territory and to call
on the Portuguese Government for round-table .talks
in order to carry on the process of decolonization.
Unfortunately,
our continuing efforts to arrange talks
with the decolonizing
Power were not answered.
Once again it was Indonesia that was thwarting the
talks through its influencing of UDT and APODETI.
113. In the meantime,
conflict along the border
between Indonesian and FRETILIN
forces had begun.
As early as September the first infiltration of Indonesian troops into East Timor had occurred. A unit of
90 red-beret marines belonging to the 315th Batallion stationed in Java was sent to East Timor. It was

divided into three groups each with 3Q men. Since
then, many weapons, automatic
rifles, mortars,
bazookas and grenades used by the Indonesian Army
have been captured by FRETILIN
forces and identified
by foreign observers.

ize, in juridical and international
terms, a & fc~&
situation that had already *existed for three months.
This was a heroic act of self-determination
by a
small country against the expansionist aims of Indonesia.

114. Some Indonesian
soldiers were captured by
FRETILIN
forces. One of the prisoners, Corporal
Welli, described his own and his comrades’ experiences in guerrilla and counter-guerrilla
activities in
several places, including Kalimantan,
North Sumatra
and West Irian.

119. The following day the puppets of Indonesia that
had formed their so-called Anti-Communist
Movement
(MAC) also declared the integration of East Timor with
Indonesia. It is necessary to draw attention to the
following points: that such a declaration was made in
Indonesian territory; and that most of the leaders of
that movement
were either in gaol at Dili under
FRETILIN
or in self-exile
in Australia,
or
had been killed during the conflict. Only three leaders
-were alive in Indonesian territory.

115. In order to avoid conflict along the border,
FRETILIN
proposed, in a cable sent to the Indonesian Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Adam Malik,
on I6 September, that a joint peace force of FRETILIN
and Indonesians
should jointly
patrol the border.
Indonesia rejected this proposal through the newspapers. Indonesian
aggression against East Timor
intensified alarmingly when warships and heavy artillery shelled the tiny, village of Batugade, which fell
into Indonesian hands. Balibo and Maliana were the
next to fall, after heavy bombardment
by nine Indonesian warships and heavy artillery stationed in Indonesian territory.
Hundreds
of paratroopers
were
dropped in those places, In Balibo, five foreign
newsmen, three Australian and two British, reporting
for Australian television, were shot in cowardly fashion
by the Javanese paratroopers. A Portuguese television
crew just managed to escape.

120. On 7 December Indonesia launched an all-out
invasion against Dili. Thirteen warships and 1 I aircraft
bombarded and bombed the capital. Three thousand
paratroopers and marines’assaulted
Dili in the early
hours of the morning. FRETILiN,forces
resisted the
assault. After a strategic retreat ‘to the surrounding
mountains, the Government forces counter-attacked
and reoccupied two thirds of the city. As many as
2.000 Javanese soldiers were killed. Up to 500 women,
children and Government
troops died in the first
confrontation.
Also, on the southern coast an Indonesian naval force attempted to, land marines at the
village of Suai. The beach had been mined by Government troops. Several hundred Indonesian marines were
killed and the attack was repulsed.

116. The Central’ Committee
of FRETILIN
denounced this Indonesian aggression and called upon
Governments to persuade Indonesia to stop violating
the territorial
integrity of East Timor. The .Portuguese Government was informed daily of the situation
in East Timor, but no action was taken by Lisbon to
prevent and to stop Indonesian aggression. We.now
welcome the Portuguese decision publicly to denounce
Indonesian aggression.

121. We are aware that there are many States Members of the United Nations which have a profound
knowledge of the just struggle of our people. ,Unfortunately, the difficulties we have experienced have
not enabled us to publicize the true story. Because
.of this and because of the viciousness that has been
developed by Indonesia for some time, many Member States have been cautious about committing
themselves to our just struggle.

117.

Since September FRETILIN
has been the c/t>
of East Timor, and since September
the people of East Timor, under the leadership of
FRETILIN,
have fought a war of resistance against
Indonesian
military
aggression. During this entire
period the Portuguese Government, whose sovereignty
over East Timor was still recognized by FRETILIN,
did not take action to neutralize the expansionist
activities of Indonesia.
Lisbon, unfortunately,
has
always-naively-tried
not to antagonize
Jakarta
while the people of East Timor were suffering from a
criminal war of aggression initiated by Indonesia.

.fircto government

122. We would like to draw the Council’s attention
to the following argument so frequently used by Indonesia to conceal its expansionist aims. It concerns
the common cultural and ethnic origins of the peoples.
of East Timorand Indonesia. As the fundamental thesis
of a common culture and ethnic origin has been
presented by Indonesia, many people have been led
to believe that integration of East Timor into Indonesia is a natural necessity. Thus, the struggle for
independence
would be an artificial and a human
caprice. May I draw the Council’s attention to the
lack of any real foundation for this thesis. We would
not deny the existence of a certain common cultural
and ethnic origin, but this is not sufficient reason for
arguing for integration
into Indonesia. It is necessary to distinguish between the cultural origin of a
people and the stage or level of culture of a people
at a given time in history. Arguing about a common
past that is many centuries remote from the present

118. Under these circumstances,
the Central Cbmmittee of FRETILIN,
interpreting
the profoundest
desires of the people of East Timor, declared, on
28 November, the birth of the youngest State in the
world, the Democratic Republic of East Timor. The
unilateral declaration of the independence
of East
Timor by FRETILIN
was merely a formal act to legal16

is to forget reality.‘ It .is’.to deny reality. We affum
that the people of East Timor as compared with the
people of Indonesia, including those of Indonesian
Timor, are at a different social, political and cultural
stage as a result of a different and independent
development.

political asylum with the Portuguese authorities. This
group of experienced officers soon became involved
with,the Timor nationalists. Thus, they gave their most
active assistance to the 1959 uprising. It is obvious
that the South Moluccan refugees would not support a
movement that favoured integration into the Republic
of Indonesia.
.’

123. We will -not discuss the “hineka
trrngul
iktr”
motto of the Republic of Indonesia, which means
“unity in diversity”.
We will speak only about the
cultural movements
which have developed in the
ex-Portuguese colony of East Timor and in the Republic of Indonesia before and since the advent of Dutch
and Portuguese colonialism.
During the period prior
to colonialism,
the main islands of Indonesia felt
the influence of Indians, Arabs and Indo-Chinese.
In East Timor, such influences did not exist. With
the advent of colonialism
the differences became
.more marked.

128. Despite the fact that Indonesia’itself
struggled
for its own independence 30 years ago, the leaders at
Jakarta have decided that the people of East Timor
have no right to be free and independent. Integration
of East Timor into Indonesia will bring long and hard
suffering to the people of East Timor. It is necessary for the world to learn about the contradictions
of Indonesian attitudes towards East Timor. While the
people of East Timor were suffering exploitation
and
oppression by the colonial Fascist regime, the Government,at Jakarta, particularly after 1965, never spoke
out in support of the rights of the people of East
Timor.

124. The isolation between the two peoples and the
lack of cultural and social interchange between peoples, each of which was under a different type of
colonialism,
contributed seriously to the accentuation
of the divisions and barriers. Besides, there are other
aspects. The language of Indonesia is Bahasa, Indonesian, which is totally unknown to’ the people of
East Timor. The people of East Timor ‘speak a different language-Tetum:

129. The people of East Timor are well aware of
Indonesian
criminal collaboration
with the former
colonial rulers from Portugal who ruled ‘our country
for so long. Many East Timorese patriots sought
political asylum under the Fascist regime with the
Indonesian diplomats
at Dili. As recently as two
years ago, before the fail of the Fascist regime of
Lisbon, a group of Timor patriots, founding members of FRETILIN,
approached
the Indonesian
Government
for support
of their underground
movement. Not only were their requests not met, but
their names were later given to’ the Portuguese
Fascist police. How can Indonesia expect sympathy
from the national leaders of East Timor? How can
Indonesia now speak about liberating the people of
East Timor when Indonesia has always collaborated
with the former Portuguese colonial ‘regime in suppressing the will of the people of East Timor to be
free?

125. It seems tliat there are people in the world
who want to turn back the clock of history, but such
attempts are doomed to failure, as it is not possible
to stop the historic law of social dynamism.
With
this brief explanation, we ought to conclude that only
the social and cultural realities of the present can
be the basis for defining any political option in East
Timor. The integration of East Timor into Indonesia,
besides being economic
and political colonialism,
would be cultural colonialism.
Thus, the only avenue
‘for the true and complete liberation of the people of
East Timor-and
this liberation must be a cultural
liberation also in order to achieve an over-all development-should
be national independence.

130. While East Timor was a Portuguese colony and
the people were under cruel oppression, the leaders
of Jakarta did not consider East Timor to be ‘a
threat to the stability of the area. But now that the
people of East Timor have liberated themselves and
have declared the Democratic
Republic ,of East
Timor under the leadership of FRETILIN,
Indonesian generals mount a massive criminal aggression to
suppress the newly-independent
State.

126. Regarding the 1959 affair, Indonesian and proIndonesian
factions claim that the purpose of an
uprising that occurred in 19.59 in East Timor was to
integrate that ex-Portuguese colony into the. Republic
of Indonesia. Such a claim is false. Indeed, in June
1959 an uprising against the Portuguese administration took place at Viqueque and the surrounding
villages, Vato-Lari
and Vato-Carabao. ,The Portuguese colonialists successfully put down the movement, and over 1.000 people were massacred.’

131. How can East Timor,
a small country’ of
650.000 people, be a threat to Indonesia with .over
100 .miliion
people and a well-equipped
army. of
1 million soldiers? Indonesia itself has caused war and
instability
in East Timor. Indonesia has set fire .to
‘East Timor over the past 18 months. Now Indonesia claims that it is necessary to, extinguish the
fire, ‘but instead it has added fire. FRETILIN
leaders and. the Government
of ‘the independent
Republic of East Timor are more than willing to

127. In 1950, on 25 April, a movement in the South
Moluccas declared the independence of those islands
from Java. ‘A bitter struggle followed the declaration
of independence. By 1958 a group of political refugees
of the self-declared government of South Moluccas
reached the ex-colony of East Timor and sought
17

establish normal relations with Indonesia,
friendship and co-operation.
My Government believes that
regional co-operation with the countries of ASEAN
[Associ~~tion
of South-East
A siun
Nutions]
and
Australia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea and Fiji
will be of great benefit for the whole region. Therefore, my Government
hopes that the neighbouring
nation will accept my country as a friendly and
helpful neighbour.
My Government
is well aware
of Indonesia’s national interests and we have great
admiration for the Indonesian people.

also gives the lie to Indonesian
territorial ambitions.

protests that,it

has no

136. The Government of the Democratic Republic of
East Timor will be willing to commence talks immediately with the Government of Indonesia to open a new
chapter in our relationship
for the sake of peace,
security and social progress in our two countries.
137. The points that we have presented are vital to
the guaranteeing of peace and security in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the United
Nations. We must bear in mind the lessons of IndoChina, the lessons of the heroic people of Mozambique, Guinea-Bissau, Cape Verde, and Sao Tome and
Principe. The waves of national liberation will go
forward and the people of East Timor will win.

132. But Indonesia, wonderful Indonesia; Indonesia
of yesterday: Indonesia that inspired the Bandung
Conference, Indonesia that struggled against coionialism and imperialism;
Indonesia that burned the
fires of liberation in South-East Asia. Where is Indonesia now’? How is it possible to betray a glorious
past, the principles
of the Bandung Conference?
How is it possible to betray the principles proclaimed
at the first conference of the non-aligned countries?
Indonesia of yesterday; Indonesia of today: what a
difference.

138. The PRESIDENT:
I now invite the representative of Malaysia to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
139. Mr. JOHARI
(Malaysia):
Mr. President, first
of all I would like to express the sincere thanks of
my delegation to you and the members of the Security
Council for enabling our delegation to participate in the
deliberations of the Council on the question of Timor.

133. The peace in which the people of East Timor
were living under the Government of the young Democratic Republic of East Timor has been violated
by Indonesian aggression. Peace in the whole region
is in danger. The continuation
of the presence and
the activities of Indonesia in our territory is developing another Viet-Nam
in that part of the world.
We all have in mind the tragedy of Indo-China.
We
must join our efforts to prevent another Viet-Nam.
Indonesian warships, submarines, aircraft, helicopters
and tanks are attacking our territory and our people.

140. To begin with, it is perhaps worth recounting
the circumstances that led to the convening of the
meeting of the Council. On 28 November the Portuguese Government,
through its Charge d’affaires a.i.
at the United Nations [secj S///887],
informed the
Secretary-General
that FRETILIN
had on that day
made a declaration through which it intended unilaterally to proclaim the independence of Timor. The
other political parties, UDT, APODETI,
KOTA and
Trabalhista,
followed this unilateral
declaration
of
independence by FRETILIN
with their own declaration of independence and integration of Portuguese
Timor into Indonesia. They urged Indonesia to restore
law and order in the Territory.
When the Government of Indonesia, acting upon the request of the
parties concerned, entered Portuguese Timor, the
Portuguese
Government
tequested the convening
of the Council.

134. We call on the Security Council to realize
the gravity of the situation in our part of the world.
The Security Council must strongly condemn Indonesian aggression against the young Democratic
Republic of East Timor that has been, and is being,
recognized by an ever-increasing number of countries
that are Members of the United Nations; call for the
immediate
and complete withdrawal of Indonesian
forces from the national territory of East Timor;
send urgently a fact-finding
mission to assess the
situation in East Timor and enforce the decisions
of the United Nations-and
I want to take this
opportunity
to invite representatives of any country
in the world to visit the Democratic Republic of East
Timor at the earliest opportunity;
and call on all
States to respect the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of East Timor.

141. To understand these events it is, however,
necessary to examine the developments in Portuguese
Timor since 25 April 1974, the role of the Portuguese Government as the administering
Power in that
Territory,
and the motivations
of the Indonesian
Government
in undertaking
the present course of
action.

135. May I’call the attention of the Security Council
to a report in today’s edition of The NW York Times
according to which Indonesia has formally annexed
the enclave of Ocussi, which has been for 500 years
part of East Timor. Such action by Indonesia must
be viewed as a provocation of the United Nations
in the light of the strong resolutions adopted by the
Assembly 48 hours ago. The annexation of Ocussi

142. The situation prevaihng in Portuguese Timor
prior to 25 April 1974 was in marked contrast to the
situation prevaiiing in other Portuguese colanies in
where the liberation
movements
were
Africa,
already waging a heroic and relentless struggle for
complete
independence
and freedom. They were
rewarded in their valiant efforts by becoming inde18

pendent soon after the change of government in Portugal. Consequently we have welcomed the presence of
Mozambique,
Guinea-Bissau,
Cape Verde, and Sao
Tome and Principe in our midst as full and equal
Members of the United Nations. In Portuguese Timor
political activity started only after April 1974, with the
formation of FRETILIN
and UDT and, a little later,
of APODETI
and the other political parties.

the Secretary-GeneraT;
fruitless.

Those

efforts,

again,

were

147. Finally, the Portuguese Government published
Law No. 7/75, under which a People’s Assembly was
to be elected through a direct, secret and universal
ballot in October 1976. It was expected that the
assembly would be able to consider the Territory’s
future. However, the Law could not be implemented
because of subsequent developments,
with which the
Council is now familiar.

!43. These parties, instead of fighting to oust the
colonial Power, unfortunately
began to fight among
themselves. FRETILIN
stood for the complete independence of Portuguese Timor, while APODETI
and
UDT, as it later developed, wanted a different solution through integration into Indonesia. All those parties were unable to reconcile their objectives and
goals, and they began to fight for supremacy. What
followed was a blood-bath and the breakdown of law
and order and the flight of thousands of refugees
into Indonesian Timor.

148. It can be seen, therefore, that the Portuguese
Government
had neither the ability nor the means
to restore peace and, order in the Territory
and
assist its people in the process of decolonization.
In fact, the Portuguese Government,
in its letter to
the Secretary-General
of 28 November,
admitted as
much when it stated that it did not have the means
to ensure normalization
of the situation in Timor.

144. The political parties in Timor did not in fact
have to fight the colonial Power, because the colonial
Power backed out and left in the early stages of the
fighting. In evacuating almost all of the Portuguese
administrative
and military
personnel at the very
early signs of trouble in Portuguese Timor, the colonial Power abdicated
the solemn responsibilities
it had assumed as the administering
Power under the
Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. Furthermore,
having removed
itself physically from the Territory,
the Portuguese
Government
also lost any leverage it might have
had for influencing the course of events in Portuguese Timor. The situation there turned from bad to
worse, and bloody fighting continued. The situation
was serious enough to warrant the concern of the
Secretary-General,
who on 2 November
1975
expressed his concern at the deteriorating
situation,
requested urgent humanitarian
assistance and called
upon the parties in Portuguese Timor to cease hostilities.

149. While the Portuguese continued their search
for a solution to the problems in Portuguese Timor,
the situation there worsened. The Indonesian Government watched the developments
in a neighbouring
Territory
with grave and understandable
concern.
It exercised restraint, by not moving into that Territory. However, it was apparent that with the breakdown of law and order in Portuguese Timor the
situation might get out of hand, for it had in it the
seeds of foreign intervention.
150. Up to the time that Indonesia moved into
Timor, its stated policy had been declared in its letter
of II November,
circulated to the then President
of the Security Council and the Chairman of the
Special Committee. It was that:
“Indonesia
is of the view that the process of
decolonization
in Portuguese Timor should be conducted through the implementation
of the. right of
self-determination
in which the entire people of
Portuguese Timor would be given the opportunity
to determine their own future freely and democratically in an atmosphere of peace and order.”

145. The Portuguese authorities made some efforts
to bring the parties together and set up a timetable
under which the people of Portuguese Timor could
decide their own future. However, they did not
find it possible to do so because of non-co-operation
by one party or the other at various times. The
Portuguese Government even stated that if no agreement between the parties proved possible it would
unilaterally
fix the schedule for the decolonization
process in Portuguese Timor. There was also talk
of holding a referendum to determine the will of the
people of the Territory. All this ended in failure.

It was also stated that:
“Indonesia
will respect the outcome
exercise of the right of self-determination.”

of the

151. It must be noted also that the Portuguese
Government
has always recognized the legitimate
interest of the Indonesian Government in the developments in Portuguese Timor. That recognition was
clearly reflected in the communique issued at the end
of the talks’ held between the Foreign Ministers of
Indonesia and Portugal at Rome early in November.
The communique
stated that:

146. The Portuguese
Government
also sent its
envoy to the region, to Dili, to Jakarta and to
Canberra in the hope that some solution might be
found for ending the hostilities in Portuguese Timor.
The envoy also visited the United Nations and met

“The two Ministers shared the view that in the
implementation
of decolonization
of Portuguese
19

declarations of independence of the rival groups are a
complete denial of the right of the people to decide
their future for themselves. We sincerely hope that
once peace and order have been restore3 in Timor it
will be possible to ascertain the wishes of the people.

Timor it would be essential also to safeguard the
legitimate interests of the countries of the region,
particularly the interests of Indonesia as the closest
neighbouring country.“s
152. That view was repeated by the representative
of Portugal in the debate in the Fourth Committee
on 2 December,6 when he stated that the process of
decolonization
in Timor should take into account the
peace and security of the geographical region in which
it was located. Indonesian intervention in Portuguese
Timor must therefore be viewed in that context. This
action occurred after nearly four months of lawlessness and bloody fighting, and after the futile attempts
that the administering
Power had made for over a
year to find a solution to the problem in Timor. It
occurred after the declaration of independence through
integration into Indonesia by the four political parties,
APODETI,
UDT, KOTA and Trabalhista,
parties
which had urged the Indonesian
Government
and
people to protect the lives of the people who regarded
themselves as Indonesians.

156. The Malaysian Government is of the view that
any action which the Security Council, in all its
wisdom, may take with respect to the future status
of Portuguese Timor should be based on the following
considerations:
-First, the Portuguese Government should be held
responsible for the existing situation in Portuguese
Timor, and it should seek the assistance of the countries in the region to discharge its responsibilities
as the administering
Power;
-Secondly,
the United Nations should dispatch a
visiting mission to the Territory to assess the situation
and to make appropriate recommendations,
bearing
in mind the ultimate objective of allowing the people
of Portuguese Timor to exercise their right to selfdetermination;

153. Recently, during the debate on the question
of Timor in the Fourth Committee,
the Indonesian
representative
stated that Indonesia did not have
any territorial ambitions in Timor and that its sole
desire was to see the creation of an atmosphere
of calm and tranquillity,
in which the people could
exercise their right of self-determination.
In other
words, it may be taken that Indonesia is not seeking
to impose a solution in Portuguese Timor, and that
it is still committed to its policy of self-determination
for the people of the Territory.

-Thirdly,
the people of Portuguese Timor must be
allowed to exercise their right to self-determination
freely, in an atmosphere of peace and order.
157. Since time is of the essence, the Malaysian
Government sincerely hopes that the Council will act
speedily and effectively so that we can bring to an end
another saga of colonialism in our part of the world.

154. Malaysia has always championed the cause of
freedom and independence for subject peoples. We
have always upheld the principle of the right to selfdetermination
for peoples under colonial domination
and oppression, principles enshrined in the Charter
and in United Nations resolutions. Our record over
the years shows our consistent support for the
application of this principle in colonial Territories.

I See A/AC. 109/L. 1027.
1 A/10277, annex.
3 A/10208.
’ See Officiul
Rrcwrd~
of the Generd
Plencmy Mmdngs,
2382nd meeting.
s See A/C.4/802, annex.
6 See OJWcrl Rewrcb
qf’the Generul
Fourth
Committee,
2178th meeting.
’ Ibid., 2184th meeting, para. 48.
* Ihid.,

155. The situation as it exists now in Portuguese
Timor is not conducive to allowing the people there
to decide their future freely. The two rival groups
have not shown any flexibility or willingness to compromise; they continue to have divergent goals and
objectives
for the Territory’s
future; each has
resorted to armed means to achieve its ends. The

Thirtieth

Sessiotl.

Anne.w.s.

Thirtieth

Se.s.sion,

Fourth

Thirtidl

Ses.sion,

Amw.ws.

Srwiorr.

Fmrrth

A/10426. para. IO.
y Ihid..

para. 32.
lo Ibid.,

A/10426, para. 8.
I’ Ihitl.,

Thirtieth

Assembly.

Thirtkth

Sc.s.sion.

Assert~hl~.

Thirtieth

Session.

agenda item 88. document
Cwnmittw

20

Thirtieth

Scwion.

Plenqv

meeting,

agenda item 88, document
Ccwmnirrec~.

2184th-2189th meetings.
I* Ihid..

, 2 185th

Meetings.

2178th. 2180th.
2349th meeting.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLlCAnONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLlCATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les librairia
et les agences d+ositaires
du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
g : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Gen5ve.
KAK

IIOJIY’IllTh

COMO

CONSECUiR

213&AHHJI

BAI~HM

OPI-AHH

PUBLICACIONES

OI;-bE~RHEHH~~lX

DE LAS NACIONES

HAIWH

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de IaS Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Cons&e
a su libren, o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00400

82-61202-December

1983-2,200
