United Nations

S/PV.6201

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6201st meeting
Wednesday, 14 October 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Le Luong Minh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Mr. Zhang Yesui
Mr. Guillermet
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Araud
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Shalgham
Mr. Heller
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir John Sawers
Mr. Wolff

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-55731 (E)

*0955731*

S/PV.6201

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Bangladesh, Brazil, Cuba,
Ecuador, Egypt, Iceland, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Jordan, Liechtenstein ,
Malaysia, Morocco, Nicaragua, Pakistan, South Africa,
the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab
Republic, the United Republic of Tanzania and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Shalev
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 13 October
2009 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2009/531 and which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite His Excellency Mr. Riad
Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Palestinian National Authority, to participate in
the meeting of the Security Council that will be
held on Wednesday, 14 October 2009, regarding
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite Mr. Al-Malki to participate in the meeting, in

2

accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Malki
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 12 October 2009 from the
Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to the United Nations, in which he requests
that the Permanent Observer of the League of Arab
States to the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Yahya
Mahmassani, be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item in accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure. If I hear
no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. Mahmassani.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Mahmassani to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 8 October 2009 from His
Excellency Mr. Paul Badji, Permanent Representative
of Senegal, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. If I hear no objection, I shall take it
that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Paul Badji.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Badji to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
09-55731

S/PV.6201

At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Pascoe: Since Special Coordinator Serry last
briefed the Security Council on 17 September (see
S/PV.6190), political efforts to resolve the Arab-Israeli
conflict have continued, but there has been no
significant progress on the ground and some worrying
developments have emerged.
On 21 September, in the first face-to-face
meeting of Israeli and Palestinian leaders since 2008,
President Obama urged the parties to meet their
responsibilities and personally committed himself to
help them restart negotiations. He stressed to the
General Assembly the illegitimacy of continued
settlements, as well as the suffering inflicted by the
ongoing conflict on Palestinian and Israeli civilians. He
detailed his goal of urgently starting talks, without
preconditions, on the key issues of security for Israelis
and Palestinians, borders, refugees and Jerusalem.
The Quartet met on 24 September and supported
President Obama’s efforts to relaunch negotiations,
stressing the urgency of progress. The Quartet also
reiterated its call on the parties to implement their
Road Map commitments, and in particular for Israel to
freeze all settlement activity, including natural growth,
and refrain from provocative actions in East Jerusalem,
and for the Palestinian Authority to make every effort
to improve law and order, fight extremism and end
incitement.
Both the Quartet and the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee (AHLC), which met on 22 September,
expressed support for the Palestinian Authority’s plan
to construct the institutions of a Palestinian State
within 24 months. AHLC members noted that effective
reform efforts by the Palestinian Authority and donorfunded fiscal stimulus were the primary drivers of
economic growth in the West Bank. The Government
of Israel’s relaxation of some restrictions on the
movement of goods and people within the West Bank
has complemented these efforts.
United States envoy Mitchell returned from the
region on 12 October. Further discussions between the
United States, Israeli and Palestinian interlocutors are
now expected to take place in Washington in the days
ahead. However, even with the full determination and
support of the international community to achieve the
two-State solution, the essential ingredient is the

09-55731

political will of the parties to meet their obligations
and negotiate an end to the conflict.
As the parties returned from New York, tensions
increased on the ground. There were a number of
incidents in East Jerusalem centred around Al-Haram
Al-Sharif/Temple
Mount.
Clashes
started
on
27 September between Israeli police and Muslim
worshippers at Al-Aqsa mosque. Rumours and an
atmosphere of mistrust subsequently provoked more
confrontations between Palestinians and the Israeli
police during the Jewish holiday of Succoth, when tens
of thousands of Jewish worshippers were present in the
Old City of Jerusalem.
From 28 September, the Israeli authorities
imposed new restrictions on worshippers and tourists
entering the compound after several hundred
worshippers associated with the Islamic Movement of
Northern Israel stationed themselves within the site,
claiming that radical Jewish groups were intending to
alter the status quo at the compound. The Israeli
authorities strongly denied these rumours. Bitter
accusations from both sides, however, underline the
gulf of mistrust that exists.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan was active in
negotiating between the Israeli authorities and the
Islamic Movement members for an orderly end to the
stand-off, and Special Coordinator Serry visited the
compound and was in close touch with the parties to
urge calm. By Saturday, 10 October, the restrictions
imposed on 28 September had been lifted.
The status of the Old City and the religious sites
within it are extremely sensitive issues that will be
fully resolved only in final status negotiations. Until
then, the repeated call of the Quartet on Israel to
refrain from provocative actions in East Jerusalem and
on the Palestinian Authority to refrain from incitement
remains more relevant than ever. The SecretaryGeneral continues to appeal to all sides to exercise
restraint.
While the immediate crisis may have passed, we
remain concerned about the broader situation in East
Jerusalem and the potential for renewed tensions. On
12 October, the Israeli authorities carried out
demolition orders against two Palestinian buildings in
the Beit Hanina area of East Jerusalem. On 7 October,
the cornerstone was laid for the further expansion of
the Nof Zion settlement in the heart of the Palestinian
neighbourhood of Jabal Mukabbir in East Jerusalem.

3

S/PV.6201

Settlement activity is illegal and undermines the efforts
of all those who are striving for peace.
Throughout the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, levels of violence remained constant during
the most recent reporting period. In total, there were
two Palestinians killed and 105 injured, and 35 Israelis
injured. Serious incidents took place at the Qalandiya
checkpoint, where several Palestinians were injured; at
Hussan checkpoint, where a Palestinian was shot and
killed; and at Shu’fat checkpoint near Jerusalem, where
an Israeli border policeman was stabbed by a
Palestinian youth. There were 23 recorded incidents of
violence involving settlers attacking Palestinians and
their property during the reporting period, and seven
recorded incidents of Palestinian attacks on settlers.
As of 29 September 2009, there were
592 movement obstacles in the West Bank, down from
618 in August. Of the 100 closure obstacles that the
Israeli authorities announced that they would remove
immediately prior to last month’s briefing, the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
has been able to confirm that 35 were removed and
22 remain in place. The remaining 43 obstacles were
not recorded in the OCHA database.
In addition to these developments, tensions
among Palestinians were heightened in the aftermath of
the deferral of consideration by the Human Rights
Council of the report (A/HRC/12/48) of the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict
headed by Justice Richard Goldstone, which was
presented to the Human Rights Council on
29 September. The deferral led to severe criticism
among a wide range of Palestinian institutions and
factions and the public, which included the affected
populations and organizations in the region; heavy
incitement against President Abbas from Hamas
leaders; and public demonstrations of discontent. On
11 October, President Abbas indicated that he had
given instructions to seek a special session of the
Human Rights Council on the report, and such a
session has now been scheduled for 15 and 16 October.
Members will recall that, at the beginning of
2009, the Secretary-General visited both Gaza and
southern Israel in order to help end the fighting and to
show his respect and concern for the deaths and
injuries of so many people during the conflict in and
around Gaza. He was and remains deeply affected by
the widespread death, destruction and suffering in Gaza

4

City, as well as moved by the plight of civilians in
southern Israel who have been subject to indiscriminate
rocket and mortar fire for too long.
The Secretary-General believes that international
humanitarian law needs to be fully respected and that
civilians must be protected in all situations and
circumstances. As he said in his address to the General
Assembly, where conflicts arise justice and
accountability should follow. Accordingly, the
Secretary-General has from the outset supported the
work of the Fact-Finding Mission.
The report makes a number of recommendations
for ensuring accountability for perpetrators and redress
for victims. It calls on the Government of Israel to
conduct independent investigations into the many
allegations of serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law committed during
the Gaza conflict. It similarly calls on Hamas — the
relevant authority in Gaza — to initiate genuine and
effective proceedings into the many allegations of
serious violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law committed by forces under its
control, and calls on Palestinian armed groups to
undertake to respect international humanitarian law by
renouncing attacks on Israeli civilians.
As the Secretary-General has said repeatedly,
peace and justice are two sides of the same coin. The
Secretary-General calls upon all of the parties to carry
out credible domestic investigations into the conduct of
the conflict without delay. He hopes that such steps
will be taken wherever there are credible allegations of
human rights abuses throughout the world.
The broader situation in Gaza, especially the
continued closure policy, remains unsustainable and
unacceptable. Resolution 1860 (2009) contains the
elements of a more strategic and principled approach,
but key elements remain unfulfilled. The situation in
Gaza cannot be left to further deteriorate and unravel.
After several months of relative calm, there was a
worrying increase in violence between Gaza and Israel
in the reporting period, with 12 projectiles fired from
Gaza into Israel, including seven in one day on
28 September, as well as nine Israeli incursions and
12 air strikes. It is essential that calm not only be
restored but solidified. Seven Palestinians, including
two civilians, were killed and 15 more, including three
children, were injured in these incidents. We continue
to be concerned about reports of the smuggling of

09-55731

S/PV.6201

weapons into Gaza as well as the continued closure of
the Strip.
No exports were allowed out of Gaza during the
reporting period, and food and hygiene items continue
to make up the bulk of imports. During his meeting last
month with Prime Minister Netanyahu, the SecretaryGeneral expressed his disappointment that, despite
extensive discussions, there had been no Israeli
approval of the United Nations Gaza recovery
proposals for schools, clinics and housing, which are
strongly supported by the Quartet and the AHLC. The
Prime Minister gave the Secretary-General his personal
assurances that he would revisit the issue and Special
Coordinator Serry has remained engaged with the
Israeli authorities.
Despite
ongoing
recriminations
among
Palestinian factions, Egypt is continuing intensive
efforts to secure the agreement of all factions to
proposals to overcome the Palestinian divide and hold
elections in the first half of 2010. We continue to
support efforts to reunite Gaza with the West Bank
within the framework of the legitimate Palestinian
Authority, as called for by the Quartet.
Between 2 and 4 October, Israel released
20 Palestinian female detainees after Hamas presented,
through a German mediator, a film clip showing Israeli
Corporal Gilad Shalit alive and in good health. We
certainly welcome these developments.
We continue to stress that efforts on the IsraeliPalestinian track must be situated within the broader
context of comprehensive Arab-Israeli peace. On the
ground, the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan was
quiet during the reporting period, although Israeli
settlement activity continues there. Syrian Deputy
Foreign Minister Faysal Mikdad met with senior
United States officials in Washington, D.C., following
the General Assembly’s general debate. After the visit
of President Al-Assad to Saudi Arabia on
23 September, King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia arrived
in Syria on 7 October for a two-day summit with
President Al-Assad in an important visit for the region.
Let me now turn to developments in Lebanon. On
16 September, Lebanese President Sleiman reappointed
parliamentary majority leader Saad Hariri as Prime
Minister-designate. Mr. Hariri has since been engaged
in intense consultations with all parliamentary factions
aimed at reaching agreement on the composition of a
new Cabinet and its programme. We continue to

09-55731

believe that the early formation of a Government
supported by all is critical to enabling the country to
face important challenges in the political, economic,
social and security spheres.
On 7 October, eight people were wounded when a
rocket-propelled grenade exploded in the Jabal Mohsen
neighbourhood of Tripoli. There was also a handgrenade blast in another neighbourhood of the city.
While these incidents were contained, they are an
ongoing test of Lebanon’s stability. Efforts to
reconstruct the Nahr el-Bared refugee camp have been
further delayed by the discovery of archaeological
artefacts. The Secretary-General remains hopeful that
the reconstruction of Nahr el-Bared can resume
without further delay.
The situation in the area of operations of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
generally remains quiet. In the evening of 12 October,
an explosion took place at a residential building in the
village of Tayr Filsay, just south of the Litani River.
The cause and circumstances of the incident are not yet
entirely clear. If it was due to the explosion of a rocket
or ammunition, this would be a clear violation of
resolution 1701 (2006). UNIFIL, in close cooperation
with the Lebanese Armed Forces, is conducting an
investigation into the incident, which is still ongoing.
UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces are continuing
intensified operational activities in sensitive areas from
which rockets could be launched. Israeli air violations
continue on a daily basis.
Efforts to resume the political track are
continuing, and have our full support. However, the
pattern of events over the past month in the Middle
East is a powerful reminder that without a credible
political horizon — including commitments made,
monitored and kept on the ground, and a calling to
account when obligations are breached — forces of
violence, tension and extremism on both sides will fill
the vacuum.
Now more than ever, it is vital that politics be
made credible and that those who try to undermine
politics by changing facts on the ground or resorting to
violence not be allowed to set the agenda. The United
Nations will continue to work for a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East, achieved through
negotiations that are based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002),
1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008), previous agreements, the

5

S/PV.6201

Madrid framework, the Road Map and the Arab Peace
Initiative.
We believe that robust third-party support will be
helpful to the parties, and that the end goal of a twoState solution, based on the 1967 lines and the
resolution of all core issues, can and must emerge
quickly and meaningfully. If we do not go forward
decisively towards the two-State solution, we may go
back to more violence, suffering and the loss of hope.
Once extinguished, that hope will be very difficult to
rekindle.
The President: I thank Mr. Pascoe for his
briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I now give the floor to Mr. Riad Al-Malki,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Palestinian National
Authority.
Mr. Al-Malki (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of Palestine, I congratulate you warmly, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and affirm our full confidence in your able and
wise guidance of our important proceedings today and
the Security Council’s agenda this month.
I also express greatly appreciation to the
delegation of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya for its efforts
to accelerate the Council’s consideration of the critical
and tense situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and particularly with regard
to the disturbing findings of the United Nations FactFinding Mission on the Gaza Conflict. We thank as
well the Arab Group, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the Non-Aligned Movement for their
endorsement of the initiative to prompt the Council to
seriously consider this grave issue, in line with its
Charter responsibilities.
I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe for his important briefing
today. Regrettably, all recent assessments of the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory attest to
its severity on all fronts. The negative consequences of

6

the continued failure to ensure Israel’s compliance with
international law and to promote appropriate
conditions for the resumption of the peace process
should give rise to concern in the international
community.
We regret that, despite the persistent efforts of the
United States Administration, the members of the
Quartet, countries of the region and other concerned
parties, no real progress has been made towards peace.
This is precisely because of the failure to address the
major issues of concern, foremost among which is the
ongoing Israeli settler colonization campaign in the
West Bank, especially in and around East Jerusalem,
and the raging humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip as
a consequence of Israel’s military aggression and
ongoing blockade. Israel’s intransigence and defiance
of the international will continue to jeopardize the
prospects for realizing a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
We are at a critical juncture. Sensitivities are
rising to all-time highs and the need and calls for
responsible action, accountability and justice are
intense and must be heeded. In this regard, the report
of the United Nations Fact Finding Mission on the
Gaza Conflict, also known as the Goldstone report
(A/HRC/12/48), constitutes yet another wake-up call to
the international community that must not be ignored.
At the same time, the explosive situation in occupied
East Jerusalem, the heart of the occupied Palestinian
territory, with all the attendant consequences should it
spiral further out of control, remind us of the centrality
of this issue to regional peace and security and require
urgent attention.
With respect to Gaza, we are all too aware of the
tragic consequences of the savage Israeli military
aggression launched on 27 December 2008 against the
defenceless and besieged Palestinian civilian
population. More than 1,400 of them, including
hundreds of innocent women and children were killed,
and more than 5,500 were injured, many permanently,
as the occupying forces rampaged through Gaza, using
all means of heavy and lethal weaponry and exhibiting
a callous disregard for human life. The widespread
destruction deliberately wreaked by the occupying
forces on the Gaza Strip remains shockingly in full
view, as Israel continues to obstruct the reconstruction
of thousands of homes, vital infrastructure, hospitals
and schools, mosques, economic, industrial and

09-55731

S/PV.6201

agricultural facilities and even United Nations facilities
damaged or destroyed in the Israeli onslaught.
The continued imposition of this immoral,
unlawful Israeli blockade and collective punishment of
the population has insured that the Palestinian people
in the Gaza Strip continue to live in misery amid the
ruins of their homes, deepening their humanitarian
hardship and stoking the raw feelings of injustice.
The investigation conducted by Justice Goldstone
and his team to follow up the request by the Human
Rights Council led to findings that clearly confirm that
Israel, the occupying Power, committed serious human
rights violations and grave breaches of international
humanitarian law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, that amount to war crimes and even
crimes against humanity against the Palestinian people.
They include the wilful killing of civilians, torture and
inhuman treatment wilfully causing great suffering,
serious injury to body and soul and extensive
destruction of property not justified by military
necessity. All this was carried out unlawfully and
wantonly and gives rise to Israeli criminal
responsibility.
The investigation concluded that Israel failed to
take the precautions required by international law to
avoid or minimize loss of civilian life, injury to
civilians and damage to civilian property, flagrantly
violating the principle of distinction. Moreover, it
concluded that that Israeli military campaign was
planned in all of its phases as a deliberately
disproportionate and systematic attack aimed at
punishing, humiliating and terrorizing the Palestinian
civilian population, radically diminishing its domestic
economic capacity to sustain itself and forcing upon it
a heightened sense of dependency and vulnerability.
That shocking finding is confirmed thousands of times
over by the depth of the trauma and anguish suffered
by the Palestinian people to this day. All the
Palestinians — men, women, the disabled — suffered
much, and that affirms the veracity of those facts.
The members of the United Nations Fact-Finding
Mission on the Gaza Conflict — Justice
Richard Goldstone, Professor Christine Chinkin,
Ms. Hina Jilani and Colonel Desmond Travers —
should be commended for the thorough investigation
they carried out and for the comprehensive and serious
report they compiled under difficult circumstances,
including Israel’s refusal to cooperate with the

09-55731

Mission. Those individuals are eminent jurists and
experts of integrity and professionalism who cannot be
challenged by anybody.
In that context, we are aware that the Mission
investigated all allegations of violations of
international law in the course of the Gaza conflict,
including the allegations against the Palestinian side.
While we reject any equation of the occupying Power’s
aggression and crimes with actions committed in
response by the Palestinian side, we wish to reaffirm
that there is no symmetry or proportionality between
the occupier and the occupied. We take very seriously
the allegations contained in the Goldstone report
regarding possible Palestinian violations.
We once again affirm our respect for and
conviction of the rule of law, including international
humanitarian law. We reiterate the commitment, as
publicly stated, to the pursuit of domestic legal
investigations to address that crucial matter.
Yet what the Goldstone report essentially
constitutes is another damning record of the Israeli
crimes committed against our people under occupation.
Its
recommendations
represent
a
significant
contribution to the pursuit of accountability and
justice. In this regard, while significant deterrent power
is presented by this report, along with other pertinent
investigations that preceded it — including the report
of the Secretary-General’s board of inquiry and
investigations by the League of Arab States
Independent Fact-Finding Committee on Gaza, the
International Committee of the Red Cross, Amnesty
International, Human Rights Watch and numerous
other organizations — it is clear that serious and
responsible follow-up at all levels is imperative. This is
very important to prevent the recurrence of such Israeli
crimes against our people.
Tomorrow the Human Rights Council will
convene a special session based on a Palestinian
initiative at the call of His Excellency President
Mahmoud Abbas to rectify the malfunction that
occurred at the Council in Geneva two weeks earlier.
We thank all the countries that supported the request
for this session. We hope that the Human Rights
Council will endorse the Goldstone report and will
formally convey it to the pertinent United Nations
bodies,
in
conformity
with
the
report’s
recommendations.

7

S/PV.6201

We firmly believe that in the long run the pursuit
of accountability for war crimes will better serve the
cause of peace, which cannot be attained without
justice. In that connection, we recall sage words by
eminent signatories of the 16 March 2009 open letter to
the Secretary-General and the Security Council:
“We have seen at first hand the importance of
investigating the truth and delivering justice for
the victims of conflict. We believe it is a
precondition to move forward and achieve peace
in the Middle East.”
We thus believe that the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the Goldstone report
must be seriously pursued. The Security Council must
uphold its Charter duty to address matters crucial to the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
General Assembly, the International Criminal Court,
the Secretary-General, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the international community as a
whole, here at the United Nations, as High Contracting
Parties to the Geneva Convention — all should act on
the report’s recommendations, in implementation of the
principle of universal jurisdiction and in accordance
with their respective roles and responsibilities. The
credibility and foundations of international human
rights law and humanitarian law, as well as of the
United Nations as a whole, is at stake.
The world has for too long witnessed Israel’s
impunity, knowing well that it has been repeatedly
fuelled by the lack of punishment and accountability.
The tragic consequences have been suffered by
generations of innocents throughout sixty years of
statelessness and diaspora and over 42 years of
occupation. We must break that vicious cycle. There
must be an outcry against the perpetrators of war
crimes, not against those who seek justice for the
victims.
Israel must be stopped from committing the
violations and crimes it continues to carry out against
the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. In that
connection, I wish to emphasize today the gravity of
the situation prevailing there. The situation is highly
volatile due to Israel’s illegal and provocative actions
and incitement, including flagrant pursuit of settlement
activities and acts by extremist settlers at the Al-Haram
Al-Sharif compound, including closing and besieging
the Al-Aqsa mosque, threatening to use force, inciting

8

feelings and other provocations so that Israel can avoid
resumption of the peace process and can claim that
there is no Palestinian partner for peace. All this
requires urgent attention and action by the international
community, including this Security Council. They
threaten the use of force and to block the Al-Haram
Al-Sharif compound. This gives the Israelis a excuse to
justify their control of the Al-Aqsa mosque and to shirk
the responsibilities of peace, resorting to the same
bankrupt rhetoric and claiming that there is no
Palestinian peace partner. Such conduct calls for just
and firm action by the international community,
including the Security Council.
In recent months and weeks, we have drawn the
Council’s attention to the increasing and unprecedented
levels of Israeli aggression in occupied East Jerusalem.
The occupying Power’s settler colonization measures
and the lawless acts of terror, violence and provocation
committed by its settlers in the city are inflaming
tensions and threatening to ignite an already fragile,
precarious situation on the ground. The entire
international community has called for the full and
immediate cessation of Israeli settlement activities,
including so-called natural growth in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
Yet Israel continues to blatantly flout these calls,
international law and United Nations resolutions; to
construct and expand settlements, settlement
infrastructure and the separation wall; to confiscate
more Palestinian land; to transfer more Israeli settlers,
especially in and around East Jerusalem; and to take
other illegal measures aimed at altering the
demographic composition, character, nature and status
of occupied East Jerusalem, including the ongoing
demolition of Palestinian homes, the eviction of
Palestinian families and their replacement by settlers,
as well as the revocation of residency permits. Israel
builds new settlement neighbourhoods, such as those in
Al-Bustan, Silwan, Jabal Mukkabir and Al-Sheikh
Jarrah. It also continues to carry out excavations,
including around and beneath Al-Haram Al-Sharif,
where it has also permitted extremists to perpetrate acts
of provocation and incitement, inflaming religious
sensitivities not only in the Holy City but far beyond,
throughout the Arab and Islamic world.
If such illegal actions and incitement remain
unaddressed, the consequences at the political and
security levels will surely be grave. Not only do such
actions have enormous potential to reignite the cycle of

09-55731

S/PV.6201

violence between the two sides, but, as we have
repeatedly cautioned, every such illegal act of
colonization and provocation further threatens the
prospects for reviving the peace process and for
achieving the two-State solution for peace on the basis
of the 1967 borders. That could very well be one of
Israel’s aim today.
History has shown that the prosecution of war
crimes and the achievement of justice are, regrettably,
not an immediate process. They require perseverance,
principled positions and commitment based on
international law and moral principles. We will
therefore continue our pursuit of justice and to reject
and call for an end to the impunity that has allowed
Israel for all these years to commit mass crimes against
the Palestinian people without fear of punishment. We
want to turn the page on this horrific and tragic chapter
for Palestine and cross the threshold into a new era in
which our people can live in peace, freedom and
dignity in an independent State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, exercising the rights to which
all human beings are entitled but which have so long
been denied them.
To that end, we will have to act, individually and
collectively, with the utmost urgency and responsibility
to promote respect for the human rights and
international law that are essential to making this new
era a reality and to achieving genuine peace and
coexistence in the region. Unchecked impunity and the
absence of justice will only continue to obstruct peace
efforts and prolong this tragic conflict and civilian
suffering. As Justice Goldstone said before the Human
Rights Council,
“a culture of impunity in the region has lasted for
too long. The lack of accountability for war
crimes and possible crimes against humanity has
reached a crisis point … The mission is
convinced that the international community must
confront the realities highlighted in this report
and by doing so find a meaningful basis for the
pursuit of peace and security for all the people of
the region. Only in that way will the human
dignity and security of these people be realized.”
The President: I
representative of Israel.

give

the

floor

to

the

Ms. Shalev (Israel): Let me thank UnderSecretary-General Pascoe for his informative and
important briefing highlighting the very complex,

09-55731

broader aspects of the situation in the Middle East.
May I also take this opportunity to bid farewell to a
friend and diplomat, the Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom, and to thank him for his great
work for peace and security in this Council. I wish
Sir John Sawers great success in his next mission.
The Security Council meets today for its monthly
debate on the situation in the Middle East and the
question of Palestine. Since the most recent meeting on
this matter, an important trilateral meeting has taken
place between United States, Palestinian and Israeli
leaders. Since that meeting, Special Envoy Senator
Mitchell and his team have been relentlessly engaged
in an effort to put the peace process back on track.
And less than a week ago, the Nobel Peace Prize
was awarded to the President of the United States.
Allow me to congratulate President Obama and the
people of the United States on this honourable
recognition. The Nobel Prize was granted to President
Obama for his “extraordinary efforts to strengthen
international diplomacy and cooperation between
peoples” in pursuit of peace. The Middle East is indeed
one of those areas yearning for peace — a peace based
on the vision laid down by the United Nations itself in
1947: two States for two peoples.
Israel seeks peace. We want a genuine peace, a
defensible peace, a permanent peace. A peace in which
two States, one Jewish, one Palestinian, will live side
by side in peace and security. Recognizing such a
vision will move the peace process forward. Terrorism,
bloodshed and incitement will not.
Let me briefly describe the reality on the ground.
As I have lately communicated, the month of
September witnessed an alarming rise in terrorist
attacks. In the South, 13 rockets and mortars were fired
at Israel from the Hamas-controlled Gaza Strip. Fifteen
other attacks were launched with light weapons and
anti-tank missiles. There were multiple attempts by
terrorists to infiltrate Israel and to plant explosives
along the fence between the Gaza Strip and Israel.
To our North, three rockets were launched on
Israeli territory from southern Lebanon. The Hizbullah
terrorist organization continues to receive deadly
weapons from its sponsors, Members of this
Organization. At the same time, Hizbullah is building a
military infrastructure in the midst of the civilian
population south of the Litani River. Its operatives and
affiliated civilians openly threaten the United Nations

9

S/PV.6201

Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), obstructing it
from discharging its mandate. The explosion of an
actively maintained weapons depot in Khirbat Salim on
16 July proved beyond any doubt that Hizbullah’s
violations are the greatest obstacle to the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).

General, Kofi Annan, called Israel’s actions a
courageous decision. This very Council commended
the ongoing implementation of the disengagement
process. Member States assured us that if Israel needed
to defend itself, international legitimacy would be on
our side.

In addition, two days before the present meeting,
another explosion of arms occurred, in a civilian home
in the village of Tayr Filsay. That grave incident once
again highlights a reality that we have been facing for
years in southern Lebanon, as well as in Gaza: a
terrorist organization, rearming and deploying within
civilian areas, endangering not only peace and security
but, cynically, the very civilians themselves.

Yet Israel’s hope turned into a nightmare. Instead
of promoting a functioning Palestinian society, Hamas
has built an infrastructure of terror. Instead of
promoting peace, Hamas has murdered and silenced
opposition, while inciting an entire generation to kill
and hate. Gaza is occupied by terrorism: Hamas
terrorism. Hamas openly rejects Israel’s right to exist.
Hamas openly rejects a two-State solution. Their
charter calls for Jews to be killed and quotes notorious
anti-Semitic citations.

The evidence of that phenomenon is clear, as was
demonstrated yesterday in southern Lebanon and seen
on television or on our computer screens. We expect
UNIFIL and the relevant United Nations authorities to
promptly conduct a thorough investigation into that
incident and to share its findings with the Governments
of Lebanon and of Israel and with the members of the
Security Council. Southern Lebanon is occupied by
terrorism: Hizbullah’s terrorism. We trust that the
upcoming report of the Secretary-General on resolution
1701 (2006) will offer practical and tangible steps
towards further implementation of that important
resolution.
This is the situation in the Middle East. Behind
Hizbullah’s defiance and build-up stands Iran. Iran’s
sponsorship and support of terrorism is pushing the
region towards instability and conflict. As Iran hurtles
towards nuclear weapons capabilities, coupled with
long-range missiles, its leaders refuse to truthfully
answer the inquiries and demands of the international
community. The recent Iranian admission of a uranium
enrichment plant outside Qom leaves no doubt: the
Iranian nuclear programme is an international crisis.

Yet the world does nothing. As Hamas smuggled
a constant supply of deadly Iranian arms into Gaza, the
world did nothing. As Hamas placed weapons and
launched attacks from within schools, mosques and
hospitals, the world did nothing. As Hamas fired
12,000 rockets against 1 million innocent Israeli men,
women and children, the world did nothing. That is the
situation in the Middle East.
This monthly meeting was supposed to take place
next week, but was rescheduled due to what was
described as the urgency of the matter. An outside
bystander would think that the issue of such an urgent
meeting would be the continuous shelling of Israeli
territory by terrorists from Gaza and Lebanon, or the
continuous threats from Iran’s nuclear development.

That country, Iran, is driven by religious
extremism, officially sponsors Holocaust denial and
violently suppresses the democratic aspirations of its
citizens, while continuing to promote international
terrorism. The world’s most dangerous weapons are
quickly falling into the hands of the most dangerous
regime in the world. That is the real threat to peace and
security in our region and in the world.

However, the urgency of the matter is a pretext to
hijack the Council’s agenda by raising an issue here
that belongs elsewhere. The Member State responsible
for this dereliction of procedure is, as we all know, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. This is the Member State, a
true champion of human rights, which recently offered
an official hero’s welcome to an arch-terrorist. That
arch-terrorist is responsible for the cold-blooded
murder of hundreds of innocent men, women and
children over the skies of Lockerbie. This is the same
Member State whose leader, in his memorable
soliloquy before the General Assembly three weeks ago
(see A/64/PV.3), called the Security Council a “Terror
Council”.

Five years ago, in the pursuit of peace, Israel
dismantled 21 settlements and uprooted over 8,000
Israelis from the Gaza Strip. The former Secretary-

Today we have heard references to the Goldstone
report (A/HRC/12/48). Although the debate on that
report belongs elsewhere, let me briefly state Israel’s

10

09-55731

S/PV.6201

position. I regret to say that the Goldstone report is
one-sided, biased and therefore wrong, just like the
forum and the mandate that established its mission.
The report favours and legitimizes terrorism. It is a
prize for terrorist organizations. It denies Israel’s right
to defend its citizens. It falls directly into the pitfall
strategically laid by terrorist organizations around the
world. It prevents and will prevent democratic Member
States from defending themselves against terrorism. It
permits terrorists to victimize civilians, target the
innocent and use those it claims to defend as human
shields.

particular the blockade that is still in effect, the
expansion of settlements, the building of the racist
separation wall despite the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice, the daily systematic
humiliation of the Palestinian people at checkpoints
and in prisons, 11,000 detainees, including women and
children, the destruction of their homes, the attempts to
Judaize Jerusalem, the attacks on the Al-Aqsa mosque
and the ongoing attacks by racist settlers on Palestinian
citizens — the ongoing occupation is the main reason
for all these violations of international humanitarian
law and of the human rights of the Palestinian people.

By trying to bring that report before a so-called
urgent debate in the Security Council, the Council’s
attention was diverted from the reality in our region.
Rather than dealing with the situation in the Middle
East, and instead of encouraging the parties to move
towards peace and resume negotiations, the debate in
this Council has been shifted to discussing a narrative
that is destructive to the peace process.

Despite the adoption of resolution 1860 (2009),
despite the outcome of the donors conference held in
Sharm el-Sheikh on the reconstruction of Gaza and
despite the most recent initiative of the SecretaryGeneral aimed at lifting the blockade, the occupying
authorities have stubbornly maintained their blockade.
As the Israeli authorities are the occupying authorities,
this is considered a blatant violation of their obligations
under the Fourth Geneva Convention. They do this
because they are convinced — indeed, assured — of
their allies’ support. That means that Israel no longer
has to abide by any laws.

For those of us who seek to resume the peace
process in the Middle East, debating the Goldstone
report in the Security Council is but a tale full of sound
and fury, signifying nothing. If Israel is asked to take
further risks for peace, the international community
must recognize our right to self-defence.
The President: I shall now give the floor to
members of the Council.
Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): First of all, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this emergency
meeting of the Security Council in accordance with the
understanding reached within the Council.
I thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing. We also
welcome our brother, Riad Al-Malki, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Palestinian National Authority.
As I said at a previous special meeting of the
Council, I believe that there is a need to focus on the
Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48). That is because the
Palestinian issue, including the occupation, in spite of its
complexity, is sometimes summarized superficially —
for example, by stating that it mainly concerns the
settlements.
That is not so. The cause of the crisis and the
source of all the violence and tension in the region over
the past six decades is the ongoing Israeli occupation.
The inhuman practices of the Israeli authorities, in

09-55731

The international community and the Security
Council in particular are still unable to refrain from
using double standards in dealing with Israel. The
international community is still not able to force Israel
to respect international law and international
humanitarian law or to implement Security Council
resolutions, despite all the reports from the various
United Nations bodies, agencies and commissions.
The most recent report is that of the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict,
better known as the Goldstone report. That report
reiterates that the occupying authorities have
committed grave violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law and that those acts
constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity.
The Goldstone report is not the first on this issue.
There were a number of previous reports, in particular
the report by Archbishop Desmond Tutu on the Beit
Hanoun massacre, the report of the international
alliance for the defence of the victims of aggression
and the report of the Board of Inquiry set up by the
Secretary-General. All of them have concluded that the
Israel army carried out direct and deliberate attacks
against United Nations headquarters despite the

11

S/PV.6201

Organization’s immunity. That has resulted in a great
many deaths and injuries among those who sought
shelter there, including United Nations staff members.
That report called for an independent inquiry to
be held. However, the immunity that Israel enjoys
meant that that report experienced the same fate as
previous reports. This reinforces Israel’s belief that it
cannot be touched, that it is above all laws. It
encourages Israel to continue to commit crimes.
However, the scale of the crimes committed
against Gaza, as described in the Goldstone report, is a
wake-up call for the international community and the
various international organizations. We must warn that
if we disregard what is contained in this report, we will
be losing ground in the progress made on human rights
since the adoption of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. That would make the concept and
ideals of human rights mere empty words, a tool to be
used by certain States for their own political purposes.
Violations of international law must be dealt with
firmly when committed by a party allied with big
Powers.
Before I address the issue of the Goldstone
report, I would like to respond to those who say that it
is not objective or fair. The Goldstone mission gathered
facts in the following ways. Reports from various
sources were considered. Interviews were conducted
with victims and individuals who had confirmed
information at their disposal. There were visits on the
ground. Video footage and photographs were analysed,
and satellite images were examined. Medical reports
were considered. The reports of forensic scientists were
analysed. Weapons were examined. There were calls
for written information to be provided. Public hearings
were held, and 188 individual interviews were held.
Over 300 pieces of information, reports and documents
were analysed.
Regardless of the nature of this information, this
amounts to over 10,000 pages, 30 videos and 1,200
photographs. Of course, the Government of Israel
simply refused to cooperate with the Mission.
We are aware of some of the procedures engaged
in by international organizations, but this clearly shows
that war crimes and crimes against humanity have been
committed. This is more important than the rules of
procedure, which cannot simply sail on seas of blood,
far removed from the violence and destruction taking
place. They cannot mask the horrifying disabilities that

12

have been visited upon women, children and the
elderly.
The report reiterated more than once that the
Israeli authorities have committed war crimes and
crimes against humanity. It reaffirmed that the Israeli
blockade of the Gaza Strip was a policy of collective
punishment and a violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention. The fact that the Security Council did not
speak out about this simply means that it accepts that
this should continue. The report lists the great number
of crimes committed by the Israeli army and the Israeli
Government against the Palestinian people. For
example:
“The Mission investigated several incidents
in which the Israeli armed forces used local
Palestinian residents to enter houses which might
be booby-trapped or harbour enemy combatants”
(A/HRC/12/48, para. 1925).
During those searches, the men were handcuffed and
blindfolded. The use of these individuals as human
shields constitutes a war crime.
The report also indicates a number of attacks that
were carried out, in particular the destruction of the
only flour mill in the Gaza Strip, the attempted
destruction of the water supply system and the
destruction of a poultry processing plant. All of these
are violations of international law and are considered
war crimes.
Israel has masked its true intentions since the
beginning of the war against Gaza, within the
framework of its Operation Cast Lead, an operation
carried out against a besieged people, a people on the
brink of famine, an occupied, besieged people who
have nothing left but their readiness to face up to the
occupation. That is exactly what Mr. Goldstone stated.
The Mission carried out a detailed investigation and
included in its report statements by Israeli political and
military leaders that they would target the
infrastructure of the Hamas movement. Hamas is the
freely and democratically elected authority of the
Palestinian people.
If this is what passes for a legitimate military
target — despite the fact that it constitutes a violation
of international humanitarian law built up over the past
century — that would make civilians and civilian
infrastructure legitimate targets. We can therefore
affirm that these attacks represent instances of

09-55731

S/PV.6201

vengeance and collective
constitutes war crimes.

punishment. And

that

The report reaffirms in paragraph 1883 that the
Israeli army targeted all the inhabitants of Gaza and did
not distinguish between combatants and civilians, and
that this was the result of clear orders given to the
soldiers. These were not blunders. That is affirmed in
paragraph 1889. The report also clearly represents that
Palestinians were the targets of ongoing, systematic illtreatment and subject to humiliating and degrading
treatment, which violates the principles of international
law and human rights law. The Fact-Finding Mission
again concludes that such conduct represents collective
punishment of civilians. In other words, it violates the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Times of War and thus constitutes a
war crime.
The attack on Gaza was unprecedented in terms
of both its violence and ferocity and of the extent to
which it flouted basic tenets of international law and
human rights. The Israeli army knowingly targeted
hospitals, ambulances, mosques and United Nations
installations. Paragraph 36 states that the Fact-Finding
Mission found no proof of Israeli allegations that
Palestinian militants had used these buildings as
shields for military purposes.
The Security Council did not fulfil its
responsibility to protect civilians in the Gaza strip.
That is reaffirmed in paragraph 1916 of the report. The
report reiterates that the Mission noted that the
international community remained silent. The Security
Council did not take action to protect civilians in the
Gaza strip and the occupied Palestinian territory in
general. That makes it amply clear that the Security
Council did not adequately respond to the Gaza
blockade and its consequences. It would have been be
wise for the Council, given its responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security, to adopt
the report and to invite the Human Rights Council to
debate it in order to ensure that it did not suffer the
same fate as previous reports.
The Israeli position on the peace process has been
made very clear by declarations issued by the Israeli
authorities. They do not hesitate for one moment to
state that they will grant the Palestinians nothing. They
call for a racist Jewish State. They want to expel the
Palestinians who lived there before 1948. Special
emissaries to Israel return empty-handed again and

09-55731

again, revealing the peace process as a simple
absurdity that will lead to nothing. Proof of this lies in
the fact that nothing has been done or achieved to lift
the blockade on Gaza and to end its colonization.
It is time to end the culture of impunity in the
region that has prevailed for so long and led to yet
another crisis. As Justice Goldstone has very rightly
said, it undermines all hopes and aspirations for peace
in the region. It is necessary to bring the criminals to
justice and to compensate victims of Israeli crimes in
order to move forward the peace process forward.
Israel’s ongoing settlement activity, collective
punishment and humiliation of the Palestinian people
will only lead to an escalation of violence, death and
suffering.
I conclude by referring once more to the
Goldstone report. The commitments of the Israeli
Government to the Israeli people in no way justify the
policy of collective punishment against an occupied
people. Nothing can justify the fact that the Palestinian
people have been deprived by the disastrous operations
in Gaza of their right to live in dignity. This will lead
to succeeding generations growing up in a culture of
hatred and enmity and in a future offering very little
hope.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing on the
situation in the Middle East. I also thank the Foreign
Minister Al-Malki of the Palestinian National Authority
and the Permanent Representative of Israel,
Ambassador Shalev, for their statements.
The Security Council is meeting once again to
assess the situation in the Middle East in a context of
growing tension in the region and scant progress in the
peace process, as the Under-Secretary-General told us.
At our last informal meeting on this matter, we
expressed our hope that the high-level meetings to take
place at the margins of the general debate could lead to
the unconditional resumption of peace talks between
Israeli and the Palestinian National Authority. We
welcome the holding of the trilateral meeting among
President Barack Obama, Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu and President Mahmoud Abbas. We regret,
however, that negotiations have yet to attain a
definitive peace in the Middle East.
The resumption of the peace process hinges on
the will and commitment of all of the parties to the
conflict. The international community, for its part, has

13

S/PV.6201

the obligation to facilitate the process in order to
ensure a fair and lasting peace in the region. We
therefore express our appreciation to President Obama
and his special envoy George Mitchell for their resolve
in laying the foundations of dialogue between Israel
and the Palestinian National Authority founded on trust
and mutual respect. Furthermore, we reiterate our
support for the Quartet and the statement it issued last
September, in which it underscored the essential
principles for attaining comprehensive peace in the
Middle East. We share the sense of urgency expressed
by its members and recognize the need for the parties
to meet their commitments and obligations, in
particular those contained in the Road Map, if
conditions conducive to the resumption of the peace
process are to be met.
It is therefore essential that Israel put an end to
the establishment of new settlements in the occupied
territories, including East Jerusalem, and to so-called
natural growth. The demolition of homes, the
expulsions and the expansion of settlements in East
Jerusalem represent a serious obstacle to the peace
process. Similarly, the agreement on places of worship
must be respected and provocations that weaken
prospects for dialogue avoided.
The Palestinian National Authority, for its part,
should continue to strengthen its political and security
institutions, with the support of the international
community. We welcome the announcement by Prime
Minister Fayyad that the institutions necessary to
create a Palestinian State will be built in a reasonable
time frame.
To that end, as the Palestinian security forces
increase their control over their territory, it is essential
that Israel simultaneously lift restrictions on the
movement of people and goods. We note the
dismantling of some obstacles and a reduction in the
number of military personnel that Israel has stationed
at certain checkpoints in the West Bank. We hope that
those actions are definitive and that they lead to the
complete and irreversible dismantling of all
checkpoints.
Furthermore, it is essential that progress be made
in the process of inter-Palestinian dialogue being
carried out with Egypt’s support. We regret that the
signing of the reconciliation agreement between
Palestinian factions, slated for late October, has once
again been postponed. The unity of the Palestinian

14

Government is an element essential to the achievement
of a comprehensive and definitive settlement in the
Middle East.
With winter about to begin, it is of vital
importance that access to Gaza be provided for
humanitarian aid and reconstruction in order to avoid a
new humanitarian disaster. That is why we stress the
need for the full implementation of resolution 1860
(2009) and for the establishment of an international
monitoring mechanism that ensures a lasting ceasefire,
the opening of border crossings and control over illicit
arms trafficking. We support all initiatives aimed at
establishing such a mechanism, which is the only way
to ensure the gradual normalization of the situation in
the Gaza Strip.
We also recall that peace in the Middle East is
linked not only to the question of Palestine, but also to
regional stability. For that reason, we are concerned
about two successive incidents that occurred in
southern Lebanon in July and just a few days ago.
According to the information available to date, they
appear to have been violations of resolution 1701
(2006). We urge the Government of Lebanon, in
cooperation with personnel of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, to take the measures
necessary to prevent another such incident. We also
reiterate our appeal to Lebanon and Israel, as well as
all other parties involved in this conflict, to comply
with the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006).
Our debate today coincides with the discussions
currently under way in Geneva concerning the report of
the Human Rights Council’s United Nations FactFinding Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48),
led by Judge Richard Goldstone. We are convinced
that, at this time, the Security Council must avoid
greater politicization and polarization of the positions
that have been expressed in that regard.
Thus, we believe that it is inappropriate for the
Security Council to consider or pronounce itself on the
report before the Human Rights Council, which is the
competent organ on this matter and mandated the
drafting of the report. The Human Rights Council’s
decision to consider the report within an established
timetable — adopted in Geneva a few days ago —
must be respected by the Security Council. Mexico is
studying the Goldstone report with all due care and
will participate in its consideration and the analysis of
its recommendations within the Human Rights Council.

09-55731

S/PV.6201

Let us be clear: there are no good or bad
violations of international humanitarian law. We
reiterate once again that, in any armed conflict, all
actors involved must respect the provisions of
international humanitarian law at all times and in any
circumstances. This is not subject to free interpretation
by the parties to a conflict. All alleged violations of
international humanitarian law deserve to be
investigated and punished when appropriate.
As on many past occasions, we now find
ourselves at a defining moment for the peace process,
which could lead to a resumption of negotiations or,
should that fail, to a new spiral of violence that would
aggravate yet further the instability in the region. The
objective, known to all, is clear: the achievement of a
comprehensive and definitive settlement of the conflict
in the Middle East that would reaffirm the recognition
of Israel’s right to exist and allow for the establishment
of a politically and economically viable Palestinian
State coexisting in peace with Israel within secure and
internationally recognized borders, in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Road
Map, the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

Japan shares serious concerns about Israeli
settlement activities and the recent clash between
Israeli forces and Palestinians at Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
Their negative impacts should not hinder a resumption
of the peace talks. It is imperative that all parties fulfil
their obligations under the Road Map with a view to
the achievement of the two-State solution and Middle
East peace.
Japan would like to call on the Israeli
Government to freeze all settlement activities,
including natural growth, and to refrain from
provocative actions on its territory. At the same time,
we call on the Palestinian Authority to continue to
make every effort to improve the security situation by
abiding by its commitment to cease violence and
terrorism. Unification of the Palestinian side is also
important to promote the peace process. We express
our strong support for Egypt’s efforts to achieve
reconciliation between Fatah and Hamas.

Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for arranging
today’s meeting on the situation in the Middle East. I
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing and to welcome
the presence of the Foreign Minister of the Palestinian
National Authority at this meeting.

The Security Council has been closely following
the humanitarian situation in Gaza and adopted
resolution 1860 (2009), in which we expressed serious
concern over the damage caused to civilian and United
Nations facilities in Gaza. Nine months after the
adoption of the resolution, the situation is very
precarious. We are deeply concerned about this
situation. The international community must maintain
its assistance to and support for the people in Gaza. We
urge Israel to cooperate with the Secretary-General’s
efforts and to ensure smooth access to goods for Gaza,
as well as the free movement of people.

If we are to overcome differences and achieve a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace among all
parties in the Middle East, there is no formula other
than the pursuit of genuine dialogue. Even in areas
where the parties face seemingly insurmountable
difficulties, they must attempt to overcome them
through dialogue and negotiation. Without genuine
dialogue and negotiation, there can be no progress in
the Middle East peace process.

As we have pledged to do, Japan will continue to
extend its assistance to improve the humanitarian
situation in Gaza. We are convinced that improving the
humanitarian conditions in Gaza is one of the most
important and urgent priorities in building the
Palestinian State and promoting the peace process. One
might even state that there will be no progress in the
Middle East peace process without significant
improvement in the humanitarian situation in Gaza.

The international community should promote
momentum for peace. We therefore welcome the recent
trilateral meeting among President Obama, Prime
Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas, which was a
significant step towards the relaunching of direct peace
negotiations. Japan reaffirms its strong support for the
initiative taken by the United States for the resumption
of peace talks aimed at the two-State solution.

In that connection, I should like to refer to the
report of the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on
the Gaza Conflict, headed by Justice Richard
Goldstone (A/HRC/12/48). The Mission was mandated
by a decision of the Human Rights Council. We
appreciate the work of the Fact-Finding Mission, in
particular its effort to try to ensure a degree of balance
in its report. We believe that the findings and

09-55731

15

S/PV.6201

recommendations of the Goldstone report should be
carefully reviewed, first and foremost by the Human
Rights Council within its mandate. It is important for
the Security Council to follow closely the discussion in
the Human Rights Council. In the light of the outcome,
the Security Council could consider an appropriate way
in which to deal with the report in a unified manner.
Mr. Guillermet (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me begin, Mr. President, by thanking you and your
delegation for having convened this debate. I thank you
also for this month’s programme of work, which
includes a number of very important open meetings
that will provide an opportunity for interaction between
the States concerned and other Members of the United
Nations. I wish also to thank Mr. Pascoe for his
briefing, and I welcome the presence among us of
Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Palestine, and of Ambassador Gabriela Shalev,
Permanent Representative of Israel.
I wish to set out my country’s position on the
Council’s discussion of the report of the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict, the
Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48). The Mission was
mandated to investigate violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law
during the military operation in Gaza. It is important to
discuss the report, which merits the close attention of
the international community.
Our initial appraisal is this is a serious report
prepared by a Mission led by an upright man with an
unquestioned track record, and that it is worthy of our
full consideration.
However, it is premature for the Council to
discuss the substance of the report when the Human
Rights Council itself has not taken the relevant
decisions. To do so without being able to produce a
concrete outcome following our consideration would
only contribute to trivializing it. For that reason, we
welcome the fact that the Human Rights Council in
Geneva has decided to take action on the Goldstone
report this week. We will follow closely the Human
Rights Council’s decisions with respect to the report’s
recommendations. We hope that in some way Justice
Richard Goldstone’s report will contribute to assigning
responsibility.
A key element of the report, drawn from its
conclusions, is that there is a need to establish
responsibility through accountability mechanisms. It is

16

essential to prevent impunity, and in that connection
we urge the parties to continue their efforts. In
particular, we urge the Israeli Government to pursue
the investigation that, as it has informed the
international community, it has undertaken, and to
make public its outcome.
We also underscore the Goldstone report’s
comprehensive
approach,
which
makes
recommendations to a number of bodies of the United
Nations system, to the parties and to insurgent groups.
We reaffirm, as we have done on prior occasions, that
the Security Council bears the obligatory responsibility
to protect civilians in armed conflict whenever and
wherever necessary. The Council must employ all its
deterrent potential to persuade all State and non-State
parties to respect international law and permit
unhindered access for humanitarian assistance.
The Security Council’s silence for reasons of
individual convenience should not signal impunity for
those who ignore international law. Nor should it
signify cruel indifference to those who call upon the
Council for help. The search for justice is essential: no
State or armed group should be above the law.
A month ago, we had hoped to see genuine
progress in the Middle East peace negotiations, leading
to the renewal of direct talks between the parties. That
hope was nourished by the announcement of important
meetings underpinned by diplomatic efforts on the
margins of the General Assembly. Unfortunately, this
did not happen. Negotiations have not progressed at the
pace that the international community had hoped for.
That, unfortunately, is the only truth that we can speak
on this conflict.
Costa Rica welcomed the downturn in violence in
the course of this year, along with the relative easing of
the security situation and the growing responsibility of
Palestinian security forces for keeping the peace in the
West Bank. We also see as positive the authorization of
entry into Gaza of construction materials and a lifting
of obstacles to movement in the West Bank. We look
favourably on those gestures and successes. We hope,
however, that they are not mere mirages giving rise to
baseless hope. The progress will not be significant
unless there is a political process that constantly moves
forward. Increased responsibility for civilian security
on the part of the Palestinian Authority can be
meaningful only if it leads to the prompt establishment
of a Palestinian State within recognized borders

09-55731

S/PV.6201

resulting from a dynamic political process of
negotiations between the parties. Goodwill gestures are
highly appreciated, but they will be nothing more than
gestures unless they lead to a lasting change in attitude
towards partners in dialogue.
We are most hopeful with respect to diplomatic
efforts founded on growing consensus regarding a
comprehensive approach to resolving the conflict.
Costa Rica has been suggesting such an approach for
more than 20 months: it would abandon a sequential
methodology and embrace a comprehensive one. We
know that if there is to be success in resolving the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict there must also be an easing
of tensions in other conflicts in the region that have a
negative impact on the resolution of that one. The
States of the region must also demonstrate their
commitment to lasting peace by recognizing the State
of Israel and by adopting policies of goodneighbourliness towards Israel based on mutual
security.
In that regard we are hopeful at — and encourage —
the endeavours of the Obama Administration through its
Special Envoy, George Mitchell.
Seven months have passed since the current
Israeli Administration was formed. The clock seems to
have been turned back. There has been an attempt to
ignore prior agreements and consolidate gains based on
cunning arguments — despite the international
community’s unanimous condemnation of such conduct
and its warning that this approach will not bear
legitimate fruit.
The Palestinian party too should contribute to the
success of the process towards resolving the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. It should strengthen its measures
to confront extremism and respond to Israel’s
legitimate security concerns. Palestinian reconciliation
is another pending issue: Hamas cannot remain outside
the peace process, and it must not sabotage the political
process. Costa Rica hopes that Egypt’s efforts will lead
to unity among the Palestinian people and to a
commitment to a negotiated solution of two peoples
living side by side in peace. The current leaders of the
Palestinian Authority merit our support, but in our view
it is important for them to prevent their territory from
being used by those wishing to thwart the process. It is
imperative that neighbouring moderate Arab countries,
as dedicated partners for peace, help the Palestinian
Authority in its endeavours to prevent the conflict from

09-55731

being used as a platform for extremist acts and defiant
statements against Israel by others in the region.
It may be that the time has passed for
implementing prior agreements. But these are the sole
foundation for new agreements. Once again, we must
deplore the continuing Israeli policy of settlement
activities, demolitions and expulsions that affect
Palestinians in the East Jerusalem. Such actions are
illegal and unacceptable; they exacerbate tensions and
are an obstacle to the peace process. Costa Rica
recognized Palestine as a State almost two years ago,
and we believe that the international community should
contribute to the resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict by universalizing such recognition and
accepting the Palestinian State as a full Member of this
Organization. If the parties fail to reach an agreement
within a reasonable timeframe, the most sensible
course of action would be to assume the responsibility
of establishing a Palestinian State and granting it
membership in this Organization.
We reiterate the concerns that we have already
expressed with regard to the humanitarian situation in
Gaza and our call for the respect of international law,
in particular international humanitarian law as
established by the Geneva Conventions and their
Protocols.
Finally, I should like to take this opportunity to
express that, while my delegation will be studying the
reports of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701
(2006) over the coming weeks, we believe that the
explosions on 12 October in Tayr Felsay in southern
Lebanon reflect the need to step up efforts to clear the
area south of the Litani River of weapons and armed
personnel. We urge that this situation be monitored
closely, alongside the investigations being carried out
by the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
Mr. Tiendrébéogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): I should, of course, like to thank Mr. Pascoe
for his briefing and to welcome Foreign Minister Riyad
Al-Malki as well as the Permanent Representative of
Israel. We thank them for their significant contributions
to our deliberations.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine, remains at the centre of our
attention. Peace and stability in this region lie at the
heart of peace and security in the world. Unfortunately,
2009 began under the worst possible circumstances,

17

S/PV.6201

with the heightened violence of the months of
December 2008 and January 2009, the painful scars of
which Gaza still bears and will, unfortunately, continue
to bear for a long time. In this context, Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009) offers an acceptable
basis for a way out of the crisis, requiring only that the
parties engage one another in good faith.
Unfortunately, we are forced to admit that this
resolution, like previous ones, has yet to be
implemented, and that the situation on the ground
continues to be a source of great concern. Also of great
concern is Israel’s continuation of its policy of
colonization, settlement and the demolition of homes.
Our concern also includes the very strict Israeli
blockade of Gaza, despite the regular appeals on the
part of the international community. We urge Israel to
hear these calls and pay heed to the suffering of
women, children and all the innocent civilians of Gaza,
who are deprived of basic necessities, and to permit
access to the territory so as to ensure the reconstruction
and economic development of the area.
Finally, another aspect of great concern is the
attacks to which Israeli towns are regularly subjected.
We urge Hamas and other extremist Palestinian groups
to put an end to such attacks, or else they risk
continuing to justify acts of reprisal. This situation is
made even more complex by the ongoing disagreement
among Palestinian brothers.
These are the principal elements that undermine
the credibility of the actors and drain the energy from
all efforts and initiatives for peace. There is no lack of
efforts or initiatives aimed at breathing new life into
the peace process, including those developed by the
American Administration and by Egypt, which has
worked tirelessly to bring about Palestinian
reunification and reconciliation. Burkina Faso supports
those efforts.
We should like once again to urge the parties to
put dialogue and negotiation first, and to exclude the
military option, which has no other effect than to
distance the parties even further from the prospect of
resolving their dispute. We continue to believe that the
Quartet Road Map, the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative and
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council provide
the best possible framework for realizing our common
objective — that of a Middle East at peace, with a
Palestinian
State
living
within
secure
and
internationally recognized borders, side by side with
Israel in peace and security.

18

The present meeting of the Council is being held
in a particular context, with the publication of the
report of the United Nations Fact Finding Mission
established
by
the
Human
Rights
Council
(A/HRC/12/48). In this regard, my delegation reiterates
its strong condemnation of the violations of human
rights and of international humanitarian law
perpetrated during the conflict last December and
January in Gaza. Burkina Faso has always hoped that
light could be shed on those violations so that the
international community could determine the
responsibilities of all the parties. It was as a response
to that need that the Fact Finding Mission was
established by the Human Rights Council. Burkina
Faso followed the work of the twelfth session of the
Council very closely and we await the conclusions of
the deliberations within the special session with great
interest.
We note the recommendations addressed to the
Security Council by the Fact Finding Mission and, in
this regard, we urge the parties to undertake all the
necessary actions to establish the truth and to prosecute
those responsible.
Burkina Faso longs to see further reinforcement
of political stability in Lebanon. We call on the
Lebanese political class as a whole to come to an
agreement, as soon as possible, which would pave the
way for a government of national unity and for genuine
national reconciliation. At the same time, we reaffirm
the need to respect the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon.
My delegation welcomes the progress achieved in
Syrian-Lebanese relations and cherishes the hope that
the efforts aimed at fostering a rapprochement between
Israel and Syria may be crowned with success.
We will never tire of repeating that the IsraeliPalestinian conflict is the Gordian knot of the situation
in the Middle East. This is why we must continue to
work tirelessly to bring about a comprehensive, just
and durable solution to this conflict. It is up to the
parties themselves to demonstrate a greater
commitment and a more resolute political will to
resolve their dispute. It is the duty of the Security
Council, the League of Arab States and all the
countries in the region and beyond, as well as the
international community as a whole, to step up their
efforts to better assist the parties in doing so.

09-55731

S/PV.6201

Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Under-SecretaryGeneral Mr. Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing on
the situation and peace process in the Middle East. We
welcome the participation in the present meeting of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Palestine, Mr. Riyad
Al-Malki.
The question of a solution in the Middle East and
the continuing tensions in that region continue to be a
central item on the agenda of the international
community. The Group of 8 Summit at L’Aquila and
the recent ministerial-level meeting of the Quartet have
shown that there is broad consensus in the international
community, on the whole, on the approach to finding a
Middle East settlement. The international legal basis
for the peace process, the significance of the Arab
Peace Initiative, the principle of two States and the
need to freeze settlement activity, including natural
growth, were all reaffirmed.
As comprehensive efforts to resume PalestinianIsraeli contacts are continuing at present, it would be
somewhat premature to make any final assessment
regarding the shape of a future regional settlement.
There is, however, something that no one disputes:
time is running out, and this is very dangerous. We
must continue working intensively to establish the
necessary conditions for the renewal of negotiations on
all available tracks — first and foremost, on the
Palestinian-Israeli track. It is only through such
negotiations that mutually acceptable solutions can be
found to all key issues needed to establish a sustainable
and fair peace in the Middle East. Our common
objective is to promote this in every possible way.
We continue to send clear signals to Palestine,
Israel and other leading States of the region on the
need to exercise restraint, to return to the negotiating
table, and to avoid taking unilateral steps that would
predetermine the outcome of the final status
negotiations.
One important contribution to assistance efforts
in that regard will be the Moscow conference on the
Middle East, which we are making serious efforts to
prepare for and convene. We consider that forum,
which has been endorsed by the Security Council, the
Quartet and the Group of Eight, to complement the
efforts to breathe new life into Palestinian-Israeli
contacts and to be a link in our important ongoing
collective work to find a sustainable and

09-55731

comprehensive settlement in the Middle East.
Following the desired resumption of negotiations
between the Palestinians and Israelis in the near future,
we are ready immediately to announce a date for the
Moscow conference.
During the course of the conference, the
international community will be in a position to
support the process and to assist the resumption of
negotiations on the Syrian, Lebanese and multilateral
tracks of the Middle East settlement process. In that
regard, I reiterate that we must base our actions on
existing international law, including all relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Madrid principles. The outcome of our work
should be a viable, independent Palestinian State living
in peace and security side by side with Israel.
We are concerned by rising tensions surrounding
the Temple Mount in Israel. We cannot allow religious
issues to be exploited for political ends or to
exacerbate the situation and people’s suffering. All
parties must exercise restraint and live by the letter and
spirit of existing agreements on holy sites in Jerusalem.
We believe that the most sound approach to resolving
the situation in the city is to do so exclusively through
dialogue on the final status negotiations for the
Palestinian territories on the basis of the
aforementioned international legal basis.
Another pressing issue is the restoration of unity
within the Palestinian factions on the basis of the
Palestine Liberation Organization platform. Concrete
steps to resolve the relevant these issues have been and
continue to be taken, inter alia, through the facilitation
of the Egyptian side, which has earned our appreciation
and support. Resolving the issue is an important
element of progress towards a settlement of the
Palestinian-Israeli issue.
In the context of the situation along the Blue Line
in southern Lebanon, it is more critical than ever that
all parties respect resolution 1701 (2006). We urge all
Lebanese political forces to repudiate the logic of
political confrontation, accusation and ambition and to
move in a spirit of good faith to establish an effective
Cabinet that represents the interests of all Lebanese.
I turn now to the report of the United Nations
Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict
(A/HRC/12/48), the discussion of which will continue
on 15 and 16 October in the Human Rights Council in
Geneva. We view that document from the perspective

19

S/PV.6201

of the need to resolve key elements of the regional
peace process, including strict compliance by the
Israeli and Palestinian sides with international norms in
the fields of humanitarian law and human rights. We
reject
all
manifestations
of
terrorism
and
disproportionate and indiscriminate responses to them
that lead to civilian deaths. In that context, we
condemn all violations of international humanitarian
law perpetrated during the conflict in Gaza.
The authors of the report did a very impressive
job gathering the testimony of witnesses and
establishing facts. The facts and recommendations set
out in the report require further careful and balanced
consideration. We believe that the best approach would
be undertake that task in the framework of
international humanitarian law in the Human Rights
Council. Clearly, the full implementation of resolution
1860 (2009) and the resolution of the remaining issues
related to the very pressing humanitarian and economic
situation in Gaza are of equal urgency, including the
need to lift the blockade of the Gaza Strip.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): May I begin
by thanking Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing. I also warmly welcome Palestinian Foreign
Minister Al-Malki here today and thank him for his
statement. I am also grateful for the statement and kind
remarks made by the Israeli Permanent Representative.
The three months since the Council’s most recent
debate on the situation in the Middle East have seen
further intense efforts to launch negotiations to deliver
the peace, security and justice that Palestinians and
Israelis so desire. Our goal remains to engage not
simply in another process, but in genuine negotiations
that have a real prospect of reaching a lasting solution.
President Obama of the United States made his
commitment clear when he spoke to the General
Assembly, and we continue to offer him, his team and
all those genuinely seeking peace our full support.
The parameters of a solution are well known: two
States, with an independent, democratic, contiguous
and viable Palestinian State based on the 1967 borders
living side by side in peace and security with the State
of Israel, Jerusalem as the capital of both States, and a
just settlement for refugees. Delivering that goal will
not be easy. All sides will have to meet their
obligations and commitments. We need to see an Israeli
freeze on settlement-building; we need to see
continued Palestinian efforts on security and

20

institution-building; and we would warmly welcome
Arab moves to normalize relationships.
A genuinely viable Palestinian State will be key
to securing a successful settlement. The Palestinian
National Authority’s two-year plan, launched in
August, represents a determination to deliver such a
Palestinian State and the institutions to underpin it, not
in some distant future but soon. President Abbas and
Prime Minister Fayyad will have our continued
backing as they work to implement this vision.
The situation in Jerusalem increasingly has the
potential to threaten the progress we all desire. There is
absolutely no room for inflammatory gestures or
actions, in Jerusalem above all, because extremists will
take advantage of them. We have followed with great
concern the disturbing incidents of violence around the
Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif. We are also deeply
concerned at ongoing settlement activity in East
Jerusalem, which can only make it more difficult to
achieve our common goal. All sides must act to calm
the situation and avoid provocation.
The situation in Gaza also continues to concern
us. The lives of Gazans will only become harder as the
winter sets in. Despite repeated representations from
the international community, the Israeli Government
has not eased border restrictions sufficiently to allow
for the passage of all essential humanitarian aid or
significant reconstruction materials. I repeat our call on
the Israeli Government to relax those restrictions.
I also repeat our call on Hamas to release Gilad
Shalit without further delay or conditions. We note the
videotape evidence provided by Hamas on 2 October in
exchange for 20 prisoners, but it is simply
unacceptable that Gilad Shalit should remain in
detention without Red Cross access three years after he
was first seized.
We must also address the conclusions of the
United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza
Conflict. They raise important issues that are of serious
concern. We believe that the Goldstone report
(A/HRC/12/48) itself does not adequately recognize
Israel’s right to protect its citizens or pay sufficient
attention to Hamas’s actions.
But the concerns raised in the report cannot be
ignored. Rocket attacks by Palestinian militants
targeted at innocent civilians in southern Israel
constitute a breach of international humanitarian law. It

09-55731

S/PV.6201

is deplorable that these acts continue. They must cease
immediately. Israel has the right to defend its citizens
from such attacks, but must do so in accordance with
international law. The Goldstone report makes serious
allegations about Israeli conduct during Operation Cast
Lead. There are reports of incidents where individual
soldiers are alleged to have acted unlawfully, for
example, allegations of the shooting of civilians as
well as overall Israeli tactics that included the targeting
of police stations and infrastructure.
My Government regrets that Israel did not
cooperate with the Mission, which, therefore, lacks an
authoritative Israeli perspective on the events in
question, which would be so crucial in order to
determine the legality of the actions. We note that the
Israeli Defence Forces have already conducted and are
continuing to conduct a number of investigations.
However, concerns remain. We urge the Israeli
Government to carry out full, credible and impartial
investigations into the allegations reported in the
Goldstone Report.
The United Kingdom is committed to ensuring
accountability
for
violations
of
international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
wherever they occur. We look forward to further
discussion of this issue in the Human Rights Council.
Turning briefly to Lebanon, we would like to say
we welcome the undertaking by the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon and the Lebanese Armed
Forces to investigate the explosion that, reportedly,
took place earlier in the week in Tayr Felsay. We
underline our call for all parties to implement Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006) in full.
In conclusion, I will say that there is little doubt
that prospects for a lasting peace in the Middle East
have been tested. Reactions to the Goldstone Report
and the events in East Jerusalem, for example, have
dampened the cautious optimism generated by the
increased diplomatic efforts to relaunch the peace
process, but we urge the parties in the region, and the
international community as a whole, to maintain and
increase momentum towards a solution.
All peace processes are tested by events. What
separates the successful processes from the
unsuccessful is the political will to push forward
despite events or setbacks.

09-55731

Mr. Skračić (Croatia): At the outset, I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
extensive briefing on the situation in the Middle East,
as well as to welcome to the Chamber Palestinian
National Authority Foreign Minister, Mr. Al-Malki, and
Israeli Permanent Representative, Ambassador Shalev.
Croatia shares the sense of urgency to secure an
early resumption — and conclusion — of IsraeliPalestinian negotiations aimed at the two-State solution
as a key part of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in the Middle East. What happens now is critical, and
failure
to
move
forward
risks
deepening
disillusionment and impasse.
We are pleased to see the imperative reflected in
the statements made at the high-level meetings held in
New York this September, including the Quartet
statement and that of United States President Obama in
his statement to the General Assembly. The continuing
efforts of the United States Administration and those of
Special Envoy Mitchell to promote negotiations have
our full support. Croatia believes that, in order to
advance the peace process, all sides need to meet their
responsibilities and make a meaningful contribution
towards creating conditions conducive to negotiations.
Israel and the Palestinians need to implement
their obligations under the Road Map without
preconditions. The Palestinians need to pursue their
reform agenda, particularly in the area of security. The
Arab States need to take early and tangible confidencebuilding steps in the spirit of the Arab Peace Initiative.
The international community should be ready to assist
the parties in creating an atmosphere conducive to
peace and in ensuring that all efforts remain focused on
our shared objective of achieving peace. It is time that
the roadblocks to peace are removed.
In light of ongoing efforts, provocative actions
that risk undermining attempts to create an atmosphere
conducive to credible negotiations are a cause of
concern. We are concerned with the recent clashes in
Jerusalem. We appeal for restraint, and we appreciate
United Nations efforts to diffuse tensions. We also call
for the cessation of other provocative actions,
including demolitions and evictions.
As recognized in repeated calls by the
international community, Israel settlement activities
present an obstacle to peace and should be immediately
brought to an end. And this includes “natural growth”

21

S/PV.6201

settlements and outposts erected since 2001, which
should be dismantled.
We condemn the marked increase in attacks
directed at Israel from the Gaza Strip over the past
month. At this critical stage, another outbreak of
violence must not be allowed. Croatia finds
encouragement in Palestinian State-building efforts, as
well as in recent trends in the West Bank area, where
improvements in security are opening space for
economic revival as part of the groundwork for a
sustainable Palestinian State.
We welcome the recent removal by Israel of a
number of roadblocks and would welcome further steps
in that direction. We understand that, should the
restrictions on movement and access continue to be
eased, for the first time since 2005, there is a realistic
chance that the downward trend in Palestinian living
standards in the West Bank can be reversed in the near
future.
It remains crucial that the Palestinian Authority
continue with its agenda of self-empowerment,
including building and consolidating an effective and
reformed security sector, functioning institutions and
the rule of law as building blocks of a viable and
independent Palestinian State. At the same time, Israel
must be assured that this objective does not go
undermine its legitimate security interests, including
that of addressing the threat of renewed rocket attacks
from the Gaza Strip.
The situation in Gaza is our continuing
preoccupation. We believe that finding a durable
solution for Gaza should be part and parcel of the
peace effort. In order to put an end to the protracted
humanitarian and human dignity crisis in Gaza, full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) remains a
priority. Croatia believes that the controlled and
sustained opening of crossings, matched with the
appropriate monitoring arrangements, is key for the
humanitarian recovery and reconstruction of Gaza and
for eradicating the tunnel economy.
We continue to call for the release of Gilad
Shalit, whose recent video message was an
encouraging sign, and we reiterate our support for the
efforts of Egypt to assist in restoring Palestinian unity.
Croatia has taken note of the Report of the United
Nations Fact Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict,
which has been submitted to the Human Rights

22

Council. Croatia takes seriously the issues that are at
the heart of the report and we respect the scope of the
confidence in the Human Rights Council within the
United Nations system.
At this stage, let me state that Croatia believes
that it is the obligation of all States to ensure respect
for international humanitarian law. When and where
there are violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law, individual accountability needs to be
established. This is what constitutes the basis for a
lasting peace. This is a duty that falls principally on the
national authorities of States themselves, which need to
carry out a credible domestic process and investigate
situations where there are indications that such
violations have been committed.
Concerning Lebanon, let me express our serious
concerns with the several recent incidents in southern
Lebanon, which are in violation of resolution 1701
(2006). Last week, there was yet another weapons
cache explosion involving munitions that apparently
belonged to Hizbullah. A few weeks earlier, rockets
were fired against Israel. We condemn these acts,
which, together with the grave incidents in July, only
underscore the need to insist on the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and the
disarmament of all paramilitary groups in Lebanon. We
also share concerns about the delay in forming a new
Lebanese Government and hope that an agreement can
be reached soon.
Before concluding, allow me to say a few words
of appreciation to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), which marked its sixtieth anniversary in
September this year. I would like to pay tribute to
UNRWA’s dedication and commitment to providing
assistance to Palestinian refugees over the past
decades, often under challenging and dangerous
circumstances. Croatia will continue to support its
vitally important work.
Equally, we believe that the interests of both
parties, the region and the international community as a
whole are best served by pursuing a shared, clear and
fundamental objective, namely, the establishment of an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State
living side by side in peace and security with Israel in
the context of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace
in the region on the basis of Security Council
resolutions and the Madrid Principles.

09-55731

S/PV.6201

Mr. Wolff (United States of America): Let me
join other speakers in welcoming Minister Al-Malki
and Ambassador Shalev to the Council today, and also
thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
comprehensive update.
As we have noted in prior monthly Middle East
consultations, advancing the cause of peace in the
Middle East is among the most important objectives
that President Obama has identified for our renewed
international engagement. As President Obama
affirmed to the General Assembly on 23 September:
“The time has come to relaunch
negotiations — without preconditions — that
address the permanent-status issues: security for
Israelis and Palestinians, borders, refugees and
Jerusalem. The goal is clear: two States living
side by side in peace and security: a Jewish State
of Israel, with true security for all Israelis, and a
viable, independent Palestinian State with
contiguous territory that ends the occupation that
began in 1967 and realizes the potential of the
Palestinian people.” (A/64/PV.3)
Special Envoy George Mitchell has just returned
from another trip to the region, working to create the
context for a prompt resumption and early successful
conclusion of negotiations between the parties. I wish
to place in clear contrast two dramatically different
visions for the road ahead: the road of statehood and
the road of conflict.
The Palestinian Authority and President Abbas
are constructing the basis for a viable and responsible
Palestinian State. They have been making steady and
significant progress towards that goal. We have
welcomed
Prime
Minister
Salam
Fayyad’s
development of a detailed two-year plan to develop
institutional capacity. We supported the deployment of
over 2,000 Palestinian security personnel to the West
Bank, after they completed their training in Jordan,
with another 500 on the way.
We have also welcomed the recent increases in
economic activity and in the quality of life in the West
Bank. Israel has taken constructive steps to facilitate
that progress. It has removed key checkpoints and
eased conditions at others and has withdrawn troops to
the outskirts of four cities. Those initial steps show that
Israelis and Palestinians can make practical progress by
working together towards the same goals.

09-55731

Much more, however, needs to be done. Israel
should stop settlement activity and dismantle outposts.
The United States does not accept the legitimacy of
continued Israeli settlements. Israel should further ease
access and movement and facilitate economic growth
in the West Bank. Palestinians, for their part, should
continue efforts on security, reform of governance
institutions and ending incitement. And all parties,
including Arab States, need to move forward to
relaunch negotiations as soon as possible.
Then, there is the road of conflict. Hamas’s
behaviour continues to fall short of the principles long
outlined by the Quartet: renunciation of violence,
recognition of Israel and acceptance of previous
agreements between the parties. In the month of
September alone, 13 rockets and mortars were fired
indiscriminately at civilian communities in Israel from
Hamas-controlled Gaza, and there were dozens of other
attacks along the boundary. Terrorist attacks of that
nature are not a form of resistance. They represent a
threat to international peace and security, and they were
the cause of the conflict between Israel and Hamas last
winter. That path will never lead to the fulfilment of
Palestinian aspirations for an independent State.
A further danger to international peace and
security that we note with very great concern is the
continuing presence of armed groups, including
Hizbullah, in Lebanon. Armed elements and their
assets and weapons in south Lebanon pose a similar
threat to those who work diligently for peace and
security in that country. The explosion in Tayr Filsay,
taken alongside the earlier explosion in Khirbat Salim,
signals yet another weapons-related violation of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). It should be a
source of deep concern to all of us. We look forward to
the report of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations for detailed information on this latest
serious incident.
We continue to strongly support the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1701
(2006) and 1559 (2004), including their calls for all
arms in Lebanon to be brought under State control and
the delineation of Lebanon’s borders. The people of
Lebanon deserve to reap the benefits of a Government
whose services and authority extend throughout the
land.
Lest we sow the seeds of another conflict, all
United Nations Members must also fulfil their

23

S/PV.6201

responsibility to prevent the smuggling of arms into
Gaza. We also continue to call for the immediate
release of Gilad Shalit. At the same time, just as we
defend Israel’s right to self-defence, we cannot accept
the continuing humanitarian crisis in Gaza. The people
of Gaza must have hope for a better future and know
that the international community hears their concerns.
We call for a reopening of the crossings, with an
appropriate monitoring regime to allow for the entry of
legitimate goods into Gaza.
On the matter of the report of the United Nations
Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict that was
requested by the Human Rights Council in Geneva
(A/HRC/12/48), the allegations of human rights and
humanitarian law violations contained therein are not a
matter for Security Council action. We continue to
have serious concerns about the report: its unbalanced
focus on Israel, the overly broad scope of its
recommendations and its sweeping conclusions of law.
Nevertheless, we take the allegations in the report
seriously. Israel has the institutions and the ability to
carry out serious investigations of those allegations and
we encourage it to do so. Hamas is a terrorist
organization and has neither the ability nor the
willingness to examine its violations of human rights.
Finally, we urge all Arab States to take steps` in
the spirit in the Arab Peace Initiative towards building
relations with Israel, including ceasing harsh rhetoric
in the international organizations and other forums.
Arab Governments can also promote progress by
supporting the Palestinian Authority under President
Abbas, both politically and financially, thus helping to
improve conditions for all Palestinians throughout the
West Bank and Gaza. With patience and determination,
we can assist all people in the region to construct a
new and better future and to realize the peace and
stability that they deserve.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate. I also
thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his comprehensive briefing. My
delegation welcomes the participation of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Palestine and the Permanent
Representative of Israel.
We recall that in January, the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1860 (2009), which
provided an opportunity for all parties in the Middle
East to engage and find a lasting solution to the Middle

24

East question. I wish to reiterate Uganda’s full support
for that resolution and call for its full implementation.
Uganda welcomes the statement issued by the
Quartet following their meeting of 24 September 2009
in New York on the sidelines of the General Assembly.
We also welcome the first tripartite meeting of
President Barack Obama, Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu and President Mahmoud Abbas, on the
sidelines of the General Assembly. We hope that these
meetings will give renewed impetus to restarting the
negotiations process aimed at achieving a just and
lasting solution with the two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security. To
that end, we look forward to seeing practical steps on
the ground towards the resumption of negotiations. We
are encouraged by the commitment of the Palestinian
Authority to rebuild State institutions. We commend
Egypt and others for the role they have continued to
play aimed at promoting intra-Palestinian dialogue. We
call on all Palestinians to resolve their differences
within the framework of an intra-Palestinian dialogue
so as to achieve unity.
My delegation welcomes the removal of
checkpoints and roadblocks in the West Bank and
commends the Israel-Palestinian ministerial contacts
on the economic situation in the West Bank. On Gaza,
we also welcome the opening of commercial points by
Israel, but regret that the blockade remains in place.
We therefore call for the complete lifting of the
blockade and for a freeze on all settlement activity,
including natural growth. We also call for an end to
arms smuggling into Gaza.
We are concerned about the recent clashes over
the Holy Sites in East Jerusalem. We call on all sides to
exercise maximum restraint and stop any incident,
incitement or provocation. We also call for the release
of all political prisoners.
Uganda welcomes the release of the Goldstone
report on 15 September 2009. We note with grave
concern the findings in the report of serious violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
that were committed during the Gaza conflicts. We also
note the recommendations in the report addressed to a
number of United Nations organs, Israel, the
Palestinian armed groups, the Palestinian authorities
and the international community on various issues. We
further note that the report was formally presented to
the Human Rights Council on 29 September and that a

09-55731

S/PV.6201

decision was taken to defer its consideration. We are,
however, concerned that the decision to defer
consideration of the report has heightened tension in
the Palestinian Territory, which, if not checked, could
escalate and negatively affect the peace process.
Uganda therefore welcomes the decision of the Human
Rights Council to reschedule early consideration of the
report.
Uganda calls on all parties in the Middle East to
take concrete steps to restart peace negotiations and to
respect previous agreements and undertakings. Uganda
will continue to support the efforts by all parties to
achieve comprehensive peace in the Middle East as
envisaged in resolution 1850 (2008).
On Lebanon, my delegation is concerned about
incidents that continue to occur and are likely to
heighten tension in the region. We call upon all parties
to fully implement resolution 1701 (2006).
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): First of all, I wish to join
others in thanking Mr. Pascoe, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his briefing. Turkey
also aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by
Sweden on behalf of the European Union.
We are once again going through a crucial stage in
the Middle East. We fully support the efforts to
reactivate the Middle East peace process on all tracks
and will contribute to them in any way we can. A
serious and active engagement between the parties has
become a matter of urgency in the absence of any
functional political process in the region for a long time.

concern regarding the tension in the city and the region
beyond, which carries the potential of poisoning the
atmosphere and harming the peace efforts. The
protection of the sacred nature of Haram Al-Sharif and
the cultural and religious fabric of Jerusalem is a
matter of utmost priority and importance for Turkey.
It is with this understanding that we invite all
parties, starting with Israel, to act responsibly and to
refrain from any provocative action at a time when
efforts are concentrated on reactivating the peace
process. Respect for holy places is one of the key
elements of stability in the Middle East.
Secondly, the situation in Gaza continues to be a
matter of grave concern for Turkey. We have
repeatedly stressed the fact that the current situation in
Gaza is unacceptable. The hostilities at the beginning
of this year traumatized Gaza with a heavy death toll of
more than 1,000 — most of whom were women and
children. Since then, the Palestinians in Gaza have
been facing formidable suffering and hardship.
Time does not itself heal all sorrows. Despite the
large number of pledges made at Sharm el-Sheikh last
March, only a small quantity of aid and material was
able to trickle into Gaza owing to the restrictions
imposed at the crossings.
In spite of our repeated appeals, resolution
1860 (2009) has not been implemented. Today, the
people in Gaza continue to suffer without proper
reconstruction,
socio-economic
activity
or
humanitarian assistance. As part of this picture, we
view the report of the Fact-Finding Mission led by
Justice Goldstone as a document that sheds light on the
Gaza conflict. The report is a comprehensive document
containing pertinent points and observations and
addressing all alleged violations.

At this stage, upholding the framework of peace
as embodied in the relevant Security Council
resolutions, Madrid Principles, Arab Peace Initiative
and the Road Map obligations is important for serious
negotiations. However, we see two main challenges to
the current efforts. The first one relates to the core
issues. It is a well-established norm in the Middle East
peace process that the core issues, including refugees
and Jerusalem, are subject to final status negotiations
and should not be undermined by unilateral acts. It is
therefore very important that Israel cease its settlement
activities in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, as well
as measures and actions that could change the character
and status of Jerusalem.

We think that the report and its recommendations
should be taken seriously and should be allowed to
follow their course. In this respect, we take the
following two principles as our departure point: first,
we should uphold accountability. We need to ascertain
the facts and take action accordingly. Secondly, we
need to act with coherence. Ensuring consistency has
always been one of the key requirements, when the
international community tackles such issues.

The recent incidents in and around Haram
Al-Sharif have shown us, yet again, the sensitivity and
importance of Jerusalem. Here, let me express our

We also agree with the understanding that, if the
parties conduct credible investigations on the
violations as suggested in the report, that would serve

09-55731

25

S/PV.6201

as a necessary and important confidence-building
measure that would contribute to efforts in the political
field. It is our sincere hope that the findings and
conclusions of the report will create an opportunity to
put an end to the deprivation and dramatic conditions
that the people of Gaza are currently going through.
Let me also emphasize the importance of
Palestinian unity. We hope that Palestinian groups can
reach a common understanding as soon as possible.
This is crucial for social harmony in Palestine as well
as for the Middle East peace process. We greatly
appreciate President Abbas’ efforts to this end.
On the subject of Lebanon, in the wake of recent
high-level visits to the region, we believe that a
Government under the leadership of Mr. Hariri,
embracing all segments of the Lebanese people, can be
established sooner rather than later. We continue to
facilitate and contribute to the issues in our
neighbourhood.
Every Israeli and Palestinian is entitled to
freedom from fear. However, for a future free from fear
and full of peace and prosperity, we need to establish
confidence and never deviate from a focus on
achieving a just, fair and lasting settlement. For our
part, we continue to work for a viable and
comprehensive peace on all aspects of the Middle East
peace process.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Pascoe, the Palestinian Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Malki, and the Permanent
Representative of Israel, Ms. Shalev, for their
statements. France aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the Permanent Representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union.

(UNIFIL) that the Secretariat will conduct over the
coming months in accordance with resolution 1884
(2009). We express our concern about the recent spate
of incidents, which are simply violations of resolution
1701 (2006). On the subject of Monday’s explosion in
southern Lebanon, we await the results of the joint
fact-finding mission of the Armed Forces of Lebanon
and UNIFIL, which should help to clarify the
circumstances of the incident. In any case, we
underline our support for the complete implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006), which calls on the Lebanese
State to exercise its sovereignty over the entire
Lebanese territory, so that no weapons can be situated
in the country without its consent.
I turn now to the Israeli-Palestinian matter. I am
not the first in the Council to say that rarely — in all
likelihood never — has there been such an
international consensus about the conditions for peace:
the creation of a viable, independent and democratic
Palestinian State, living peaceably side by side with
Israel within secure and recognized borders, as set out
in this Council’s resolution 1515 (2003). Nevertheless,
we still have to determine the way to take the steps
leading to that goal and to do so fast. I will suggest
three important steps.
First, progress on the ground is necessary to
prevent people from losing all hope. In that regard
Israel should stop settlement activities in the West
Bank and also in East Jerusalem. They are illegal and a
major obstacle to peace. As our President Sarkozy has
said, the settlements obstruct the prospects for a
Palestinian State, they do not contribute to security for
Israel but rather increase its vulnerability.

To begin, I should like briefly to address the
matter of Lebanon, which is also on the Council’s
agenda. We support the Prime Minister-designate,
Mr. Saad Hariri, and we hope that a Government will
be formed quickly. The spirit of dialogue must
continue to prevail among Lebanese parties. The
countries of the region should, for their parts, also join
forces to foment a climate conducive to the formation
of that Government.

A second important consideration is Jerusalem.
After the clashes in recent days in the Holy City, we
call upon the parties to show restraint, so as to avoid
the immediate risk of an escalation, whose
consequences cannot be predicted. We call upon the
Israeli authorities to cease the demolition of houses and
other expulsions in East Jerusalem. It is a fact that
settlement in that city has taken on a particularly
provocative aspect. There can be no peace without
Jerusalem, which will be, as President Sarkozy said in
his address to the Knesset on 23 June 2008, the capital
of both States.

Moreover, it is essential that all parties respect
resolution 1701 (2006). We will closely follow the
review of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon

Complementary progress must also be made in
the realm of movement and access. This is the case for,
Gaza — and I will come back to this — but it is also

26

09-55731

S/PV.6201

the case for the West Bank and East Jerusalem. The
lifting by the occupying authorities of obstacles to
movement around a number of large Palestinian cities
constitutes a positive development that should be
pursued.
All measures that allow for movement towards a
normal life for the Palestinian population should be
encouraged.
Beyond
their
consequences
in
humanitarian matters these measures would also allow
the Palestinians to face their responsibilities to build
the institutions of their future State. Along these lines
the Palestinian Authority should continue its efforts to
strengthen its security sector and also to institute the
rule of law. The continued fight, without quarter,
against terrorism should remain a priority.
As regards the situation in Gaza — and this is my
second point — the consolidation of the ceasefire that
hinges on a full implementation of resolution 1860
(2009) remains a priority. This resolution has set the
parameters for a lasting ceasefire, including the
reopening of crossings and the implementation of
mechanisms that will make it possible to put an end to
weapons trafficking. These two conditions have not
been met.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza is concerning.
We call for an immediate opening of the crossings,
especially to allow for access by civilians to
humanitarian assistance and also for a resumption of
economic activity. Beyond the humanitarian concerns
the current closing of these crossings leads to the
continuation of the status quo of the political situation
in Gaza. Parallel to these efforts, we continue to call
for immediate and unconditional release of Gilad
Shalit. I should like to thank the delegations that
mentioned the case of this prisoner.
As regards the Goldstone Report, its allegations
are grave. Throughout the Gaza conflict brought on by
the firing by Hamas on Israel, France has reiterated its
unswerving position: international humanitarian law
should be respected in all places, under all
circumstances and by all parties to a conflict,
particularly in Gaza and in southern Israel. We believe
the parties should engage in a process of independent
inquiry, in conformity with international standards, into
allegations of violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights during the Gaza crisis.
My third and last point has to do with interPalestinian reconciliation and the role of the neighbour

09-55731

States. Palestinians should speak with a single voice in
order to put the peace process back on track. There
cannot indeed be a peace accord with just one part of
the Palestinian people, nor would there be a viable
Palestinian State without Gaza. There cannot be peace
without recognition of Israel’s right to exist, without a
renunciation of violence and without respect for signed
peace accords. While negotiations towards interPalestinian reconciliation face many challenges, we
continue to support the Egyptian mediation efforts, and
we should also like to pay particular homage to those
efforts.
The countries of the region, of course, have an
important role to play. We will continue to provide all
of our support to the Arab Peace Initiative. This should
be an essential foundation of a global and lasting
solution to the situation in the Middle East.
All measures and gestures by States of the region
to demonstrate their commitment to a lasting peace —
including, in particular, good-neighbourly relations
with Israel — are to be encouraged. In the context of
that regional approach, we also believe that the time
has come to make progress on the Syrian and Lebanese
tracks of the peace process. Such developments will
amount to nothing, however, if the two parties do not
resume their negotiations with a view to reaching a
definitive peace settlement whose broad outlines are
already known to us.
This is a matter of urgency, as President Sarkozy
has recalled by stressing the urgency of settling a
conflict that is not only regional, but also concerns the
entire world. Tensions have increased in recent days in
the Middle East, and we all feel that a spark could
ignite a fire at any moment.
This is a matter of urgency, and the international
community and the Council also have a major role to
play, because the situation in the Middle East is
pressing and concerns us all. We therefore support the
efforts of the United States Administration. For their
part, France and the European Union have expressed
their willingness to support and facilitate the
negotiations as much as necessary and to consider the
guarantees required in a possible agreement.
It is now time to make concrete progress on the
path of a just and comprehensive peace that is based on
the Arab Peace Initiative, the Madrid principles and the
Road Map and is in accordance with the relevant

27

S/PV.6201

Security Council resolutions. France is prepared to
play its full role in such an effort.
To that end, President Sarkozy and President
Mubarak have proposed the idea of a peace summit in
the framework of the Union for the Mediterranean,
which would accompany a resumption of peace
negotiations between the two parties and would, of
course, be organized in consultation with all parties
involved.
Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s open
debate. I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lynn Pascoe for his briefing. We welcome the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Palestinian National Authority and thank him for his
statement. We also listened attentively to the statement
made by the representative of Israel.
The Middle East question, including the question
of Palestine and Israel, is a difficult issue that has been
a focus of the Security Council since the founding of
the United Nations. Despite the unremitting efforts of
all parties concerned to achieve a settlement of the
Middle East issue, the Middle East peace process has
remained stagnant and the regional security situation
unimproved. At present, what is most disconcerting to
the States of the region — and, for that matter, to the
entire international community — is the grave
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including Gaza.
Following the issuance of the report of the FactFinding Mission established by the Human Rights
Council (A/HRC/12/48), the miserable plight of those
living in Gaza is once again the object of much
attention on the part of the international community.
Nine months have elapsed since the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009), yet it has yet
to be fully and effectively implemented, and there has
been no progress in the reconstruction of Gaza. The
people of Gaza still find themselves in a difficult
situation that continues to deteriorate.
The difficult situation of the Palestinians on the
West Bank of the Jordan River is also a cause for
concern. The Chinese Government expresses its deep
concern and sympathy over the plight of the
Palestinian people and its ongoing exacerbation. We
hope that the Security Council will address this matter
with great concern and take active steps to promote a
settlement.

28

The current humanitarian situation in the
occupied Arab territories, in particular the Gaza Strip,
is unsustainable. The international community and the
Security Council should follow it very closely and take
practical measures to help reverse it. At this point, the
international community should intensify its efforts in
the following four priority areas.
First, all parties concerned should be urged to
comply seriously and fully with resolution 1860 (2009)
by establishing and maintaining a lasting ceasefire and
avoiding any action that could cause tension or pose a
threat to regional peace and security.
Secondly, Israel should respond in earnest to the
appeals of the international community by opening all
crossing points into Gaza and ensuring the unimpeded
delivery of humanitarian assistance and reconstruction
materials there, while the international community
should expeditiously honour its commitment to
assisting in Gaza’s reconstruction. At the same time,
Israel should freeze its activities related to settlements
and the separation wall.
Thirdly, all parties should renounce the use of
force and cease all acts of violence against civilians.
We oppose all use of force against civilians. The
excessive use of force is unacceptable. We support the
Security Council in explicitly reiterating that all
violations of international humanitarian law are
intolerable and subject to prosecution. We appeal to all
parties to abide by international humanitarian law and
to maintain the necessary cooperation with the relevant
United Nations agencies.
Fourthly, Palestine and Israel must honour their
obligations under the Road Map and support the
negotiated-settlement approach. The Quartet should
play a more active role in pressing for an early
resumption of peace talks between Palestine and Israel.
Achieving intra-Palestinian reconciliation is of
the utmost importance in order to protecting the
national interests of Palestine and to resuming the
Middle East peace process. The international
community should continue to support Egypt’s efforts
to that end.
The Middle East peace process is now at a crucial
juncture. Fulfilling the vision of two States, Palestine
and Israel, living side by side in peace is the only way
to settle the Middle East question. We support the
achievement of the two-State option on the basis of the

09-55731

S/PV.6201

relevant Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the principle of land for peace, in order
to ensure that the Palestinian people will be able to
establish an independent and viable State.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Austria would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
update on recent developments in the Middle East. We
also thank the Palestinian Foreign Minister, His
Excellency Mr. Riad Al-Malki, and the Permanent
Representative of Israel for their statements and their
presence here today.
Austria fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union.
Peace negotiations between Israel and the
Palestinians must be urgently resumed. That was one of
strongest messages that came out of the general debate
of the General Assembly this year. We appeal to Israel
and the Palestinians to remove the remaining obstacles
to negotiations by acting on their previous agreements
and obligations. As Austrian Foreign Minister Michael
Spindelegger stated during the general debate and
reiterated today at his meeting with Israeli Foreign
Minister Liberman in Vienna, Israel’s right to exist in
security and peace and the realization of the rights of
the Palestinian people are not in contradiction; on the
contrary, both are crucial elements of a comprehensive
and just solution.
The creation of an independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State comprising the
West Bank and Gaza — a State of Palestine that lives
in peace and security with the State of Israel — is
indispensable for stability and peace in the wider
region. After decades of violence and hostility, partners
in the region need to shoulder their respective
responsibilities in the interest of a credible and
sustainable solution.
We need to see an immediate end to all
construction of settlements, including in East
Jerusalem; the dismantlement of the outposts erected
since 2001; and an end to all other activities that may
prejudge the outcome of negotiations. In view of recent
incidents around the holy sites in Jerusalem, incidents
to which others have already referred in the course of
this debate, we urge all sides to seek to defuse tensions
by exercising the utmost restraint both in deeds and in
words.

09-55731

Implementing the vision of a Palestinian State
requires unity of purpose among the political
leadership of the Palestinian people, and common
renunciation of violence. Palestinian reconciliation is
vital. We urge Palestinian leaders to work together to
overcome the separation between the West Bank and
Gaza in order to preserve the chance of viability for a
future homeland for the Palestinian people. The
viability of a future Palestinian State also depends on
continuous, vigorous efforts by the Palestinian
Authority to strengthen its institutions and enforce the
rule of law, both in the interests of the citizens of a
future Palestinian State and in order to address the
legitimate security concerns of its neighbour Israel.
We welcome the national plan presented by Prime
Minister Fayyad for the build-up of Palestinian
institutions and infrastructure over the next two years.
Austria will continue to help establish the economic
foundation and institutional infrastructure of a future
Palestinian State, both bilaterally and in the framework
of the overall efforts of the European Union. Normal
economic activity in both the West Bank and Gaza is
essential for funding these self-empowerment efforts.
This is another reason why we call on Israel to stop the
construction of the separation barrier on occupied
territory and to reinforce the removal of obstacles to
movement and access in the West Bank. It is also
imperative that access to Gaza be opened urgently.
Let me add that violent incidents such as the
indiscriminate firing of rockets and mortars at Israel
must come to an immediate and sustained end, as
called for in resolution 1860 (2009). We respect the
legitimate Israel security concerns on this point. At the
same time, we also believe that continuing to prevent
access to Gaza may also turn out to be
counterproductive from a security point of view, since
people in Gaza are required to live a life that does not
satisfy basic conditions of human dignity. A life of
continued desperation, hopelessness and deprivation
provides a breeding ground for further extremism.
As the Human Rights Council prepares to
reconvene tomorrow to discuss the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory and East Jerusalem, I
would like to make the following observations
regarding the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on
the Gaza Conflict, from an Austrian point of view.
Rebuilding trust and respect for the rule of law, in all
contexts of conflict, requires thorough and credible
investigation of all allegations of grave violations of

29

S/PV.6201

international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Measures to ensure accountability are an essential part
of a comprehensive approach to preventing future
violations, avoiding their recurrence and seeking
sustainable peace, justice, truth and reconciliation.
The Fact-Finding Mission’s report (A/HRC/12/48)
contains allegations of grave violations by all sides of
international humanitarian law, including deliberate
attacks on civilians. Austria remains committed to a
serious assessment by the Human Rights Council of the
report and its recommendations, which are addressed to
Israel and to Palestinian actors. The Goldstone report
should be used as the starting point for appropriate and
credible investigations by all parties in accordance with
international standards. The Human Rights Council will
have to decide on the appropriate follow-up, and we
believe it should take this very important and sensitive
decision on the basis of the broadest possible consensus.
Regarding Lebanon, we hope that the process of
the formation of a new Government will soon come to
a successful conclusion. Austria is concerned about
reports regarding the incident in Tayr Filsi on
12 October. While awaiting the results of the
investigation launched by the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the Lebanese Armed
Forces, we wish to reiterate the importance of full
compliance with resolution 1701 (2006) by all parties.
In this context, we strongly encourage the
reinforcement of efforts to ensure that the area south of
the Litani River is kept free of unauthorized armed
personnel, assets and weapons.
In concluding, we wish to reiterate our sincere
hope for the early success of international efforts to
relaunch peace negotiations between Israel and the
Palestinians, and for progress towards a comprehensive
peace between Israel and all its neighbours. Austria,
both nationally and within the framework of the
European Union, is ready to support this process
actively.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.
I join other Council members in thanking UnderSecretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his detailed
briefing. We also welcome the participation in today’s
Council meeting of His Excellency Mr. Riad Al-Malki,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Palestine, and of the
Permanent Representative of Israel. My delegation
associates itself with the statement to be delivered by

30

the Permanent Representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
Over the past month, further efforts have been
made by the international community towards the
resumption of negotiations aimed at achieving a twoState solution to the Israel-Palestine conflict. Such
collective undertakings have been reflected in a series
of events at various levels and within various
frameworks during the period under review, including
those held on the margins of the sixty-fourth session of
the General Assembly, such as the meetings of the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians, of the Quartet
principals and of the League of Arab States Follow-up
Committee on the Arab Peace Initiative, as well as
among the leaders of the United States, Palestine and
Israel. We can also note that, under difficult
circumstances, the Palestinian National Authority has
continued efforts to strengthen socio-economic
stability, security sector reform and functional
institutions for a future State.
The peace process, however, remains clouded
with persistent challenges. Though substantive
progress has been recorded in implementing Council
resolutions 1850 (2008) and 1860 (2009), Israeli
military incursions, the construction of the separation
wall, the expansion of settlements and the blockade of
Gaza have never ceased, inflicting vast deprivations on
the Palestinian civilian population. Sporadic rocket
attacks have placed civilians in southern Israel under
continuous threat.
It is essential in this context that all parties
concerned should try to shoulder their mutual
obligations under the Road Map, the Madrid terms of
reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and relevant
Council resolutions. Constructive dialogue and
political negotiations remain the only viable solutions.
We urge Israel to immediately halt illegal settlement
activity, dismantle outposts erected since March 2001,
open all border crossings, release all Palestinian
prisoners and ensure unhindered access for
humanitarian assistance. We also urge Palestinian
factions to set store by their long-term national
interests,
resolve
their
differences
through
reconciliation and jointly work towards the
establishment of a government of national unity.
We note with deep concern the findings contained
in the report (A/HRC/12/48) prepared by the United

09-55731

S/PV.6201

Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict,
which was established by the Human Rights Council,
to the effect that Israel seriously violated international
human rights and humanitarian law during the conflict
and failed to extend the required cooperation to the
Mission, and that the rocket and mortar attacks caused
loss of life and property damage to southern Israeli
communities.
My delegation believes it is legitimate that the
report should receive due attention and consideration
by the pertinent United Nations agencies and the
parties involved. Given the extremely explosive nature
of the regional situation, and in the interests of peace
and justice, we underline that the greatest imperative
for all parties concerned is to stop all acts of violence
and strictly comply with international humanitarian
and human rights law, as well as to observe the
paramount priority of ensuring safety and security for
all civilians and for diplomatic and United Nations
premises and personnel.
We share the concern about the delay in the
formation of a new Government in Lebanon after the
parliamentary elections last June. We hope that
negotiations will soon be concluded in a spirit of
consideration and dialogue in order for a new
Government to be formed, representing the interests of
all communities in Lebanon.

09-55731

At the same time, we welcome the efforts being
made by the Lebanese authorities, in cooperation with
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), to defuse the tension brought about by the
recent multiple security incidents in southern Lebanon.
We urge Israel to cease flights over Lebanese territory
and withdraw from the northern part of the village of
Ghajar and adjacent areas north of the Blue Line. We
reiterate our support for UNIFIL and the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).
Finally, Viet Nam stands ready to join the
international community’s unremitting efforts towards
a peaceful settlement of the Israel-Palestine and ArabIsrael conflicts and the ultimate attainment of a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East. In
that spirit, we continue to support Russia’s initiative to
convene an international conference on the Middle
East in Moscow before the end of this year.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are a number of speakers remaining on my
list for this meeting. In view of the lateness of the hour,
I intend, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3.10 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

31
