A /67/PV.53

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-seventh session

53rd plenary meeting
Wednesday, 12 December 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Charles
(Trinidad and Tobago), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 10
Return or restitution of cultural property to the
countries of origin
Note by the Secretary-General (A/67/219)
Draft resolution (A/67/L.34)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Greece to introduce draft resolution
A/67/L.34.
Mr. Mitsialis (Greece): On behalf of its sponsors,
I am pleased to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.34,
entitled “Return or restitution of cultural property
to the countries of origin”, which we trust will be
unanimously endorsed by the General Assembly.
At the outset, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and the Director-General of UNESCO for the
comprehensive report on the return or restitution of
cultural property to the countries of origin (A/67/219).
The report outlines the most significant developments
that have taken place in recent years on the matter.
The fortieth anniversary of the 1970 Convention
on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit
Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural
Property and the increasing number of countries that

have acceded to the instrument, which now amount
to 123 States parties; the outstanding work of the
Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the
Return of Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin or
its Restitution in Case of Illicit Appropriation; and the
continuing commitment of UNESCO to the attainment
of that end are only a few of the recent positive steps in
the fight against the illicit traffic of cultural property.
In the years since the General Assembly adopted
resolution 64/78, entitled “Return or restitution of
cultural property to the countries of origin”, major
developments have come about. The draft resolution
contained in document A/67/L.34 reflects the state of
play in the field. A major step in the effort to return or
restitute cultural property was the convening, in June
in Paris, of the second meeting of the States parties
to the 1970 Convention on the Means of Prohibiting
and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer
of Ownership of Cultural Property. The adoption of
the rules of procedure for that meeting contained two
important decisions: the decision to convene every two
years, thereby granting a necessary periodicity to the
meetings, and the creation of a subsidiary committee
to promote the purposes of the Convention. More
specifically, the subsidiary committee will, inter
alia, review national reports and prepare and submit
to the meeting of States parties guidelines aiming at
improving the implementation of the 1970 Convention.
Despite concerted international efforts to tackle
the problem, the illicit traffic of cultural property
continues to pose a serious threat to the cultural
heritage of States. The threat is higher in situations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-64420 (E)

*1264420*

A/67/PV.53

of crisis and conflict, when cultural objects are often
smuggled outside their countries of origin. The draft
resolution under consideration today condemns recent
attacks against world cultural heritage sites and calls
for an immediate end to such acts by reminding States
parties to the Convention of their obligations under it.
Awareness-raising and capacity-building are
critical to the success of the efforts undertaken in
the context of the return or restitution of cultural
property. As is highlighted in the draft resolution,
UNESCO — along with INTERPOL, the International
Institute for the Unification of Private Law and other
major stakeholders — continues to drive a systematic
campaign to increase the visibility of the available
tools and to organize joint action for the effective
protection of cultural heritage. Furthermore, the
draft resolution welcomes the presentation of model
legislative provisions on undiscovered cultural objects,
which is another important step towards combating
the phenomenon of illegal excavations and ensuring
that ownership of unearthed archaeological objects
remains in their countries. Moreover, interaction with
the international art market with a view to improving
practices in various areas of expertise — such as
provenance, investigation, ethics and procedures of
restitution — has proved to be of paramount importance.
Recent restitution cases, either in the framework
of the 1970 Convention or under the auspices of the
Intergovernmental Committee, show the importance
of international cooperation in facing the challenge.
The restitution from Canada to Bulgaria of 21,000
coins, jewels and other artifacts that had been illicitly
imported to Canada and seized by the Canadian
police, and the restitution of the Boğazköy Sphinx to
Turkey, to mention only two cases, are clear examples
of the successful use of available tools, be they legal
instruments or bilateral agreements.
Its cultural heritage is the mirror of a country’s
history and therefore lies within the very core of its
existence, since it represents not only specific values
and traditions but also the unique way that a people
perceives the world. Whether it is a Makonde mask, an
Etruscan vase or a Parthenon frieze, each is a testimony
to a nation’s path in time. But if they are to continue to
serve their artistic, aesthetic and social raisons d’être,
they must be protected against illicit acts and use and,
in such cases, be restored and returned to their natural
environment, outside of which they can no longer
inspire the collective conscience of humanity. That is

2

precisely the reason for which the objectives of this
draft resolution should leave no State indifferent.
Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina wishes to express its support for the adoption
of draft resolution A/67/L.34, intended to protect and
safeguard the historical and cultural heritage of States.
The cultural heritage of a State bears clear, unequivocal
witness to its identity. For that reason, Argentina is
firmly committed to combating the unlawful trafficking
of cultural property, which can no longer be considered
booty but is rather a fundamental element of a people’s
civilization and culture.
Argentina is party to the 1970 UNESCO
Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing
the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership
of Cultural Property. That valuable international
instrument has now been in force for 40 years and
represents a milestone. In coordination with the
countries of its region, Argentina has promoted the
adoption of measures and mechanisms to foster the
effective application of the Convention and to address
the challenges connected with the protection of cultural
property in today’s world, to analyse strengths and
weaknesses, and to identify future challenges.
In 2013, Argentina hopes to join the recently
established committee for follow-up to the Convention,
with an eye to promoting initiatives to ensure a better
and more effective implementation of its provisions.
That hope is in keeping with our membership in both
the Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the
Return of Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin
or its Restitution in Case of Illicit Appropriation and in
the UNESCO Committee for the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Conflict. We are party
to the International Institute for the Unification of
Private Law Convention on Stolen or Illegally Exported
Cultural Objects, the Convention on the Protection of
the Archaeological, Historical and Artistic Heritage
of the American Nations, and all other international
instruments relating to the protection of national
cultural heritage.
Our devotion to protecting the cultural heritage
of peoples has led us to create national mechanisms
to combat unlawful trafficking in cultural property,
in particular the Argentine Committee to Combat the
Unlawful Trafficking of Cultural Property, which is an
interministerial entity to establish the procedures and
mechanisms necessary to preventing and combating

12-64420

A/67/PV.53

unlawful trafficking in such property. The Committee
works in close coordination with INTERPOL, which
maintains a database of stolen cultural goods. Among
the entities that have recently joined the Committee, we
call attention to the Financial Information Unit, which
is responsible for preventing and investigating moneylaundering and has established clear standards for the
lawful purchase and sale of cultural property.
Given its geographic location in South America,
Argentina is very sensitive to the trafficking of
archaeological items from the pre-Hispanic era.
However, I want to draw attention to recent positive
developments, such as the return of archaeological
property to Peru in Buenos Aires in February. Fortysix ceramic pieces and a necklace were returned under
the bilateral convention on the matter. Similarly, in
November 2011 the Oswaldo Cruz Foundation returned
to the Brazilian authorities an important collection
that had been illegally brought into Argentina. Other
examples of note are the return of Argentine fossils by
the United States in 2008 and by Australia in 2010.
The illicit traffic in cultural property has become
a serious, increasingly sophisticated world problem
that is linked to other illegal trade. Moreover, modern
technologies have created sophisticated networks of
contraband and illegal traffic through the Internet.
Fighting it requires the development of common
strategies to detect and prevent such transactions.
Cooperation among States through bilateral
agreements on restitution of cultural property
should absolutely be encouraged. Similarly, States’
active involvement in the work of UNESCO through
participation in the conventions on the subject and
the enactment of national legislation reflecting those
international commitments would be an effective way
to reduce the pernicious effects of illegal traffic in
cultural property on the living historical heritage of
nations.
Mr. Emiliou (Cyprus): The issue of the return or
restitution of cultural property to the countries of origin
constitutes an area in which international relations are
put to the test — a noble test, I would say — to ensure
that cooperation among State and non-State actors
can positively affect the lofty goal of protecting the
cultural heritage of humankind. My delegation attaches
particular importance to the issue and to the efforts of
the United Nations in general, and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) in particular, for the considerable work
12-64420

being done on the subject. In that respect, we welcome
the report of the Director-General of UNESCO,
contained in document A/67/219.
Cyprus, as a State party to the 1954 Hague
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the
Event of Armed Conflict, and a signatory of its Second
Protocol, follows with interest the work undertaken to
address the illicit sale of cultural objects on the Internet
and the need for Member States to adopt appropriate
international legislation in the field. The combating
of illicit trafficking in cultural property is a task that
requires perseverance and multifaceted collaborative
efforts. One of the major efforts to that end is the
promotion of international documentation for recording
data of cultural property and the dissemination of
information in order to assist in its recovery.
Cyprus also takes the view that, in order to stop
illicit trafficking, States should ensure that customs and
border control officials are fully trained in their duties
to apply the rules of the UNESCO Convention on the
Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import,
Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property
of 1970, and to report any cases of illicit activity to the
appropriate authorities of the State party concerned.
My country is fortunate to have 9,000 years of
recorded civilization, which have left us with an immense
stock of cultural heritage which we have an obligation
to protect and bequeath to future generations. By virtue
of its geographical position at the crossroads of three
continents and many civilizations, Cyprus’ cultural
heritage has, through the millennia, been continuously
enriched and provides a unique insight into the many
civilizations that have existed on the island during
its long and eventful history. Many of the artefacts of
this rich cultural history can be viewed in museums
throughout the world. Many more, unfortunately, have
become the objects of illicit trafficking, especially
those removed illegally from the territory of the island
under occupation since 1974.
The devastation in the occupied areas of Cyprus
is systematic and widespread. Churches, chapels,
monasteries, cemeteries, libraries, museums and
private collections of religious art and antiquities have
been destroyed and looted. The illicit trade operating
from the occupied area of Cyprus has been illustrated
by a number of cases brought to courts around the world
by the Church of Cyprus, which is the rightful owner of
many of those artefacts.

3

A/67/PV.53

One well-known case with international
repercussions was the removal and illegal export of the
Kanakaria Church mosaics, a rare work of art dating to
the sixth century A.D. A lawsuit filed by the Orthodox
Church of Cyprus in the United States District Court of
Indianapolis resulted in a judgement in 1989 whereby
the mosaics were returned to their rightful owner, the
Church of Cyprus, two years later. A related case filed
before a German court led to a court decision in 2010
that opened the way for the repatriation to Cyprus of
artefacts looted from Kanakaria and other churches and
monasteries.
Prevention, customs training, criminal justice
responses and international cooperation lie at the heart
of our strategy on this exceptionally important topic. We
reiterate our unwavering determination to use all legal
and political means necessary to repatriate cultural
treasures that were illegally obtained from us. We look
to the international community to extend its solidarity
and support to our efforts to protect an invaluable part
of the cultural heritage of humanity.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I congratulate Greece on
proposing to the General Assembly once again the
universally important theme of safeguarding cultural
heritage and the return of cultural property to the
countries of origin. Italy is one of the traditional
sponsors of the important resolution under this agenda
item. With 47 sites on the UNESCO World Heritage
List, we are home to a large share of the planet’s
cultural, artistic and landscape heritage. It is the fruit
of the ancient civilizations that traveled through and
settled in Italy over the millennia, leaving behind a
unique legacy of different cultures and identities.
The safeguarding, promotion and appreciation of
cultural and artistic heritage have universal value. In
the words of the great Italian writer Giorgio Bassani,
a forefather of the conservationist movement in Italy:
“Artistic heritage is the proof, the timely witness, to
the spiritual process that has changed the profile of
civilization”. There can be no common progress and
no mutual respect between peoples without a profound
understanding of the spiritual process to which Bassani
refers. There is an unbreakable bond — both local
and universal — between cultural properties and
their place of conception and creation. The return of
cultural properties to their countries of origin thus has
a fundamental historic, spiritual and political value.
UNESCO and the International Institute for the
Unification of Private Law (UNIDROIT) are driving
4

forces in this common effort, as is well described in the
excellent report transmitted by the Secretary-General
(A/67/219) for which we are extremely grateful. With
renewed energy, we must continue initiatives to develop
legal, practical and awareness-raising tools to improve
the implementation of the universal legal framework
and international cooperation with governmental
and non-governmental organizations, the art market,
cultural and educational institutions, museums and
civil society.
The General Assembly’s adoption by consensus of
draft resolution A/67/L.34 will send a clear message
that the protection of cultural assets and their return to
their States of origin must remain high on the United
Nations agenda. We are pleased by the insertion of new
language, such as the invitation to Member States to
adopt appropriate legislation and to consider trafficking
in illicitly acquired exported cultural properties as a
serious crime. The definition of “serious crime”, we
were pleased to note, refers explicitly to the Palermo
Convention. Finally, I applaud paragraph 15, which
urges the establishment of national, regional and
international databases inventorying cultural property.
In recent decades, Italy has developed good practices
for the recovery of illicitly acquired cultural properties
and shared its experience with the international
community. In 1969, Italy became the first country in
the world to have a specialized police division — the
Carabinieri Art Squad — to address trafficking in
cultural properties. The Squad has created a national
database that carefully documents stolen works in more
than 400,000 photographs, offering a valuable resource
for law enforcement agencies as well as purchasers of
artworks. Over the years, the Carabinieri Art Squad has
achieved remarkable results in the recovery and return
of illegally acquired and exported cultural properties, in
cooperation with States Members of the United Nations,
UNESCO, INTERPOL, UNIDROIT and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. It has also trained
specialized police forces and protected cultural heritage
sites in Albania, Afghanistan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Ethiopia, Jordan and Iraq. This past summer, the Italian
authorities and UNESCO held a unique exhibition
of some 30 stolen and recovered cultural items, to
highlight the importance of international cooperation
in combating trafficking in cultural property.
In conclusion, Italy remains fully committed to
participating in the common efforts of Member States to
fight trafficking in cultural property and facilitate the

12-64420

A/67/PV.53

return of illicitly-appropriated assets to the countries
of origin.
Mrs. Sucuoğlu (Turkey): We would like to express
our full support for draft resolution A/67/L.34, entitled
“Return of restitution of cultural property to the
countries of origin”.
Despite the increasing awareness and capacitybuilding efforts to tackle illicit trading of cultural
heritage, the problem has been ongoing, not least in
the Mediterranean region. In situations of conflict
or instability, the risk of illicit trafficking of cultural
property is even higher.
To remove artefacts from their natural and historical
context is to commit a crime against humankind. Illicit
trading in cultural property falls into the same category
as illegal arms trading, drugs and human trafficking.
We strongly believe that cultural assets will find their
real value by being protected on their own soil.
International efforts to combat the illicit trade in
cultural properties require the active involvement of
all Member States, cultural and education institutions,
museums and civil society. At the core of the efforts to
protect cultural heritage lies the active involvement of
UNESCO. We would like to express our appreciation to
UNESCO for its valuable efforts to that end.
The need to enhance international cooperation in
this area is reflected in the draft resolution before us.
It highlights initiatives set forth at the international
level through treaties, conventions and the policies of
UNESCO. It promotes cooperation between nations
aiming to preserve the cultural heritage of humankind.
It provides for the return and restitution of cultural
treasures illegally removed from their place of origin.
We therefore support all activities and efforts which
will contribute to international cooperation in this area.
In that context, Turkey supports the draft resolution
submitted by Greece.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.34.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): Since the submission
of the draft resolution, and in addition to those
delegations listed in document A/67/L.34, the following
countries have become sponsors: Albania, Azerbaijan,

12-64420

Bangladesh, Burundi, the Central African Republic,
Costa Rica, Djibouti, the Dominican Republic,
Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Mauritania,
Paraguay, Peru, Qatar, the Russian Federation, Sri
Lanka, Suriname, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Uganda, Ukraine, the United
Republic of Tanzania, Yemen and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: May I take it that it that
it is the wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft
resolution A/67/L.34?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 67/80).

A/67/L.34

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I also take it that it
is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 10?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 123
Global health and foreign policy
Note by the Secretary-General (A/67/377)
Draft resolution (A/67/L.36)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of France to introduce draft resolution
A/67/L.36.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.36, under
agenda item 123, “Global health and foreign policy”,
on behalf of the seven members of the diplomacy
and health group: Brazil, France, Indonesia, Norway,
Senegal, South Africa and Thailand.
I thank the Secretary-General for his note
transmitting the report of the Director-General of the
World Health Organization, pursuant to resolution
66/115 of 12 December 2011 (A/67/377).
Since 2007, the initiative on global health and
foreign policy has sought to strengthen the place given
to health among the priorities of the international
community and to raise the profile of global health in
the development of foreign policy. To that end, each year
our group introduces a draft resolution on emerging
global health problems.
For the sixty-seventh session of the General
Assembly, we are introducing the topic of universal
health coverage, in the light of its crucial impact

5

A/67/PV.53

on improving the level of health around the world,
effectively fighting poverty and promoting sustainable
development.
I would first like to observe that, despite the
progress that has been made, many tasks remain to
be achieved for us to attain the three health-related
Millennium Development Goals. Beyond those
enduring challenges, the international community
has taken on the issue of non-communicable diseases,
which now affect all countries. One billion people do
not have access to health services when they need them,
a fact that is compromising the effectiveness of our
efforts to improve global health.
To respond to these challenges, universal health
coverage is a comprehensive, inclusive and dynamic
objective. It is a comprehensive objective because
universal health coverage contributes to improving
access for populations to the health services they
need, including maternal and child health services,
sexual and reproductive health services, the fight
against HIV and AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria, and
the prevention of non-communicable diseases. By
strengthening health systems through a cross-cutting
approach, universal health coverage contributes to the
realization of specific goals. That is why it is promoted
by the initiative of the Secretary-General for women’s
and children’s health. These two axes — horizontal and
vertical — are complementary.
It is an inclusive objective because universal health
coverage helps to ensure fairness and reduce poverty.
The World Health Organization estimates that 100,000
people fall below the poverty line each year due to illness
or health-care costs. Universal health care coverage
would allow everyone to receive the services they need,
including access to medications, without running the
risk of falling into poverty. The draft resolution is built
around these two forms of protection: access to health
services and financial protection.
It is also a dynamic objective because it seeks to
move towards universal coverage for populations in
terms of health services and related costs. The draft
resolution recognizes the urgency of that process, but
it does not impose any model, as the financing system
selected will depend on the context of each country.
It encourages strengthened cooperation among States
to promote the implementation of universal health
coverage.

6

As a comprehensive, inclusive and dynamic
objective, universal health coverage seems particularly
well adapted to the post-2015 agenda. The United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
marked the key role of social protection in combating
poverty. It recognized the central role of health as
a precondition, consequence and indicator of the
three dimensions of sustainable development. The
draft resolution therefore encourages States to adopt
multisectoral approaches to reduce inequalities and
promote sustainable development.
The draft proposes follow-up action within the
framework of discussions on the post-2015 development
agenda in the Economic and Social Council in 2013
and in the General Assembly. It builds on the work
on universal health coverage by the World Health
Assembly and by regional conferences held this year in
Bangkok, Mexico City and Tunis, which demonstrated
the growing interest in the subject.
The draft resolution entitled “Global health and
foreign policy” is the fifth on the topic since 2008. It
urges States to consider health issues in the formulation
of foreign policy.
I thank all delegations that participated in the
consultations and sponsored the draft resolution.
Mrs. Martínez Lievano (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We wish to thank the Director-General of
the World Health Organization (WHO), Ms. Margaret
Chan, for her report (see A/67/377), which was prepared
pursuant to resolution 66/115 and which develops
the links between health and the environment and
between health and natural disasters. We also welcome
draft resolution A/67/L.36, submitted by the health
and foreign policy group, which reflects the desire of
Member States to work for universal health coverage.
Mexico views both the report and the draft resolution
as further steps in the impetus the international
community has given to discussions of health matters
at the global level.
Among the advances made in recent years, we
note the outcomes of the High-level Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Prevention and Control of
Non-communicable Diseases, the High-level Meeting
on HIV/AIDS, and the World Conference on Social
Determinants of Health, as well as resolutions on
the subject adopted by the World Health Assembly
in Geneva. In that respect, the inclusion of health
issues in the outcome document of the United Nations

12-64420

A/67/PV.53

Conference on Sustainable Development (resolution
66/288, annex) is very significant. My delegation
applauds the acknowledgment of health as an intrinsic
part of sustainable development that is cross-related
to the three pillars of development: the economic, the
social and the environmental spheres.
A ministerial forum on sustaining universal health
coverage, sharing experiences and supporting progress
was held on 2 April in Mexico City, with the participation
of Ms. Chan and representatives of 21 countries
from five continents and the six regions of the World
Health Organization. On that occasion, delegations
stressed their points of convergence with a view to
crafting a shared vision and political message aimed
at strengthening universal health coverage as a means
of addressing the continuous and growing challenges
of sustainable social development. The Mexico City
Political Declaration on Universal Health Coverage
made it clear that universal health coverage should
be a central element of the international development
agenda and supported by Governments, international
organizations, civil society and the private sector.
On behalf of my delegation, I wish to make several
remarks on universal health coverage as a tool for
sustainable development at the global level.
First, our discussions have shown that our
Governments and societies need to invest more in
health, even in a context of scarce available resources.
Secondly, in order to make that a reality, political
support for the issue of health is critical as an expression
of the will and vision that the international community
brings to the task of improving the coverage and quality
of the health services our people receive. Thirdly,
resources allocated to universal health coverage
constitute one of the most profitable investments in the
future of our countries, as they contribute not only to
economic growth but also to the well-being, equality
and sustainable development of our peoples.
Today, a growing number of countries around the
world, representing all levels of development, have
some form of universal health coverage. In Mexico, the
creation of the social health-care system — commonly
referred to as the people’s health insurance — has given
equal access to more than 106 million Mexicans. The
challenge to those countries that have made universal
health coverage a fundamental goal for the wellbeing of our societies is to ensure its sustainability. To
that end, it is very important to continue sharing the
best international practices on matters of financing,
12-64420

implementation, coordination and evaluation. In that
regard, we believe that the issue of health, and universal
health coverage in particular, should be given serious
consideration in our upcoming discussions on the post2015 international development agenda.
The international community needs to address
the challenge of achieving the full implementation,
improvement, continuity and sustainability of
health services in our countries. Mexico affirms its
commitment to continuing to work on the points of
convergence between the health sector and foreign
policy within the framework of those discussions.
Ms. Prince (United States of America): The
expansion of health care coverage has been at the
forefront of our domestic agenda, and we believe that it
is appropriate for the international community to begin
putting it at the forefront of its agenda as well.
Universal health coverage is fundamentally about
all people having equal access to care. President Obama
has made access to health care a landmark issue of his
Administration through the Affordable Care Act, which
seeks to dramatically expand Americans’ access to
health-care services. The Affordable Care Act advances
that goal for the United States and includes numerous
provisions to keep-health care costs low, promote
prevention, and ultimately expand health coverage to
30 million Americans who are currently living without
coverage.
The United States believes that health coverage is
a national-level concern and responsibility and that, in
order to ensure progress and sustainability, national
Governments must take on the fundamental challenges
of moving towards more inclusive access. That is
particularly relevant at a time when the economies of
many low- and middle-income countries are undergoing
unprecedented economic transition. Half the countries
that were low-income in the year 2000 have already
become or will become middle-income by 2020.
Draft resolution A/67/L.36, which we are about
to adopt, acknowledges the diversity of approaches to
financing and sustaining health-care systems that seek
to achieve universal health coverage. The United States
thanks France and the core group of sponsors for the
open and inclusive way in which they developed this
session’s draft resolution on global health and foreign
policy and moving towards universal health coverage.
We recognize the relevance of the topic and are pleased
to be a sponsor of that important draft resolution.

7

A/67/PV.53

We recognize the importance of access to medicine
and further note that countries have a wide array
of policies and actions that may be appropriate in
promoting the progressive realization of the right to
enjoy the highest available standard of physical and
mental health care. We therefore think that the draft
resolution should not try to define the content of that
right. Furthermore, to the extent that it is implied in the
draft resolution, the United States does not recognize
the creation of any new right that we have not previously
recognized, the expansion of the content or coverage of
existing rights, or any other change in the current state
of treaty or customary international law.
The United States acknowledges the importance
of universal health coverage as a means of addressing
global health challenges as we seek to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals and discuss the
post-2015 development agenda. We also welcome
the continued focus on health as a critical foreign
policy issue, and we are enhancing the United States
State Department’s capabilities to conduct diplomacy
in support of global health, including through the
upcoming naming of a global health ambassador.
The United States is committed to partnering
with countries in their efforts to strengthen health
systems in areas that help expand access, reduce health
disparities and strengthen capacities. We do this by
improving health-resource tracking to enable countries
to understand the dynamics and gaps in current health
financing arrangements as a first step to improving
them. Our development assistance helps countries
lay the foundations for universal health coverage
by strengthening and increasing human resources
for health, identifying and scaling up high-impact
interventions, improving the quality and efficient
purchasing of medicines, strengthening institutional
and management capacities, and improving and
institutionalizing quality of care.
The need is plain and the challenge to our
Governments is real, both domestically and
internationally. Advancing global health for all remains
a top priority for the United States. Today’s important
draft resolution confirms the centrality of the challenge
and the opportunity before us.
Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): It gives me great pleasure to
briefly state my Government’s position on global health
issues, including universal health coverage, on the
occasion of the adoption of draft resolution A/67/L.26,
entitled “Global health and foreign policy”. Health plays
8

a crucial role in economic and social development. We
appreciate the fact that the draft resolution encourages
universal health coverage in an inclusive and fiscally
sustainable manner.
Many societies in the world are rapidly ageing.
As the population gets older, the burden on the aged,
their families and their societies is expected to increase
rapidly because of the rise in the number of older
people with non-communicable diseases and mental
disorders. Japan is experiencing the ageing of society
ahead of others around the world. In order to prepare
for this unprecedented situation, Japan has introduced
various measures, such as long-term-care insurance
and comprehensive health promotion measures, in
cooperation with relevant entities. Thanks to these
efforts, Japan has been able to attain high marks for
its population, with increasingly good health, including
long life expectancies.
One of the factors that contributed to the success
in Japan is the fact that we were able to attain universal
health coverage. That situation was brought about 50
years ago by establishing a public health insurance
system for the whole nation. The following three
characteristics of our experience with the system
should be pointed out. First, all people have access
to high-quality medical services, regardless of their
occupation or income. Secondly, patients can choose
whichever medical institution they wish to visit for the
same price. And finally, we have managed to control
overall medical expenses.
Japan is proud to be able to provide such access
to medical services for the entire nation. In order to
share that experience with other countries, Japan has
collaborated with the World Bank on research into
methods for financing universal health insurance
coverage. We look forward to sharing the results of that
research with all Member States and other interested
parties in the near future.
Although only two years remain until the target
date of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs),
challenges remain on issues such as maternal health
and water sanitation. Those areas require more effort on
our part if we are to attain the MDGs. We believe that
universal health coverage will be crucial to achieving
the MDGs. In order for an entire nation to access
adequate and high-quality medical services, it will be
indispensable to strengthen a sustainable health system
for that nation. My delegation has mentioned that point
on various occasions.
12-64420

A/67/PV.53

Furthermore, the Government of Japan believes
that universal access to simple and effective health
interventions, such as vaccination, is also important
for global health. At the moment, the challenge of polio
eradication is at an important stage. Japan will continue
to support efforts to bring results in the field of polio
eradication.
Finally, my delegation is aware that the value of
health has been increasing in modern society, where
situations change quite rapidly. In that regard, it is useful
to address health issues from the viewpoint of human
security, which calls for people-centred, comprehensive,
context-specific and prevention-oriented responses
that strengthen the protection and empowerment of all
people and all communities.
The world continues to face many challenges in
the field of global health and therefore requires global
cooperation. In that regard, it is important that we
continue the discussions on global health and foreign
policy. As a member of the global health community,
Japan will be able to contribute to the efforts to strive
for universal health coverage and intends to continue to
participate in the discussion actively.
Mr. Khan (Indonesia): At this meeting, Indonesia
would like to address issues under agenda items 123
and 127.
We all are aware that global health remains one of
the biggest challenges facing the world. We continue to
believe that pandemic issues, such as avian influenza,
HIV/AIDS, malaria and severe acute respiratory
syndrome, in addition to being health problems,
can threaten a country’s economy and security.
Consequently, Indonesia affirms the need for the
Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative to redouble
efforts to improve the state of global health. In that
regard, there is a need to clearly define our priorities in
strengthening global health in the context of the post2015 development agenda.
Indonesia would suggest that some elements of
the Oslo Ministerial Declaration — including the
availability and affordability of basic needs, including
health services; improved capacity; ensured services in
emergency situations; and the linkage between global
health and environment — be incorporated into the
post-2015 development agenda.
We recall that the outcome document of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development

12-64420

(resolution 66/288, annex) affirmed the importance
of universal health coverage in achieving sustainable
development. This year, therefore, we have fully
supported and sponsored draft resolution A/67/L.36,
introduced by the representative of France, which
focuses on moving towards universal health coverage.
It is obvious that on the one hand, poverty
continues to be the main cause of health problems. On
the other hand, poverty alleviation is closely linked to
public health interventions. Therefore, we underscore
the need to attain universal access to quality health
services. That entails providing preventive measures,
care, treatment and medical products without imposing
a huge cost burden on the people.
Achieving that objective, however, requires the
robust implementation of the 10 priority areas stipulated
in the Oslo Declaration, and the outreach programme to
non-members of the foreign policy and global health
group be pursued. Today, we would like to inform
the Assembly that Indonesia is honoured to assume
the position of coordinator of the foreign policy and
global health group meetings in 2013. In assuming that
responsibility, we will ensure that the foreign policy
and global health group will continue to be active in
promoting and raising health issues in the formulation
of foreign policy.
It is widely recognized that autism symptoms in
children have been on the rise for some time. In Indonesia
itself, the incidence of autism has significantly increased
in the past few years and is worrying. Despite the lack
of official data on the number of people with autism in
Indonesia, it is assumed that for every 10,000 births,
there are 15 to 20 children born with autism. Until now,
in Indonesia, as in most developing countries, dealing
with autism has been very complicated.
Psychologists and therapists agree that autism is
not a type of ailment or form of mental retardation.
Indeed, children with autism spectrum disorder often
show extraordinary cognitive potential. According to
some studies, a number of structural difficulties have
been identified in dealing with problems of autism in
Indonesia, such as lack of professional personnel, the
public view of autism, costly treatment, the failure of
insurance to cover autistic children, and problems at
school. However, as part of its efforts to create greater
understanding for children with autism, Indonesia has
continuously made the efforts necessary, including
in collaboration with civil society organizations and

9

A/67/PV.53

foundations, among others, by organizing seminars and
training for teachers and parents and creating caring
communities in targeted cities for those with autism.
As part of our outreach and awareness programme,
on the occasion of the commemoration of the World
Autism Day in April, the Ministry of Health, in
collaboration with the Cabinet Ministers’ Wives Club,
jointly organized the Walk for Autism and the Autism
Expo 2012. Indonesia believes that a coordinated and
multi-pronged global response to autism, particularly
with a view to developing funding and building capacity,
would greatly advance the interests and well-being of
millions of individuals and families living with autism.
In view of the foregoing, Indonesia wholeheartedly
supports and sponsors draft resolution A/67/L.33,
on autism spectrum disorders and developmental
disabilities, initiated by Bangladesh.
Mr. Lee (Singapore): Singapore welcomes draft
resolution A/67/L.36, on moving towards universal
health coverage, and thanks the foreign policy and
global health group for its excellent work on the text.
Singapore further welcomes the note by the SecretaryGeneral on global health and foreign policy (A/67/377),
transmitting the report of the Director-General of the
World Health Organization analysing the challenges
States face in achieving universal health coverage.
The issue of universal health coverage has gained
increasing traction with the international community in
recent years. All countries — developed and developing
alike — agree that universal health coverage brings
benefits to society and the economy. Within multilateral
settings, the World Health Organization has been active
in promoting universal health coverage. In that context,
the submission of a draft resolution on moving towards
universal health coverage at the sixty-seventh session is
a timely endeavour.
However, the path to achieving universal health
coverage is complex and there is no universal formula.
Instead, Member States should adopt different
solutions tailored to their own unique circumstances.
Just as every sovereign State embarks on its own path
of development, every sovereign State should craft its
own approach to achieving universal health coverage.
In that context, we would like to highlight the fact
that universal health coverage needs to be not only
accessible and effective, but also sustainable.

10

To be successful, such health coverage needs to
satisfy the following criteria. First, the coverage it
provides should be universal, ensuring that the sick and
poor are not denied good-quality health care because of
their inability to pay. Secondly, it must be affordable for
both present and future generations. Thirdly, it should
encourage doctors and patients to choose health care
that is effective and appropriate to their needs.
In Singapore’s case, we have tried over the
years to progressively put in place a sustainable
health financing system. We are acutely aware of the
dangers of borrowing against our children’s future to
finance our present needs. In that regard, in the 1980s
Singapore introduced medical savings accounts, known
as Medisave, not to replace but to ensure the long-term
sustainability of universally available Government
subsidies in our public hospitals. With a rapidly ageing
society, we have anticipated that our future generations
will face an increasingly heavy burden in financing
such universal health coverage. In setting up Medisave,
we ensure that those who can afford to do so set aside
sufficient resources for themselves, freeing up subsidies
to those who most need it.
Singapore’s health financing system is also
designed to encourage patients and doctors to make
the appropriate treatment choices, with supply-side
cost containment and demand-side cost sharing in the
form of user fees and patient co-payments. Government
subsidies for public hospitals are given out on the basis
of diagnosis-related groups rather than a fee-for-service
model. That has reduced overservicing and increased
hospital efficiency. Our national health insurance
scheme, MediShield, is designed to include deductibles
and co-payments. Such patient cost-sharing features
instil a sense of individual responsibility when making
health care decisions and prevent flagrant abuse. The
Singapore Government has also worked to ensure that
co-payments are not overly onerous in order to avoid
creating a financial burden on the patient and his family.
By and large, Singapore has achieved reasonably
good outcomes on providing universal health coverage
to our citizens while ensuring a sustainable financing
system. Nevertheless, our system is not perfect and will
continue to evolve as our health-care needs change over
time.
I offer the aforementioned examples not to
highlight Singapore’s modest achievements but to point
to the challenges of achieving sustainable and effective

12-64420

A/67/PV.53

universal health coverage. More importantly, I wish to
illustrate the broader point that each country needs to
design its own path to achieving that goal. There is no
one-size-fits-all health-care financing system, whether
it be tax-financed, based on social insurance or a
medical-savings funded model. There are strengths and
weaknesses in each system. What is critical is that we
be able to objectively judge each system on its merits,
adopt features that work, and refine them to respond to
the evolving environment.
Ms. Kasese-Bota (Zambia): I am grateful for this
opportunity to speak on the important subject of global
health and foreign policy, moving towards universal
health coverage.
Zambia notes with appreciation the outcomes of
the major United Nations conferences and summits
that have helped to advance the global health agenda.
They include, among others, the outcome document
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, entitled “The future we want” (resolution
66/288, annex); the Political Declaration of the Highlevel Meeting on the Prevention and Control of
Non-Communicable Diseases, adopted on 19 September
2011 (resolution 66/2); the Political Declaration on
HIV/AIDS: Intensifying Our Efforts to Eliminate HIV/
AIDS, adopted on 10 June 2011 (resolution 65/277);
the Rio Declaration of the World Conference on Social
Determinants of Health held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in
October 2011, as well as the World Health Report of the
World Health Organization and the recommendations
it contains on improving the coordination, coherence
and effectiveness of governance for global health and
addressing the interlinkages between health and the
environment and health and natural disasters. Zambia
is also cognizant of the World Health Assembly
resolutions WHA58.33 and WHA64.9, on “Sustainable
health financing universal coverage and social health
insurance” and “Sustainable health financing structures
and universal coverage”, respectively.
Zambia is aware of its primary responsibility for
ensuring the health of its people; hence its vision of a
nation of healthy and productive people. To that end, the
Government of Zambia promotes the implementation
of policies and programmes that aim to provide equity
of access to quality and cost-effective health services
as close to the family as possible. However, attaining
completely universal access to quality health care still
remains a big challenge.

12-64420

Zambia’s health-care financing policy treats basic
health care as a fundamental human right of its citizens.
The policy assumes the ideal existence of a welldefined and systematically implemented basic healthcare package, although that is far from being realized.
To ensure sustainable financing of the health sector, the
Government has steadily been increasing the budgetary
allocation from domestic resources to health services.
Public-private partnerships are integral to Zambia’s
health care financing strategy and help to maximize
domestic resources for health services. However,
external financing remains an equally important factor
in our resource mobilization.
Universal health coverage is not just about Member
States’ capacity to enrol the entire citizenry in health
care programmes; it involves both quantitative and
qualitative services, universally provided, when and
where required. It therefore demands investment in
infrastructure development and capacity-building at all
levels of service provision.
The World Health Organization’s World Health
Report recommends improving the coordination,
coherence and effectiveness of governance for global
health, as well as addressing the interlinkages between
health and the environment and health and natural
disasters. Its recommendations call for multidisciplinary
coherence and a re-examination of health care as more
than a social issue, an entity that does not just cut across
the three pillars of sustainable development but that is
the fundamental basis of sustainable development.
Foreign financing for universal health coverage
should encourage a holistic, comprehensive and
integrated approach to the management of illnesses,
including tackling the environmental and social
causes of ill health as well as managing the diseases
of longevity. Foreign financing mechanisms that spell
out stovepiped conditions of disease specificity have
resulted in the rigid compartmentalization of the
human body by health personnel, despite the fact that
people are whole and interconnected organisms. Global
health-care financing should strive to work within
host countries’ existing structures in order to improve
efficiency and reduce overhead costs and duplication
of efforts.
Zambia has made great strides towards achieving
the health-related Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs), although it is not likely to meet two of the three
targets. Zambia hopes that the post-2015 development

11

A/67/PV.53

agenda will utilize both the weaknesses and the
successes of the MDGs to inform its trajectory, as well
as to maintain and sustain the momentum gained in the
race to the 2015 MDG targets. Zambia remains grateful
to global partners who continue to support our health
sector.
Mrs. Davidovich (Israel): At the outset, I would
like to express Israel’s appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for transmitting the important report of the
Director-General of the World Health Organization
on global health and foreign policy (A/67/377). The
links between health, prosperity, environmental
sustainability and security are well established.
Healthy people are more likely to seek higher levels
of education, to be financially independent and to
contribute positively to the societies in which they live.
Promoting global health undeniably helps to reduce
poverty and inequality, advance economic progress and
growth and lay a foundation for increased stability and
security.
Those issues are at the very core the mission of the
United Nations. When it comes to the health challenges
we face, cooperation is key. In our globalized world,
health issues that were once confined to a single region
have the potential to threaten millions of citizens
everywhere. Many of the greatest health issues we face
today are global in scope and call for global responses.

states that a community must provide basic health care
through a communal fund aimed at caring for the sick.
When the State of Israel was established in 1948, a
significant national health infrastructure was already
in place. We have given high priority to developing
innovative and effective solutions to meet the range of
health challenges facing our diverse population. In fact,
Israel was a pioneer in the practice of universal health
care, and our system has been used as a model for many
other countries.
In 1995, the National Health Insurance Law went
into effect. The law Sets forth the State’s responsibility
to provide health services for all residents of the country,
not only its citizens. It stipulates that a standardized
basket of medical services, including hospitalization,
will be supplied to all, whether they live in urban
centres or outside them. Israel’s national health-care
system takes into account the two important and
interrelated components of universal health coverage:
coverage for everyone who needs health services,
including prevention, promotion, treatment and
rehabilitation, and protection from financial risk. Our
system is holistic and comprehensive, and uses online
tools to ensure greater and more frequent access to
health services and to help patients manage their health
more effectively.
Promoting good health is also one of the key
priorities that guide us in our international development
work. For decades, Israel has provided its expertise,
technology, medicine and training in the field of health
care, to developing countries. That important work
is carried out by MASHAV — Israel’s agency for
development cooperation — in partnership with the
Ministry of Health, civil society and the private sector.

Draft resolution A/67/L.36, which we shall adopt
later today, focuses specifically on the importance
of universal health coverage. At the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development earlier
this year, world leaders recognized the importance
of universal health coverage for enhancing health,
social cohesion and sustainable human and economic
development. They pledged to strengthen health
systems towards the provision of equitable universal
health coverage. The ultimate goal for universal health
coverage is enabling everyone to obtain the high-quality
health services they need without the risk of suffering
severe financial hardship when using them. Universal
health coverage helps to break the vicious cycle in
which lack of access to health services impoverishes
people when poor health renders them unable to work,
while health services can impoverish them because of
their costs.

Allow me to provide a few recent examples of that
work. In July, a cooperation agreement was signed
between the Vinnytsia City Council in Ukraine and
MASHAV, aimed at improving local medical and
health care services. Within the framework of the
agreement, MASHAV established a modern diagnostic
centre, which included the renovation of infrastructure
and installation of medical equipment, including CT
scanners and radiological and ultrasound facilities.
MASHAV also provided professional training for the
operation and maintenance of the new centre.

The duty to heal the sick is a deep moral imperative
in the Jewish tradition. In fact, our greatest rabbi,
Maimonides, was himself a medical doctor. The
Talmud, a collection of Jewish law and principles,

Israel is closely engaged in reducing child mortality
and maternal health around the world. Just over one
year ago, MASHAV sent an obstetrics and gynaecology
expert, Dr. Hanna Shapira, with a medical crew to

12

12-64420

A/67/PV.53

Vanuatu, in response to the high stillbirth and maternal
mortality rates facing the small island nation. Although
the team’s mission concluded after four months, Dr.
Shapira continues her work to this day, roaming
between the islands by light plane and small motorboat,
armed with a portable, battery-operated ultrasound
machine. Given that the machine is often the only one
available in certain areas, it is also used to diagnose
problems in men.

Albania, Argentina, Austria, the Bahamas, Barbados,
Chile, China, Colombia, the Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, El Salvador, Georgia, Guatemala, Haiti,
Jamaica, Lesotho, Madagascar, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Montenegro, Myanmar, Nigeria, Peru, the
Philippines, the Republic of Moldova, San Marino,
Serbia, Suriname, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay and Zambia.

For more than 50 years, Israel has sponsored
eye clinics in countries where health facilities are
inadequate. Israeli eye doctors travel throughout the
developing world to treat people who suffer from
blindness and poor eyesight resulting from cataracts,
malnutrition, trauma and infection. These clinics have
been set up around the world — in Liberia, Kenya,
Malawi, Mauritania, Mozambique, Namibia, Georgia,
Sri Lanka, Viet Nam, Uzbekistan and many other
countries. This past summer, MASHAV, in cooperation
with the non-governmental organization Eye from
Zion, organized an eye camp in Bamenda, located in
north-western Cameroon. During the mission, the
Israeli medical team conducted sight-restoring and
oculoplastic surgery.

The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.36?

As a proud sponsor of the important draft resolution
before us, Israel will continue to play an active role in
the debate on the intersection between global health
and foreign policy. Against the backdrop of growing
risks and emerging challenges, increased cooperation,
investment and action are needed to achieve better
health outcomes for all people. We must put people and
their health at the centre of global policies. Together, let
us pledge to improve the health of every family, every
community and every nation — laying the foundation
for a more secure, more prosperous and more peaceful
planet.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 123.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/67/L.36.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that, since the submission of the
draft resolution and in addition to those delegations
listed in the document, the following countries have
become sponsors of draft resolution A/67/L.36:
12-64420

Draft
resolution
(resolution 67/81).

A/67/L.36

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 123?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 127
Addressing the socioeconomic needs of individuals,
families and societies affected by autism spectrum
disorders and other developmental disorders
Draft resolution (A/67/L.33)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Bangladesh to introduce draft
resolution A/67/L.33.
Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): I have the honour to
introduce an important and topical draft resolution
on autism and disability. The negotiated title of the
draft resolution, contained in document A/67/L.33, is
“Addressing the socioeconomic needs of individuals,
families and societies affected by autism spectrum
disorders (ASD), developmental disorders (DD) and
associated disabilities”.
Before I introduce the draft resolution, I would
like to mention the names of the Member States that
were on the list of sponsors as of yesterday. They are
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina,
Azerbaijan, the Bahamas, Bahrain, Belarus, Benin,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi,
the Central African Republic, Chile, China, Costa Rica,
Cyprus, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Eritrea,
Georgia, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Nepal,
Nigeria, Panama, Peru, the Philippines, the Republic

13

A/67/PV.53

of Korea, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saudi Arabia, Serbia,
Sri Lanka, Suriname, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine and Uganda.
I understand that quite a number of Member
States are ready to join the list of sponsors of the draft
resolution today. I hope that they will, and request
them to manifest their desire to do so by signing the
sponsorship form with the Secretariat.
The text we agreed during negotiations includes
some editorial and technical amendments made by
the Secretariat to the final version. For the sake of
information and transparency, I would like to mention
those corrections.
In the fifth preambular paragraph, the word “the”
has been inserted before the phrase “human rights of
all persons with disabilities”. The first lines of the
fourteenth preambular paragraph now read, “Recalling
that early diagnosis, appropriate research and effective
interventions are vital”. In the seventeenth preambular
paragraph, the word “passed” has been replaced by the
words “adopted by the sixty-fifth”. In the nineteenth
preambular paragraph, “international public concerns”
has been replaced by “international public concern”.
We have agreed to use the phrase “ASD, DD
and associated disabilities” throughout the text for
consistency. However, if States give their approval to
the English text, that might be problematic for other
languages, especially the non-Roman alphabetic ones.
So the technical and secretarial staffs are advised that
the whole aggregate phase, that is, “autism spectrum
disorders (ASD), developmental disorders (DD) and
associated disabilities” may be used in other languages
in such circumstances.
The finally agreed draft of the resolution contains
20 preambular paragraphs and seven operative
paragraphs. In the preambular section, Member
States express their concern that persons with autism
spectrum disorders, developmental disabilities and
associated disabilities continue to face barriers in their
participation as equal members of society and reaffirm
that discrimination against any person on the basis of
disability is a violation of the inherent dignity and worth
of the human person. The Assembly also recalls that
early diagnosis and appropriate research and effective
interventions are vital to the growth and development
of the individual, emphasizing that early intervention is
crucial for addressing the needs of the individual with

14

autism spectrum disorders, developmental disabilities
and associated disabilities, thus increasing the
opportunities to lead a quality life with the ability to
participate in the greater community and the increasing
likelihood that the individual will need lower levels of
support later in life.
In another preambular paragraph, the General
Assembly realizes that the challenges of meeting the
needs of individuals with autism spectrum disorders,
developmental disorders and associated disabilities is
particularly acute in the developing world, resulting
in increased difficulties for individuals and their
families, as well as for the health, education and
social welfare systems trying to meet their needs.
In that vein, the Assembly recognizes that the full
enjoyment by persons with autism spectrum disorders,
developmental disorders and associated disabilities
of their human rights and their full participation will
result in significant advances in the social and economic
development of societies and communities as a whole.
With that aim in mind, the General Assembly
recognizes in paragraph 2 that, in order to develop and
implement feasible, effective and sustainable intervention
programmes for addressing autism spectrum disorders,
developmental disorders and associated disabilities, an
innovative, integrated approach would benefit from a
focus, inter alia, on increasing public and professional
awareness of autism spectrum disorders, developmental
disabilities and associated disabilities and reducing the
stigma associated with these conditions; enhancing
and increasing research expertise and service delivery,
including through international collaboration, by
training researchers, service providers as well as
non-professionals in early diagnosis and interventions
within health and other relevant sectors; enhancing
inclusive educational programmes suited to infants,
children and adults with autism; emphasizing the
unique needs of each person with autism across a
spectrum of different characteristics and experiences;
and increasing awareness of the advantages of the
inclusion of individuals with autism spectrum disorders,
developmental disabilities and associated disabilities in
the society through occupational and leisure activities.
Finally, the General Assembly requests the
Secretary-General to bring the present draft resolution
to the attention of all Members States and United Nations
organizations as a contribution to the preparations for
the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
the realization of the Millennium Development Goals

12-64420

A/67/PV.53

and other internationally agreed development goals for
persons with disabilities in September 2013.

us to better understand who is affected by autism and
what the risk factors are, and to promote early detection.

With that hope and aspiration, we sincerely believe
that the draft resolution will stand out in the highlevel event on disabilities next year, and its provisions
will receive due recognition towards its successful
implementation. In that venture, we need everybody to
join in support of the draft resolution. By sponsoring
the draft resolution, they will manifest their ownership
of that holy gesture. We humbly appeal for an increased
number of sponsors.

While there is a great deal going on in the
United States, we have also established international
collaborations with many countries across the world.
Puzzles can often best be solved by partnerships, and so
it will be with autism and deepening the understanding
of what puts our children at risk.

I conclude by offering my sincere thanks
and gratitude to all Member States for agreeing
overwhelmingly and consensually to the adoption of
the draft resolution today.
Ms. Prince (United States of America): It is an
honour to be here today to speak about addressing
the socioeconomic needs of individuals, families and
societies affected by autism and other developmental
disabilities.
Today, there is more support for Americans with
autism than ever before. Autism is no longer hidden.
As recently as the 1990s, scientists believed that autism
was rare, affecting only 1 in every 2,000 children. As
we all know now, the truth is very different. Now that
we can begin to see the extent of the issues, we can
focus our efforts.
In the United States, a big step to support those
affected by autism and their families came with the
Affordable Care Act in March 2010, which requires
new insurance plans to cover autism screening and
developmental assessments for children at no cost to
their parents. Insurers in the United States are no longer
allowed to deny children coverage for pre-existing
conditions like autism or to set arbitrary lifetime or
annual limits on benefits. That new law and other
legislative protections allow us to continue important
research and to develop and refine vital treatments.
Through the innovative programmes of the United
States Government, my country is working to address
key questions and provide quality support and services
to all families affected by autism. The Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services are working with states
to shape their Medicaid programmes to help children
and adults with autism get the home care assistance
they need to take control of their own lives and thrive.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention closely
track autism in communities across the nation, allowing
12-64420

The United States is pleased to be able to join the
consensus on draft resolution A/67/L.33, now before
us for adoption. In supporting the draft resolution, we
bear in mind that autism is one of many different kinds
of disabilities, and while we credit the sponsors’ good
intentions for highlighting the needs of individuals,
families and societies affected by autism, we note that
a number of the issues raised here are also applicable
to many people with a variety of different disabilities.
Issues of stigma, discrimination and exclusion are all
too common an experience for people, regardless of the
nature of their specific disabilities.
It is for that reason that the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities addresses such
issues in an inclusive and cross-disability manner.
We are concerned that resolutions focused on only
one specific disability may lead to such targeted
responses that opportunities are missed to develop
comprehensive, systemic solutions that could benefit
broader populations. Rather, our preference remains
to adopt disability-themed resolutions on issues of
relevance to the entire disability community, and
to be inclusive of persons with disabilities in other
resolutions, as appropriate.
It is also extraordinarily important, in this as in
all resolutions, to be fully mindful of the language
used in order to ensure that it is respectful of those
individuals who are the focus of the text. We understand
that certain terminology may be commonly used in
medical and health-focused forums. However, in light
of the paradigm shift catalysed by the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, we call
upon delegations to ensure that we utilize language
that embodies a human-rights-focused approach to
disability. In addition, we believe it important to
note that there are many individuals with autism who
proudly self-identify as autistic and we recognize the
important contributions that they make to society, while
recommitting ourselves to combating societal barriers
that hinder their full enjoyment of human rights and
inclusion in society.
15

A/67/PV.53

As President Obama said last year on World Autism
Awareness Day,

enjoy a full and decent life in conditions that ensure
their dignity and their integration into society.

“let us recommit to improving the lives of
individuals and families impacted by ASDs and
creating a world free from discrimination where all
can achieve their fullest potential.”

As the draft resolution about to be adopted
rightly emphasizes, those suffering from autism and
developmental disorders need dedicated and professional
support services and robust public and professional
awareness programmes aimed at the integration of
these individuals into society and at an inclusive and
life-long learning process, with a particular emphasis
on imparting life and social developmental skills and on
taking advantage of the special abilities that those who
are affected by autism often are able to demonstrate.
That will require a coherent framework for international
cooperation, awareness-raising programmes and the
provision of adequate funding.

Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia): We support
the unanimous adoption of draft resolution A/67/L.33,
entitled “Addressing the socioeconomic needs
of individuals, families and societies affected by
autism spectrum disorders (ASD), developmental
disorders (DD) and associated disabilities”. Saudi
Arabia is proudly associated with this draft resolution
as a sponsor. We would like to thank Bangladesh for its
valuable efforts, which have resulted in the anticipated
unanimous adoption of this initiative. We are confident
that the draft resolution, when adopted, will be an
important milestone on the path towards raising
awareness and helping take further steps to address the
numerous socioeconomic problems faced by individuals
suffering from autism and developmental disorders.
The international community has a collective
responsibility to address this important issue. The
recognition by the General Assembly of 2 April as
World Autism Awareness Day, the High-level Special
Event on Autism and Disabilities held on 19 November,
as well as the anticipated adoption of today’s draft
resolution reflect our increasing focus on this issue.
We express hope that autism and other developmental
disorders will continue to receive our due attention and
consideration as we prepare for the high-level meeting
on disability and development in 2013.
The number of people diagnosed with autism
has increased dramatically over the years, with an
estimated 1 in every 88 children diagnosed with this
disability. This is a particularly acute problem in
developing countries that have neither the resources nor
the expertise to deal with a problem of this magnitude.
That is why we have given specific reference and
attention to autism in the draft resolution before us.
Such individuals and their families continue to
suffer a sense of isolation from society due to a lack
of awareness and a lack of opportunities to integrate
into mainstream society. Individuals suffering
from these disorders need societal understanding
and governmental support throughout their lives.
Individuals with disabilities have an equal right to

16

In the Arab world, autism is a growing concern.
The situation has been augmented by the limited
number of specialists and experts available to deal with
such disorders, as well by a lack of adequate funding
for programmes to deal with the issue. Saudi Arabia
is actively engaged in the fight against autism and its
socioeconomic repercussions. Several initiatives have
been taken by the Kingdom in recent years in that
regard, including the formation of a charitable society
for individuals with autism spectrum disorders, as well
as the establishment in 2010 of the first Saudi assembly
to address the needs of such individuals and their
families. Recent legislation also recognizes the rights
of the victims of autism and their families to life-long
support. Numerous specialized centres for care and
development have been established throughout the
Kingdom. We will continue to support all international
efforts aimed at addressing and highlighting this
important issue in all forums.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): Israel welcomes the
imminent adoption of today’s draft resolution
A/67/L.33. We are a sponsor of the draft resolution
because Israel is committed to raising awareness
about autism and to addressing the challenges faced
by autistic individuals and their families. The draft
resolution reflects our deep commitment to advancing
the rights of these individuals. The draft resolution
appropriately recognizes the leading role played by the
World Health Organization in this regard. Israel will
participate in the debate both here in New York and at
the World Health Organization in Geneva.
Five years ago, Israel supported the adoption of
resolution 62/139, which designated 2 April as World

12-64420

A/67/PV.53

Autism Awareness Day. Our Mission has organized
side events at the United Nations to mark this day every
year. We have hosted film screenings, lectures and
interactive dialogues.
There is a clear need to raise awareness about
disabilities, particularly disabilities that are not
immediately visible. Since autism is invisible to the
naked eye, it is often misunderstood or misdiagnosed.
Countries must educate their people about autism. They
must provide resources for developmentally disabled
children and adults so that they can fully participate in
society. All individuals deserve a life that is dignified,
regardless of who they are or where they live.
Israel recognizes the importance of providing
resources for autistic children and their families. Israel’s
national insurance provides grants and subsidies to
children with autism so that families can cope with the
additional costs of raising an autistic child. Autistic
children within the Israeli educational system receive
free education from the age of 3 until they are 21. They
also enjoy a longer school year and attend school six
days per week. This provides a more constructive
learning environment and eases the burden felt by their
families.
Israel’s vibrant civil society has played a major
role in advancing these initiatives. The Israel National
Autism Association (ALUT) has launched many
effective public awareness campaigns and advocated
extensively for innovative public policies on autism.
Along with other non-governmental organizations,
ALUT has implemented effective and individualized
educational programmes for autistic children. It
has allowed thousands of autistic individuals to be
integrated fully into society.
As we speak, parents of autistic children in Israel
are launching a campaign to enact an integrative
autism law that will provide Government assistance to
autistic individuals in all aspects of their lives, from
infancy to old age. Israel is working on this issue at the
international level as well. In August, an international
conference was hosted in Jerusalem, bringing together
policymakers and scientists from around the world
to discuss the latest autism research. These kinds
of collaborations are critical to addressing autism
effectively.
Autism awareness is a global issue. It affects people
in countries around the globe, regardless of gender,
race or socioeconomic status. Many autistic children

12-64420

continue to go undiagnosed and face tremendous
stigmatization in their societies. The United Nations has
a vital role to play, not only in New York, but around the
world. We must work to ensure that autistic individuals
across the globe have an opportunity to achieve their
full potential.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): The Bangladesh
Chairperson of the National Advisory Committee on
Autism, Ms. Saima Wazed Hossain, was supposed to
be here this morning. Unfortunately, she is not yet here,
and therefore, with due permission, I have the privilege
to take the floor.
I would like to begin by sharing the following
names, which everyone here knows: Mozart,
Beethoven, Albert Einstein, Bob Dylan, Bill Gates
and Stephen Hawking. All of these icons and many
more were, in their childhood, neglected or dubbed
“prodigal” children by their parents because they were
on the autism/Asperger’s spectrum. However, all of
them achieved great success in their life. Their minds
worked differently than those of traditional learners.
As they found their place in the world, they engaged
their strengths and really enriched all of us and this
world. That is why we are here today. We have a whole
population whose talents go undiscovered and whose
gifts go unshared. Their place in the world has been
carved out only in niches.
Today, in the United States alone, autism is
diagnosed in 1 out of every 88 children. In a recent
study in South Korea, the rate of occurrence was found
to be 2.6 per cent in school-age children. It is true that
we now have a better understanding of the disorder, our
screening and diagnostic tools and protocols are more
sensitive and standardized, and more professionals are
able to diagnose it.
However, since the disorder was first described
in the early 1940s by Leo Kanner and Hans Asperger,
the combinations of symptoms have largely remained
the same. It is still a condition characterized by core
impairments of social communication, an inability or
loss in language development, motor skills deficits,
hypersensitivity to sensory stimulation, stereotypical
and/or repetitive mannerisms, and restricted interests.
What could be the reason for this developmental
disorder? We still do not know for sure, although,
through research, we are identifying an increasing
number of genetic and environmental risk factors. Since
it is a neglected area, research funding is still very low.

17

A/67/PV.53

However, what we do know is that, every 15
minutes, a person is diagnosed with autism and every
year more children are diagnosed with an autism
spectrum condition than with AIDS, diabetes and
cancer combined. The most effective intervention is
early detection followed by intensive, evidence-based
behavioural therapy. The challenge, therefore, is to
mitigate the health, social and economic impacts of
this global public health crisis around the world, and to
alleviate the suffering of children, adults and families
living with autism by implementing these best practices
in systematic, feasible and sustainable ways, especially
in countries like Bangladesh, where resources are very
limited.
It is also a fact that the vast variety of the needs
of individuals with autism spectrum disorders,
developmental disorders and associated disabilities
pose a substantial challenge in terms of addressing
the disability and providing the appropriate services
for treatment and care by governmental and
non-governmental organizations. In addition, children
with autism spectrum disorders, developmental
disorders and associated disabilities in all regions
of the world experience challenges in accessing
long-term health care, education, training and
intervention programmes undertaken by Governments,
non-governmental organizations and the private sector.
It goes without saying that persons with autism
spectrum disorders, developmental disorders and
associated disabilities continue to face barriers in
their participation as equal members of society, and
discriminating against any person on the basis of
disability is a violation of the inherent dignity and
worth of a human being.
That is why it is so important for all United Nations
member countries to sponsor draft resolution A/67/L.33.
We need to continue to build capacity to provide care
for those affected. We need more research to unearth
the cause and the cure. We need to raise awareness
because many of the young people on the spectrum
are so talented and so gifted, yet much of the world
still dismisses them simply because it is something
that many of us do not understand. There is a whole
population of such children with gifts that have yet to
be shared with the world. Adopting the draft resolution
will be a critical step in ensuring that our children
have a fair and equal chance of leading a happy and
meaningful life. In this connection, I would once again
thank those colleagues who have already sponsored

18

the draft resolution and would issue a humble appeal
to others to rise to the occasion and sponsor the draft
resolution before its adoption.
Our efforts to address the needs of individuals and
families with autism in Bangladesh over the past two
to three years have made us realize that, in order to
fully meet the needs of those with neurodevelopmental
disorders such as autism, our approach has to be
multifaceted, comprehensive and integrated with
other community-based programmes. If our solutions
are to be effective and sustainable, treatment needs
to be evidence-based, culturally sensitive and
economically feasible. There has to be cross-sectoral
and interministerial coordination and collaboration,
so that early-detection programmes and intervention
services can be incorporated into the existing health,
educational and social systems. We urgently need to
remove the stigma that is associated with disabilities in
general and neurodevelopmental disorders specifically,
and empower parents so that they can be partners in
the treatment process and informed advocates for their
loved ones. We have to invest in research and training
for clinical professionals and other professional and
para-professional service providers in the latest
diagnostic and treatment tools. We also need to create
new policies and procedures that ensure that those with
autism spectrum disorders are no longer marginalized
but included in mainstream society throughout their
lives.
Collaborative
partnerships
that
transcend
geopolitical boundaries are no longer just an option, but
a very real necessity. An increasingly globalized world
certainly presents many challenges, but it also offers
us unprecedented opportunities to accelerate progress
and speed the delivery of answers to our community.
Science has given us the understanding and the tools
necessary to improve the outcome for these individuals
and their families. We all need to work together to
lessen the stigma they face on a daily basis, develop new
evidence-based solutions that are appropriate given the
limitations in resources and cultural differences, and
disseminate and implement existing best practices so
that all of our children, adolescents and adults with
autism can live a life of dignity and opportunity in
order to fulfil their true potential as happy, independent
and productive members of society.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 127.

12-64420

A/67/PV.53

The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/67/L.33, entitled “Addressing the
socioeconomic needs of individuals, families and
societies affected by autism spectrum disorders
(ASD), developmental disorders (DD) and associated
disabilities”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department of General
Assembly and Conference Management): I would like to
announce that, in addition to those delegations listed in
draft resolution A/67/L.33, as well as those mentioned
during the introduction of the draft resolution, the
following countries have become sponsors: Kyrgyzstan,
Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and Uruguay.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.33?
Draft resolution A/67/L.33 was adopted (resolution
67/82).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 127?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 121 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(h) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe
Draft resolution (A/67/L.14/Rev.1)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held the debate on agenda item 121 and
its sub-items (a) to (w) at its 40th plenary meeting, on
19 November 2012.
I now give the floor to the representative of Albania
to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.14/Rev.1.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Based on the mandate given
by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
to the Albanian chairmanship of the Council for the
period from May to November 2012, I have the honour
to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.14/Rev 1, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe”, on behalf of the 40 sponsors listed
in the document and other countries that have joined as

12-64420

sponsors and will be announced by the representative
of the Secretariat later.
Over the past 12 years, the resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly on this matter have continuously
reflected the trend of increasingly close cooperation
between the United Nations and the Council of
Europe. The draft text presented today to the General
Assembly, enriched with several new paragraphs,
recognizes the ever-increasing role of the Council of
Europe in the protection and strengthening of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, the promotion of
democracy and the upholding and strengthening of
the rule of law through its standards, principles and
monitoring mechanisms, as well as in the effective
implementation of its legal instruments. It also
reaffirms the commitments and aspirations of both
organizations to further enhancing their cooperation in
fields of common interest.
In this regard, I would like to express my satisfaction
regarding the consensus reached on language regarding
international obligations of Member States, in particular,
where applicable, those defined in the Rome Statute of
the International Court of Justice. We consider it part
of the maturity and increased affirmation of the role of
this institution with regard to the application of rule of
law and fight against impunity at both the national and
the international levels.
The new draft reflects the fact that the Council of
Europe now has a wider outreach, far beyond its member
States’ perimeters. Over the past years, through policies
elaborated, adopted and implemented in its immediate
neighbourhood, the Council of Europe has enhanced
the promotion of dialogue and cooperation with the
countries and regions in the vicinity of Europe that
request the Council’s assistance, based on the common
values of human rights, democracy and the rule of law,
as well as through its numerous legal instruments with
a universal vocation.
I should also mention the success of the first
World Forum for Democracy, which was convened
in Strasbourg, France, from 5 to 11 October, with the
participation of more than 200 experts from around the
globe and 1,500 participants representing 120 countries
to discuss democracy. The Secretary-General was a
keynote speaker at that event.
(spoke in French)

19

A/67/PV.53

Despite the fact that the text has been clearly
enriched with renewed language, we regret the absence
of appropriate references to certain important issues,
including the abolition of the death penalty. This
issue is of particular importance to all members of the
Council of Europe. Indeed, it is an emblematic issue for
the Council. Compromising 47 members, the Council
of Europe represents the only region in the world to
have abolished the death penalty — an important fact
that we should have liked to have seen acknowledged
in the text.
Despite the great flexibility shown in the
consultations on this question, we once again had no
choice but to sacrifice references to this issue in order
to arrive at an agreed text that would be adopted by
consensus. The Council of Europe remains fully
committed to advancing the best values for protecting
and promoting human rights and remains open to
continuing dialogue with States members of the General
Assembly to further consolidate our common work.
(spoke in English)
In conclusion, I take this opportunity to thank all
members of the Council of Europe for their cooperation
and support during our chairmanship and all other
delegations that were actively and constructively
engaged during the two-month process of consultations,
enabling us today to have a text that we hope can be
adopted by consensus, as on previous, similar occasions.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.14/Rev.1.

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (h) of agenda item 121?
It was so decided.
(n) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States
Draft resolution (A/67/L.35)
The Acting President: Members will recall
that the Assembly concluded its consideration of
sub-item (n) of agenda item 121 at its 40th plenary
meeting on 19 November. In order for the Assembly
to take action on draft resolution A/67/L.35, it will be
necessary to reopen its consideration of sub-item (n) of
agenda item 121.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen its consideration of sub-item (n) of
agenda item 121?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.35. May I
take it that the Assembly decides to adopt it?
Draft resolution A/67/L.35 was adopted (resolution
67/11 B)
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (n) of agenda item 121?
It was so decided.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

Programme of work

Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of draft
resolution A/67/L.14/Rev.1, and in addition to those
delegations listed in the document, the following
countries have become sponsors: Azerbaijan, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mexico, Portugal, Romania,
San Marino, Serbia and Slovenia.

The Acting President: I would like to draw the
attention of members to the date of recess of the current
session. Members will recall that, at its 2nd plenary
meeting, on 21 September, the General Assembly
decided that the sixty-seventh session would recess on
Tuesday, 18 December. However, in view of the work
that remains to be completed in this part of the session,
I would like to propose to the Assembly that it postpone
the date of recess to Friday, 21 December.

The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.14/
Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/67/L.14/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 67/83).

20

If there is no objection, may I take it that the
Assembly agrees to postpone the date of the recess to
Friday, 21 December?
It was so decided.

12-64420

A/67/PV.53

The Acting President: I would also like to
consult members regarding an extension of the work
of the Fifth Committee. Members will recall that, at
its 2nd plenary meeting, on 21 September, the General
Assembly approved the recommendation of the General
Committee that the Fifth Committee complete its
work by Friday, 14 December. However, I have been
informed by the Chair of the Fifth Committee that
the Committee requests an extension of its work to

12-64420

Thursday, 20 December, in the view that such an
extension would facilitate reaching a consensus on the
pending draft resolutions before it.
May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to
extend the work of the Fifth Committee until Thursday,
20 December?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

21
