88

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

3149 (XXVIII). ·Human rights and scientific and
technological developments

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Proclamation of Teheran 67 and resolution XI adopted by the International Conference
on Human Rights on 12 May 1968, 68
Recalling further its resolution 2450 (XXIII) of 19
December 1968 and subsequent resolutions on human
rights and scientific and technological developments,
Regretting that the Commission on Human Rights
was unable to consider this item at its twenty-ninth
session,
Requests the Commission on Human Rights, through
the Economic and Social Council, to give high priority
to the consideration of the item in conformity with
its decision of 3 April 1973.Gn
2201 st plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3150 (XXVIII). Use of scientific and technological developments in the interests of peace
and social development

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 3026 B (XXVII) of 18
December 1972 and recalling its previous resolutions
on this subject,
Noting the reports of the Secretary-General on this
subject, 70
Noting the positive role of scientific and technological achievements in the development of human society
and the unprecedented acceleration of the rate of scientific and technological developments,
Convinced that scientific and technological developments effect important changes in many areas of the
life of society and should be used to exert a beneficial
influence on human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Bearing in mind that, while scientific and technological developments provide ever increasing opportunities to better the human condition, in a number of instances they can give rise to social problems and may
be accompanied by an increase in social and material
inequality and a deterioration of the social situation
of broad sectors of the population,
Noting the urgent need to make full use of scientific
and technological developments for the welfare of man
and to neutralize their present and possible future
liarmful consequences,
Noting with concern that scientific and technological
developments are used by the forces of imperialism
and colonialism to intensify the arms race, suppress
national liberation movements and deprive the peoples
of their fundamental rights,
Reaffirming the right of peoples to self-determination and the need to respect human rights ,and funda67 Final Art vf the International Conference on Human
Ri;;hts ( United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
r• 3.
6H [bid., p. 12.
tlll See OfJicia/ Records of the Economic and Social Council,
17.'ftv-fourth Se.nion, Supplement No. 6 (E/5265), chap. XII.
10 See A/9075.

mental freedoms and the dignity of the human personality in the light of scientific and technological
developments,
l. Calls upon all States to develop further international co-operation to ensure that the results of
scientific and technological developments are used in
the interests of strengthening international peace and
security, the realization of the peoples' right to selfdetermination and respect for national sovereignty,
freedom and independ0nce and for the purpose of economic and social development and improving the quality of life for the entire population;
2. Believes that the efiects of scientific and technological developments have been generally beneficial
and hold out great potential for the future;
3. Recommends ;ill St;ites to pursue a policy of utilizing all scientific and technological achievements to
satisfy the material and spiritual needs of al! sectors
of the population;
4. Recognizes that, where it exists the use of scientific and technological achievements' for the purpose
of violating the sovereignty of States, interfering in
their internal affairs, waging aggressive wars, supressing na_tion~I li?e~ation movements_ or pursuing a policy
of racial chscnmmat1on not only 1s a flagrant violation
of the Charter of the United Nations and other principles of international law, but constitutes an inadmissible distortion of the purposes that should guide scientific and technological developments for the benefit
of mankind;
5. Invites the Secretary-General, the International
Labour Organisation, the United Nations Educational
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the World Health
Organization and other specialized agencies concerned
to l?ay particular attention to the problem of the protection of broad sectors of the population against social
and material inequalities, as well as other harmful effects which might arise from the use of scientific and
technologi~al developm~nts, and requests the SecretaryGeneral, m co-operation with the above-mentioned
agencies, to submit a report on this subject to the
Grneral Assembly at its thirtieth session;
6. Urges all_ Sta~es to take acti_on whenever necessary
to develop leg1slat10n _guaranteemg human rights and
fundamental freedoms m the light of scientific and technological developments.
2201 st plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3152 (XXVIII). Assistance in cases of natural
disaster and other disaster situations

The General Assembly,
Recalling previous resolutions of the General Assemb_ly and th~ Ec?nornic. and Social Council relating
to disaster relief, m particular Assembly resolutions
2816 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971 and 2959
(XXVII) of 12 December 1972,
Noting with appr~ci~tion the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the activities of the Office of the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator71 and his report
on preventive measures. disaster contingency planning
and preparedness, 72
11 A/9063.
1
7? /\ 92: 1.
