United Nations

S/PV.4303

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4303rd meeting
Thursday, 22 March 2001, 10.35 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zlenko . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ukraine)

Members:

Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Shen Guofang
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Doutriaux
Mr. Cooney
Miss Durrant
Mr. Touré
Mr. Neewoor
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Mejdoub
Mr. Eldon
Mr. Minton

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Briefing by Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, High Representative for
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-30018 (E)

*0130018*

S/PV.4303

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Briefing by Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, High
Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Sweden and Yugoslavia, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zivalj
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the
Council table; Mr. Šimonović (Croatia),
Mr. Schori
(Sweden)
and
Mr.
Šahović
(Yugoslavia) took the seats reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Petritsch to take a seat at the Council

2001, respectively, from the Permanent Representative
of Sweden to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General.
At this meeting the Security Council will hear a
briefing
by
Mr.
Wolfgang
Petritsch,
High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina. I give him the
floor.
Mr. Petritsch: I speak to the Council at a testing
time for the hard-won peace in the Balkans. The smoke
over mountain villages and the angry crackle of gunfire
have come back to haunt us in Macedonia and in
Serbia, and the calls for ethnically based division are
being sounded once more in mainly Croat parts of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
But this time we cannot claim ignorance of the
challenges we face in consolidating the peace in
southeastern Europe. We see them for what they are;
leaders of the past who fear the positive and very real
changes of the present will see themselves disinherited,
both politically and financially.
This report is the eighteenth by a High
Representative, and this is the fourth time that I have
had the honour of addressing the Security Council. I
want to use this opportunity to show how my Office,
and other international organizations that I coordinate
in Bosnia, like the United Nations, are working
successfully against the dangerous voices of division in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I want to show how the rule
of law and market economic reforms are turning the
country around and setting it on the path towards
integration with Europe and how all this can serve as a
model for the rest of the region.
What we must not do is cower at the appearance
of a few gunmen or noisy threats and give up on all our
hard work and the billions of dollars that have gone
into building the foundations for a stable and
prosperous Balkans.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Our continued engagement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina can be read in two ways: as a moral
imperative or, simply, as self-interested common sense.
Either way, the international community would come
out the loser if we were to give up with the job half
done. I should like to explain why.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to documents S/2001/181 and
S/2001/212, letters dated 26 February and 8 March

Given the revolutionary changes last year in both
Croatia and Yugoslavia, last November’s general
election results in Bosnia and Herzegovina were seen

table.

2

S/PV.4303

as a disappointment. But given Bosnia’s character as a
truly multi-ethnic country, where up to a quarter of a
million people lost their lives in the 1992-1995 war, the
shift to more moderate parties is both real and
encouraging. Old nationalist parties, none of them with
particularly strong democratic credentials, have seen
their share of seats in the House of Representatives at
the State level decline from 36 of 42 seats in 1996 to
just 19 in the most recent election. The multi-ethnic
Social Democratic Party (SDP) has the strongest
representation, with nine seats.
This change has led, nearly 10 years after the
outbreak of war in Bosnia, to the formation of the
country’s first non-nationalist Government at State
level as well as in the mainly Bosniac-Croat
Federation. In the predominantly Serb entity,
Republika Srpska, a moderate technocrat heads the
Government. The country’s new State-level Prime
Minister, Bozidar Matic has announced plans to
implement market reforms, create jobs and get the
hundreds of thousands of Bosnian citizens who remain
refugees or displaced persons back to their homes. I
regard this as an important indicator that my concept of
local ownership of the problems is finally taking root.
Do we want to abandon Mr. Matic now, just as Bosnia
and Herzegovina is turning the corner?
A respected United States columnist, writing
under the headline “Ethnic nationalism is still
prevailing”, thinks that we probably should. He wrote,
“the future will probably see non-Muslim Bosnia
and Herzegovina partitioned between Croatia and
Serbia. Today’s Bosnia and Herzegovina, forced
into birth by Richard Holbrooke during the
Dayton negotiations of 1995, is probably too
much of an artifice to survive.”
Worryingly, this idea appears to be gaining
currency in the halls of academe and elsewhere on both
sides of the Atlantic. The only recently discredited idea
of “ancient ethnic hatreds” — an excuse that the
international community used in order to do nothing in
the early 1990s — is gaining ground just as its
nationalist proponents in Croatia, Yugoslavia and
Bosnia itself are, in fact, losing ground.
One of those losing ground is Mr. Ante Jelavic.
After many provocative acts on his part, I removed him
this month as a member of Bosnia’s Joint Presidency. I
further banned his involvement with any political party,
including the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ),

which he led up until two weeks ago. Three of his
hard-line deputies are under the same ban.
Mr. Jelavic worked to tear up the Dayton Peace
Accords, threatening the constitutional order in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the country’s peace. His party has
boycotted official institutions for months, leaving those
who voted for it unrepresented. His party held a
political rally disguised as a referendum on election
day last November, despite specific warnings not to do
so. He actively participated in a rally in support of two
men convicted by the war crimes Tribunal in The
Hague last month for crimes against humanity. Shortly
afterwards, his party, claiming to speak for the Bosnian
and Herzegovinian Croats, announced a plan for selfrule. I was forced to act decisively.
Our columnist would probably say, “Well, I told
you so.” But what is this really about? For many years,
nationalists of Mr. Jelavic’s stripe got rich by
exploiting fear and suspicion among a population that
is still trying to get over the terror of the war. The
HDZ, in an inflammatory election advertisement that
was subsequently banned by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for
breaching election rules, portrayed the Bosnian Croats’
Muslim neighbours as bloodthirsty Saracens who put
innocent children to the sword. It does not take much
to convince people with limited access to balanced
information that their livelihoods are in danger. For
years, their play on fear guaranteed a good turnout at
elections.
But parties like the HDZ are in trouble. Overall,
the HDZ’s votes for the State Parliament have dipped,
from 340,000 in the first post-war election of 1996, to
just 160,000 last year. It is true that the Serbian
Democratic Party (SDS), founded by indicted war
criminal Radovan Karadzić, did well in the Republika
Srpska. But that party had to accept the moderate
Government that I mentioned earlier.
Overall, the sources of fear, and the cash it raised
to fill nationalist party coffers, are starting to fade. A
record number of refugees and displaced persons last
year decided it was safe enough to go home. There
were still criminal incidents aimed at scaring them
away — house burnings in the eastern town of
Srebrenica, demonstrations and daily intimidation of
housing officials charged with implementing tough new
property laws.

3

S/PV.4303

But there were more than 67,000 registered
returns in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 2000. These are
people returning to areas where they constitute a
minority; that figure is almost double the rate in 1999.
The United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees has reported that there were no tent cities this
winter and that returns have got off to a good start this
year thanks to mild weather. There were more than
4,000 minority returns throughout Bosnia and
Herzegovina alone in January of this year, against the
barely 1,700 registered in January last year.
When a Bosniac refugee has the confidence to
return to a place like Srebrenica, the site of Europe’s
worst massacre since the Second World War, it is a
fairly safe bet that the nationalist message is losing
ground. I will continue to act decisively to remove any
officials who obstruct the rule of law in the vital area
of returns. The nationalists do not like how the rule of
law and market reforms have started to chip away at
their once-powerful economic fiefdoms and at the
institutionalised banditry they once took for granted.
In early January of this year, the payments
bureaux — the old communist monopoly on financial
transactions, which were under the thumbs of the three
main nationalist parties during the war — were finally
closed down. Commercial banks, including several
Western banks, have taken their place and are
providing better services and real competition. The cost
of borrowing has fallen from around 30 per cent to just
10 per cent.
But Bosnia and Herzegovina remains far too
reliant on international aid flows, which make up an
estimated 60 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP).
But real GDP growth in 2000 was a respectable 10 per
cent, and inflation increased in the Federation half by
just 3 per cent. Inflation slowed considerably in the
Republika Srpska, to 8 per cent in 2000. Pensioners
remain very vulnerable, but a controversial law to end
a damaging cycle of payment arrears is working. Their
angry protests of last year have stopped.
Too many of these positive advances have had to
be imposed by my me. Bosnia’s outgoing
Administration refused to adopt the pension reform
law, risking tens of millions of dollars in badly needed
aid from the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank. I had to impose it. But I believe that with
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s new Administrations in
place, the country’s citizens have, for the first time,

4

leaders who want to own this process and get on with
the business of government themselves.
Both the new State and entity Governments have
ambitious plans to further the reforms — cutting tax
rates and widening the tax base, improving collection
of customs and excise payments and pushing forward
with privatization — to attract both domestic and
foreign investors and to balance official budgets. The
new Governments are very interested in putting an end
to the smuggling of cigarettes and alcohol, which costs
them an estimated quarter billion dollars in lost
revenues each year. Part of the greater confidence is
greater transparency and rule of law, something which
is, again, not to the taste of the nationalists.
Last month I removed Edhem Bicakcic — until
recently the Federation’s Prime Minister and a senior
member of the Bosniac Party of Democratic Action
(SDA) — from his new post as director of the power
utility Elektroprivreda. Mr. Bicakcic is under four
separate criminal investigations for fraud and abuse of
public office. I did not want him around as we set
about this year to overhaul public utilities such as
power generation and telecoms, where efficiency and
price will determine distribution, not the supposed
ethnicity of their subscribers. This has sent a clear
signal to officials to clean up their acts and, along with
the creation of a State-level court to arbitrate
international trade disputes, has done much to bolster
investor confidence. It has done little for the
confidence of the nationalists.
Since I last addressed the Security Council, I
have also taken an important decision to set up
constitutional commissions in both entities. These
commissions will ensure that the historical
Constitutional Court ruling on the so-called constituent
peoples’ case is put in place on an interim basis until
its full implementation this summer. This legal
mouthful means, in essence, that any constituent people
in Bosnia — whether Serb, Croat, Bosniac or so-called
other — have their rights as citizens fully protected in
law even before the full implementation of the Court
ruling. It will have a huge and positive impact in many
areas of daily life, from the classroom to the
workplace. The nationalists do not like this either.
Furthermore, I established the Independent
Judicial Commission last December to shake up reform
in the courts and prosecutors’ offices across the
country. This should help buttress the rule of law.

S/PV.4303

Positive reforms and democratic Governments
that eye membership in the European Union are also
now the daily fare of life in neighbouring Croatia and
Yugoslavia. Bosnia has just named its first Ambassador
to Belgrade.
How does the many-voiced international
community ensure that the Balkans integrate with
Europe as a peaceful and prosperous region? For all the
complexities, I believe the answer is relatively
straightforward. First, we must continue to ensure our
full support for the United Nations International
Criminal Tribunal in The Hague. This is an institution
which is getting results. A landmark conviction in the
Kunarac trial last month saw mass rape, as a crime in
itself, punished for the first time as a crime against
humanity, with huge consequences for women’s rights
worldwide.
Many indicted war crimes suspects also see the
writing on the wall. In January, Biljana Plavsic, a
former President of the Republika Srpska charged with
crimes against humanity, handed herself over to the
Court. This month, Blagoje Simic, who was indicted
for crimes against humanity committed when he was a
top civilian official in the Bosnian town of Samac
during the war, travelled to The Hague to hand himself
over for trial. He is the first Yugoslav citizen to do so
voluntarily.
We must not let up the pressure. The United
States Government has made it clear to the new
authorities in Belgrade that they must cooperate with
the Tribunal or face having international aid cut off.
This must not be an empty threat. We must see to it that
Slobodan Milosević, Radovan Karadzić and Ratko
Mladić face trial for their part in one of the last, grim
acts of a dark century. As the writer Michael Ignatieff
has said of leaving war crimes unpunished,
“the cycle of impunity remains unbroken,
societies remain free to indulge their fantasies of
denial”.
Secondly, we must stop paying exclusive
attention to men with guns like those on the
Macedonian border and in the Presevo Valley in
southern Serbia. We fail when we are not clear; but we
succeed in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in Croatia and in
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia whenever the
international community speaks with one voice.

The redrawing of borders in the Balkans in an
attempt to meet the impossible demands of exclusivist
nationalists pursuing a mono-ethnic ideal that can be
realized only on a remote island leads only to more
killing and to prolonged international engagement.
Chaos benefits only the ratni profiteri, the war
profiteers.
What the implementation of the Dayton Accords
shows is the importance of citizenship based on the
rule of law, which has formed the foundations of a
prosperous United States and a united Europe. This
empowers people with the right to travel, trade and talk
without fear, whatever their nationality, language or
religion.
We have a very powerful means of persuasion.
The peoples of South-Eastern Europe might not agree
on much right now, but they do agree on this: all want
to be members of a prosperous European Union. The
journey will be a long one for them, but it must be
more than a vague hope. We must continue to present
this in very concrete terms, as we are doing through the
Stability Pact and elsewhere. The future of the Balkan
region is already being shaped in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The elections showed that its citizens are
beginning to see how nationalism makes them poor and
isolated. We must build on our success. We must not
back away from a job half done.
The President: I thank Mr. Petritsch for his
comprehensive briefing.
Before opening the discussion, I should like to
acknowledge the presence at the Council table of the
new Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United
Nations, Ambassador Noureddine Mejdoub. On behalf
of the Council I should like to extend a warm welcome
to Ambassador Mejdoub and wish him every success in
his challenging task. We look forward to cooperating
with him in the Council’s work.
I shall now open the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are glad today to welcome Mr. Petritsch
to our meeting. We consider that the report of the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina contains
various assessments that prompt a mixed reaction on
our part. On the one hand, in the political and
economic fields, as Mr. Petritsch noted, there are

5

S/PV.4303

positive phenomena, but along with these there are also
facts that cause us serious concern.
We note that as a result of the elections that took
place last fall, the moderate forces, for the first time
since the signing of the Peace Agreement, have won a
victory over the nationalists. However, the latter, united
in the Croatian Democratic Union, are refusing to
participate in implementing the results of the elections
and are boycotting the majority of State institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as institutions on the
entity level.
Together with growth in the gross domestic
product and measures being undertaken to right the
economic situation in the country, as mentioned by the
High Representative, the economy of the country
unfortunately remains unstable. This is having a
negative impact on the social and economic living
conditions of the majority of the population. The level
of corruption remains high, which is blocking the
implementation of the Peace Agreement and the
carrying out of reforms. Together with accelerated rates
in the return of the refugees, there continues to be an
outflow from the country primarily of young people
and the intellectual elite. This is also a cause of
concern. The listing of these contradictory facts could
be continued, but those already mentioned suffice to
describe the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina as
one that is causing difficulties.
In that context, I would also like to draw attention
to a few processes on which we would like to hear the
additional views of the High Representative. In
particular, we continue to have doubts regarding the
justification of the efforts to speedily conclude the
draft for a single united defence doctrine of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We consider this a direct step towards
building united armed forces for Bosnia, which runs
counter to the provisions of the Dayton Agreements.
In addition, everything is not clear regarding the
concept of State restructuring on the basis of
cantonization. As we understand it, the basis of this
proposal is the idea of the elimination of the entities.
How, in that case, will their interests be ensured? How
does this idea correspond to Dayton? We know that the
High Representative described this idea as an
interesting one, although premature. We would like to
hear the view of the High Representative as to what,
then, makes it attractive.

6

We have one more comment. According to
several assessments, proposals regarding making
amendments to the Constitution of the entities attest to
the intention of radically changing their internal
structure. For example, it is proposed that the
constitutional commissions, which were created and so
far have existed only on a temporary basis, be inserted
into the Parliaments as permanent organs. We believe
that making fundamental amendments to the
Constitution of the entities will, in fact, become a step
towards a silent review of Dayton, which cannot be
allowed.
We would be grateful to the High Representative
for his comments on the questions that we have raised.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): It is a pleasure to welcome
High Representative Wolfgang Petritsch to the Council
and to hear his comprehensive briefing on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I can assure him of my
Government’s continued support in his efforts to
implement the Dayton/Paris Accords.
Norway commends the High Representative’s
peace implementation initiatives in the areas of
economic reform, refugee return and the consolidation
of State institutions. We recognize that important
progress has been made in these areas in 2000. But
many challenges remain. The Dayton/Paris process has
proved far from self-sustaining. We emphasize the
fundamental responsibility of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina State, entity and local authorities in this
regard. The High Representative’s decision to establish
constitutional commissions in both entities is an
important, though temporary, measure to protect the
vital interests of the constituent peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Norway is concerned about the political and
economic situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
welcome the formation of non-nationalist Governments
at State and entity levels following the general
elections in November last year and call upon the
respective Governments to implement policies in
accordance with the priorities given by the Peace
Implementation Council meeting in May 2000.
My Government firmly condemns attempts by the
Croat National Congress to establish a Croat entity
within Bosnia and Herzegovina. This clearly
contradicts the Dayton Peace Agreement and threatens
the political stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Following repeated undermining of the Dayton Peace

S/PV.4303

Agreement, the High Representative had no other
option but to remove Mr. Jelavic from the Presidency
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as other officials
holding public office and positions within the Croat
National Congress.
Norway appreciates the efforts of the High
Representative to ensure that the Agreement on Special
Parallel Relations between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and Republika Srpska is in accordance with
the Dayton Peace Agreement and the Constitutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republika Srpska.
Norway underlines the crucial role of
neighbouring countries in promoting a viable, stable,
multi-ethnic and unified State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We expect that the recent democratic
changes in Croatia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia will have a positive impact on the political
development of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
My Government would like to stress the
importance of taking a regional approach to the
problems in the Balkans. The tensions in southern
Serbia, Kosovo and on the Macedonian side of the
border could also adversely affect political and
economic developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The increasing problems of organized crime, illegal
trafficking, economic stagnation and political
instability can be adequately dealt with only within a
regional framework and with a unified international
approach.
Norway has over the years been a consistent
provider of personnel and financial assistance to
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as part of the significant
efforts of the international community to bring lasting
peace and stability. It is now time for the governments
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and its constituent entities
to shoulder a greater share of the responsibility in
developing a sustainable, peaceful and democratic
solution for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to thank the High Representative,
Mr. Petritsch, for his very comprehensive briefing on
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Permanent Representative of Sweden will
speak later on behalf of the European Union. My
delegation naturally endorses his statement, and I
should simply like to emphasize a few specific points
at this time.

The recent formation of the Government of
Mr. Matic as a result of the general elections held on 11
November reflects the new atmosphere in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as just indicated by the High
Representative. After five years of nationalist
domination following the signing of the Dayton
Accords, the changeover to a coalition of pluri-ethnic,
democratic and modern parties has become a reality.
Every effort must be made to ensure that the hopes
raised in those elections are not dashed. It was this
spirit that Minister Védrine travelled to Sarajevo on 9
March to take stock of the changes that have occurred
since the recent elections and to encourage the new
authorities to undertake reforms and to encourage
coexistence among their communities.
Indeed, it is crucial that all necessary assistance
be provided to the new Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina so that it can meet the challenges before
it.
The most recent and important of those
challenges was the dissidence of the leaders of the
Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ), who chose to
violate the Dayton Accords. France supported the
decision taken by the High Representative to remove
the Bosnian Croat member of the joint presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Ante Jelavic, as
Mr. Petritsch has just recalled. That step was necessary.
Given the delicate institutional balances in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, it is particularly necessary to make clear
to all that the framework defined by the Peace
Agreement must not be deviated from. Bosnian citizens
of Croatian origin, as well as other nationals of the
country, have no other option except to engage in a
democratic dialogue in the framework of legal
institutions.
It is pivotal now for the new authorities to
consolidate their country and to undertake the
necessary economic and social reforms.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the economic
situation is a priority. The economy will be decisive in
the coming general elections, to be held in the fall of
2002. The Bosnian authorities must be given support as
they tackle the indispensable reforms set out in
Brussels, at the ministerial meeting of the Peace
Implementation Council in May 2000, and in the Road
Map of the European Union. The fight against
corruption must be at the forefront of these reforms. In
more general terms, every effort must be made to

7

S/PV.4303

improve the economic environment. Confidencebuilding is necessary in order for investors to put their
faith in the future of the country.
Reforms are first and foremost the responsibility
of the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
encourage them to continue with determination on the
course they have charted. The international community
must provide support in this process. In this respect,
Europe has a major role to play in the process to
improve the situation.
The European Union is undertaking efforts in this
respect, in particular in the framework of the process of
stabilization and association. The pace of the
rapprochement of Bosnia and Herzegovina with the
European Union, in the framework of the process of
stabilization and association, will depend on the
progress made in ensuring that the criteria set forth by
the European Union are respected. France therefore
calls on the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
continue their efforts, building on the foundation of the
progress that has already been achieved.
The democratic changes that have taken place in
Croatia and in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia have
strengthened the opportunities for reconciliation and
cooperation among the States of the western Balkans,
despite the persistence of hotbeds of tension. In this
context, Bosnia and Herzegovina has entered into
diplomatic relations with its all of neighbours.
Simultaneously, the entities themselves have also
entered into special relationships with neighbouring
States, in conformity with the Dayton Accords.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Bangladesh is
highly appreciative of the role played by High
Representative Wolfgang Petritsch in an exceedingly
difficult and complex mission. We are grateful to him
for his eighteenth report, sent to the Council in
document S/2001/219. The report provides a detailed
analysis and information on all issues relating to the
implementation of the Framework Agreement. His
briefing this morning, which we appreciate, traces the
difficulties faced and the challenges ahead.
It is important that we recall the Srebrenica
tragedy when we discuss the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We commend Mr. Petritsch for the
decision on the cemetery and memorial for the victims
of the Srebrenica massacre. As he noted, this has been
essential in helping Bosnia and Herzegovina come to
terms with its past. He should have the fullest support

8

of the local authorities and the international community
in implementing the decision as soon as possible.
We have noted the progress made and the
difficulties encountered in implementing measures in
the three key areas identified by the Peace
Implementation Council last May: consolidation of
institutions, refugee return and economic reforms.
I turn first to the question of institutions. The 11
November general elections, which the Council had
welcomed, marked a significant development. For the
first time since the signing of the Peace Agreement, the
moderate forces established their majority.
The establishment of Constitutional Commissions
is a major achievement. It is important that the
constituent peoples and others be protected against
discrimination. The entity parliaments should engage,
without wasting time, in the debate on amendments to
their respective Constitutions.
The setting up of the Independent Judicial
Commission last December represented important
progress. As we all know, establishing the rule of law
and good governance is at the core of the socioeconomic challenges facing Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We have followed the recent conclusion of the
special relationship agreement between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republika Srpska. The
agreement should be consistent with the Peace
Agreement and supportive of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
High Representative will have all our support in
addressing the matter.
It is a matter of serious concern that at a time
when State and entity-level governments are being
formed through a democratic process, moves are being
made to undermine the peace process. In this context,
we denounce the unilateral decision to establish Croat
self-rule by the so-called Croat National Congress.
The second question is that of the economy. The
consolidation of peace in that war-ravaged country will
depend largely on the recovery of its economy. We
have noted the measures taken by the High
Representative to address matters within his
competence. The Bosnian economy is extremely
fragile. It is plagued by too many factors, and the
unemployment rate is between 40 and 50 per cent. We
encourage the international community to further
strengthen its efforts to help the economy to recover.

S/PV.4303

As Mr. Petritsch stressed, the work must not be left
half done.
Third, refugee return. The progress in refugee
return has been very slow. We have noted 67,000
minority returns over the past year; a modest 26,000
more than in 1999. The fact that returns have taken
place in several localities is a good sign. It is
encouraging to note that returns have picked up this
year. However, it is worrying that five years after the
war there is still about a quarter of a million people
outside the borders, and three-quarters of a million
remain internally displaced. The return of refugees, as
the High Representative underlined, has to be
facilitated by targeted programmes, including for the
creation of economic opportunities to make them
sustainable.
In conclusion, I would like to ask two questions.
The Council extended the mandate of the mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina until 21 June 2001, against the
backdrop of visible and encouraging signs of progress
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Special Representative
Jacques Klein had, against the backdrop of the positive
developments last year, suggested that the end of 2002
should be the target date for the completion of core
mandates of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We would like to know how Mr. Petritsch
sees the possibility of meeting the objectives of the
implementation of the Framework Agreement and the
conclusion of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
My second question concerns relations with
Belgrade. The changes in the political landscape in the
Balkans last year had raised hopes for a speedier
implementation of the Dayton Agreement. President
Kostunica declared during his visit to Sarajevo that he
would defend the Dayton Agreement and expressed his
desire to normalize relations with Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In this connection, we would like to
know more about the High Representative’s contacts
with Belgrade.

positive developments and ongoing challenges. At the
State level and in the Federation we have a coalition of
moderate non-nationalist parties, which has expressed
its commitment to the international community’s
priorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. And yet at the
same time, this majority is extremely fragile. It will not
be easy to achieve the important steps that are needed
for making progress in refugee returns, the
consolidation of State institutions and economic
reform. This is a big job and it will take time.
Likewise, while there is a non-ideological
government of experts in the Republika Srpska, no one
doubts the continuing influence of the Bosniac Party of
Democratic Action (SDA) and other nationalist parties
in the Republic. And sadly, the nationalist Croatian
Democratic Union (HDZ) party continues to pursue an
obstructionist path that, we are confident, is merely the
last gasp of an obsolete and defeated faction. We
applaud the resolute action that the High
Representative has taken to deal with those leaders
who attempt to reverse progress by clinging to such
nationalism.
I have reviewed some of these details because my
delegation believes that the High Representative must
monitor the situation closely and take strong and
concerted action when necessary. We do not disagree
with the High Representative’s concept of ownership,
but my Government has made very clear its continuing
belief that the international community has an
important role to play in pushing for progress when it
grinds to a halt. It is Ambassador Petritsch, the High
Representative,
who
leads
the
international
community’s efforts in this regard.
Another important point is that we are
encouraged by the positive news on refugee returns,
but there is still important legislative action that must
be taken to push this process further.

Mr. Minton (United States): We would like to
extend a very warm welcome to the High
Representative and thank him for his report. We would
also like to welcome to the Council for the first time
the new Ambassador of Tunisia, Ambassador Mejdoub.
Welcome, Sir.

We would also like to note our deep concern
about the special agreement between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republika Srpska. As
the statement you will read, Mr. President, at the end of
this meeting makes clear, it is important that the High
Representative monitor the final details of this
agreement to ensure that it does not undermine the
sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina or violate the
Dayton Peace Agreement in any way.

We have in the situation before us today, as often
is the case in this area of the world, a mixture of

Finally, my delegation would have liked a
specific call in the presidential statement for the

9

S/PV.4303

adoption and the implementation of a permanent
election law as soon as possible. This is the most useful
and appropriate response to the irresponsible action of
the HDZ, and we urge all of Bosnia’s duly elected
representatives to make it a priority in the coming six
months.
Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank you for this welcome, Mr. President, that you
have extended to me and for having introduced me to
the members of the Council. I am grateful to you and to
the members of the Council.
As the new Permanent Representative of Tunisia
to the United Nations I am speaking for the first time in
this body. I wish to welcome you, Minister Zlenko, to
New York. I would like through you, Ambassador
Yel’chenko, and through Ambassador Kuchynski to
pay a tribute to the Ukrainian presidency, which is
providing moderation and innovative ideas and enjoys
the greatest respect.
I also wish to greet my Security Council
colleagues, who are my elders in this forum, and assure
them of my willingness to work with them in the spirit
and objectives of the Charter and in the context of
friendship and cooperation, which our mission
maintains with all.
I now turn to the item on our agenda. I wish to
thank to you, Mr. President, for having taken the
important initiative of organizing this briefing on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. These periodic
meetings are all the more important because they
summon us to carry out constant follow-up to the
implementation of the Peace Agreement and thus to
assess progress made in its implementation through
today. I also wish to thank Mr. Petritsch, the High
Representative, for his excellent statement on the
development of the situation in the region.
Tunisia considers that the breakthrough of the
moderate parties during the elections last November is
a good sign. We voice our satisfaction in this regard
that Bosnia and Herzegovina has acquired an elected
Council of Ministers, whose main objective is to
undertake basic reforms on all levels, particularly by
advancing the noble values of tolerance and peaceful
coexistence among all the ethnic groups. We are
gratified to learn that significant progress has been
made in this area, particularly the recognition of the
flag, emblems and national anthem of Bosnia and
Herzegovina by the National Assembly of the

10

Republika Srpska — symbols of a united State and of a
symbiosis of communities.
However, it should be noted that the international
community should not show any tolerance for any
secessionist designs of the nationalist parties. In this
respect, like my colleague from Bangladesh, we
deplore the proclamation of autonomy by the
nationalists Croats of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we
hope that they will reconsider their decision in the light
of the Peace Agreements.
We believe that a united, stable, multi-ethnic
State is a factor for regional balance that will make it
possible to contemplate calmly the future in Bosnia and
Herzegovina within the framework of European
integration.
A strong and prosperous economy in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is unquestionably a factor for peacebuilding in that country. It therefore seems to us
important that special attention be paid to the economic
difficulties experienced by Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which flow directly from the effects of the war that it
underwent. We are particularly sensitive to the rise in
debt-servicing costs in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
call upon the donor countries and credit organizations
to show understanding in view of the fragility of the
economic situation in that country and its consequences
for social peace.
The reform of the judicial system is one of the
pillars of a State of law. We believe that it is critically
important for this reform to be concluded in the best
possible conditions. The application of laws in
impartial and non-discriminatory fashion will assist in
establishing confidence and reconciliation among the
Bosnian communities. In that context, we support the
creation of the Independent Judicial Commission,
which has been entrusted by the Office of the High
Representative with the implementation of a consistent
and comprehensive reform of the judicial system.
We also applaud the creation of the function of
national mediator. It is essential that this post remain
neutral and apolitical so that it can properly play its
role, particularly in championing human rights and
restoring the rights of citizens.
More than five years have elapsed since the
signing of the Peace Agreements in the country. The
refugees, however, have still not returned despite the
untiring efforts of the international community. It is

S/PV.4303

true that significant progress has been made and that
the return of the minorities has noticeably increased in
all regions of the country, but we continue to believe
that an acceleration of targeted programmes allowing
the refugees to return to their rightful place in Bosnian
society — measures such as strengthening security
around zones in which minorities live, the settlement of
real estate issues and access to basic public services —
will help in advancing the flourishing of a multi-ethnic
society in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Tunisia would like to take this opportunity to
voice its concern regarding the possibility of a halt to
the demining programme in the spring due to a lack of
funds. Energetic action by the High Representative in
this respect should renew the confidence of the donor
countries and prompt them to continue to provide
necessary assistance to undertake the total demining of
all of the mine-infested regions of the country.
Moreover, we believe that any disengagement on
the part of the international community from Bosnia
and Herzegovina at this decisive stage is premature and
likely to have unexpected consequences. The events
taking place in the region show us how fragile the
situation is.
In conclusion, I should like pay tribute to
Mr. Wolfang Petritsch for his decisive action to
implement the Peace Agreement for Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to express to his entire team my
delegation’s support.
The President: I thank the representative of
Tunisia for his kind words to me and to my colleagues.
Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish first of all to thank you, Mr. President, for having
arranged today’s meeting to consider the question of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. My delegation also wishes to
thank the High Representative, Mr. Petritsch, for his
report and for his very interesting briefing.
On behalf of the Chinese delegation, may I also
take this opportunity to warmly welcome the new
Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the work of the
Council.
On the whole, my delegation is satisfied that the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is stable and that
the Peace Agreement is being implemented. Of course,
this should be attributed to the political good faith and
cooperation of the various parties and ethnic groups in

Bosnia and Herzegovina, and is also closely related to
the help provided by the international community.
However, we should also note that progress in
implementing the Peace Agreement has been slow.
Arduous tasks still lie ahead. In areas such as
increasing the self-reliance of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the realization of reconciliation, harmony among the
various ethnic groups, post-war reconstruction and the
return of minority refugees, much work remains to be
done for the various parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We hope that the various international agencies in
Bosnia and Herzegovina will intensify their work and
continue their close coordination and cooperation. But
we must note that the participation of the international
community in the reconstruction of Bosnia and
Herzegovina must be based on the Bosnian people
being the major players. The focus of our work should
be on helping the local people develop self-reliance,
and gradually reducing their dependence on outside
assistance, so as to avoid a situation in which, when
international assistance is reduced, various social and
political problems resurface.
China
believes
that
achieving
ethnic
reconciliation is the fundamental basis for peaceful
coexistence among the various ethnic groups in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and for a peaceful and prosperous
life, but that the country is a long way from the
realization of this goal.
China notes that among various factions there are
still radical and extremist forces. In his report
Mr. Petritsch also pointed out that nationalist parties
still enjoy great support from their respective ethnic
groups. We are particularly concerned at the divisive
information propagated recently by the Croatian
Democratic Union (HDZ).
At present the situation in the West Balkans
continues to worsen. We are worried that such
extremist nationalist action will encourage nationalists
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Therefore, it is necessary
that the parties concerned remain highly vigilant and
take precautionary measures to prevent the occurrence
of any such incidents.
Finally, we would like to reiterate our support for
the work of the High Representative, and we wish him
and his team continued success in their future work.

11

S/PV.4303

Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): Mr. Foreign
Minister, it is very good to see you in the Chair again
and a great honour to have you here.
Before welcoming the High Representative, I
should also like to welcome the new Permanent
Representatives of Tunisia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The United Kingdom delegation looks
forward to working with them closely in the future.
I must also apologize to Mr. Petritsch for not
being able to be here for his briefing, but life is getting
like that at the United Nations and in the Security
Council these days. I have nevertheless had a full
account, and I want to underline that we regard the
briefing today as a very important contribution.
I think it is noticeable that since Mr. Petritsch was
with us last, there have been a number of significant
achievements, and we congratulate him on those,
particularly the implementation of the Brussels Peace
Implementation Council commitments. The work of his
office is clearly making an impact, and I would very
much like to support his sentiment, expressed earlier
today, that we must finish the job and finish it properly.
As Mr. Petritsch said, four months on from the
November general elections, we now have new and
moderate Governments in place at State level and in
both entities. This is a very significant achievement.
We also very much welcome the progress on the
communications regulatory agency, the State court and
the independent judicial commission.
What the High Representative has said about
increased refugee return is also a very good sign, and it
is a particularly good sign that returns are beginning to
take place in areas such as Srebrenica. But more
progress is needed in that area, and I would welcome
the High Representative’s views on what more might
be done to get the refugees back. That is only one of
the further tough challenges ahead, particularly for the
State-level Government. The first of those further
challenges will be the passing of a new elections law.
The initial signs in that area look promising, and we
must all make every effort to build on the progress that
has been made so far.
We also support the High Representative’s
general approach, including his removal of Mr. Jelavic,
which should target the troublemakers and the Bosnian
Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ). But at the same
time, it will also be important to reach out to the

12

Bosnian Croat community. Again, it would be very
helpful to know whether the High Representative has
any particular ideas on this sort of outreach effort
which he would wish to share with us today. We would
also encourage the Office of the High Representative to
work closely with other regional Governments,
particularly the Government in Zagreb, in this area.
Several delegations around the table have
mentioned the special agreement between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republika Srpska. It is
very important that any further details in the annexes to
that agreement, which have yet to be completed, should
be approved by the High Representative. In particular,
the issue of military relations between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republika Srpska must
become fully transparent. It is also essential that the
High Representative should continue to engage
President Kostunica in the process of Dayton
implementation. The next step must be the signature of
the State-level agreement between the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and Bosnia.
I have deliberately avoided making a full
statement, partly because it is our hope that this
meeting will be interactive in character, because that it
is the way these things are most useful, but partly also
because the representative of Sweden will be speaking
later today on behalf of the European Union, and my
delegation fully associates itself with what the
representative of Sweden will say in his presidency
capacity.
But I want to conclude with a word of support
from the United Kingdom with regard to what
Mr. Petritsch said about the question of bringing
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) indictees to trial. That is a crucially
important element, and when the Prime Minister of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was here earlier this
month I made the same point to him then. I know that
he took it on board. The more cooperation can be
extended to the ICTY, the quicker the trials can begin;
and the quicker all the indictees find their way to The
Hague, the better it will be for us all.
Mr. Cooney (Ireland): I thank you, Mr. President,
for calling this meeting. I take this opportunity to
acknowledge the presence of the new Permanent
Representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina and of
Tunisia; we wish them welcome. I would like to thank
Mr. Petritsch for his informative briefing on the

S/PV.4303

situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We commend his
excellent work in implementing the Dayton/Paris
Agreements, as outlined in his most recent report. We
take this opportunity too to pay tribute to the excellent
work of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH), which, as Mr. Petritsch has
said, must be carried through to its conclusion. Its
achievements in reforming and restructuring the law
enforcement agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
particularly the police, are impressive indeed.
As Ireland fully subscribes to the statement which
will be delivered later by the Permanent Representative
of Sweden for the presidency of the European Union, I
will be very brief and will highlight only a few points
of particular national interest.
Ireland believes that the democratization and
development of Bosnia and Herzegovina are essential
to overall stability in the Balkans. Since the signature
of the Peace Agreement more than five years ago,
considerable progress has been achieved there. We
believe that the regional approach adopted is the
correct one, and we urge all parties in the region to
contribute to the strengthening of inter-State relations.
At the same time, we believe that there is continued
need for the involvement of the international
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Ireland, as a
member of the European Union, will continue to be
active in that regard.
Ireland welcomes the formation of a moderate
Government in Bosnia and Herzegovina which, for the
first time, contains no extreme nationalistic parties. We
support the programme outlined by that Government
and hope that it will make rapid progress in
establishing State institutions to promote a sustainable
democratic and multi-ethnic civil society. The
Government must undertake serious political,
economic, human-rights and rule-of-law reform in
order to improve the conditions of all people in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Such reform will strengthen the
capacity of the country for self-sustainability and will
help it to fulfil the conditions outlined in the European
Union road map for moving towards full European
integration.
Ireland joins others in condemning the recent
unilateral moves by the self-styled Croat National
Congress in Bosnia and Herzegovina to establish a kind
of Croat self-rule. Such moves are a clear violation of
the Peace Agreement. We support the decisive action

taken by Mr. Petritsch in removing Mr. Jelavic and
others from their offices and their positions within the
Bosnian Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ). We urge
all parties to work within the legal institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and of its entities to promote
their legitimate interests. Such an approach is the only
way forward.
While we recognize that progress has been
achieved, we remain extremely concerned about the
situation of the more than one million refugees and
displaced persons remaining in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The authorities in the country and
elsewhere must make progress on that issue and on
implementing property rights laws, both of which are
central to the normalization and stability of the region.
We are also concerned about the level of human
trafficking and illegal migration through Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This has obvious implications for
stability, not just in Bosnia and Herzegovina itself, but
in the wider region. We recognize the efforts of the
State border service in that regard and agree that the
service needs to be further strengthened.
Finally, we express our pleasure that progress is
being made in bringing to justice the perpetrators of
crimes committed under previous regimes. We
encourage all parties in the region to make further
progress on this extremely important issue and to
cooperate fully with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Please allow me to
begin with some brief words of welcome. First, I would
like to welcome Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch. Secondly, I
would like to welcome Ambassador Noureddine
Mejdoub of Tunisia, my neighbour on my left, and to
congratulate him on his maiden appearance and speech.
And finally, I would also like to welcome the new
Permanent Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina;
I am pleased to see him here, as I have not had the
pleasure of meeting him before today.
We also welcome this opportunity to examine
progress made in efforts to rebuild Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which remains a major challenge for the
United Nations and for the international community —
a challenge that is clearly far from over.
In this regard, we would like to thank
Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch for the candid and
comprehensive briefing that he gave us this morning. I

13

S/PV.4303

can say that I, personally, learned a lot from the
briefing he gave us. We also want to join our
colleagues in commending Mr. Petritsch and his
colleagues for the progress that has been made in
implementing the Peace Agreement.
However, in our remarks today, we would like to
step back a little and look at the issue from what is
perhaps a slightly different perspective. As you know,
Mr. President, it has been more than five years since
the Dayton Accords. We re-read the records of the most
recent meeting of the Security Council on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which took place on 12
December 2000, shortly before the fifth anniversary of
the signing of the Dayton Accords. On reading the
record, we were struck by the note of optimism —
albeit cautious optimism — sounded by a majority of
the members of the Security Council. But we were
even more profoundly struck by what appeared to be
the dissenting opinion of Ambassador Peter van
Walsum of the Netherlands, and I would like to quote
him. He said,
“Five years after Dayton we can only
conclude that despite generous foreign aid, to the
tune of $5 billion, both the political and the
economic situations of Bosnia and Herzegovina
are disconcerting ... Bosnia is at peace. Well,
there is no more fighting, and the security
situation is generally good. But the animosity
among the three population groups has hardly
subsided since Dayton. People are daily reminded
of the war in a country where the borders of the
entities reflect the military frontlines of 1995.”
(S/PV.4245, p. 16)
We believe that those words of Ambassador van
Walsum describe the fragility of the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and perhaps in the region as a whole,
if the recent events in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia are anything to go by. Indeed, as I listened
to the opening remarks of Mr. Petritsch earlier today, I
heard him say that the sounds of gunfire have again
returned to the region. As I listened to his statement, it
struck me that there were grounds for both optimism
and pessimism for the region as a whole.
Given this backdrop, perhaps the question for us
is whether the time has come for the Security Council
to re-examine the approach that it is taking to Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We are not, of course, suggesting
that we abandon the Dayton Accords. But we should

14

note that even the key architect of the Dayton Accords,
Ambassador Richard Holbrooke, contemplated the
necessity of modifying the approach at a conference on
Dayton held in Sarajevo to mark the fifth anniversary
of the Accords. Ambassador Holbrooke, in fact,
described Dayton as “a living document that must
adapt to new realities and confront new challenges as
Bosnia grows and matures.” He added, “We must not
only fully implement it, we must seek to correct those
flaws and defects which have become apparent.”
For example, one key aspect of Dayton that
Ambassador Holbrooke highlighted as needing change
was the establishment of a united army, instead of the
current forces divided between the Serbs, Croats and
Bosniacs. Indeed, his words might now prove to have
been prescient in the light of concerns over the
activities of the Bosnian Croat army units following the
threat of the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) to
proclaim self-rule in Bosnian Croat majority areas,
which has, we believe, been described as the sharpest
challenge to the authority of the international
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Against this backdrop — and following on from
the point that Ambassador Stewart Eldon made earlier,
that we should make this into an interactive meeting at
which we try to solicit new information from
Mr. Petritsch — I thought that I would pose a few
questions.
My first question relates to whether the recent
moves by the Bosnian Croats to establish a
self-governing council in Bosnia mean that the
nationalist genie is once again out of the bottle. If I
heard Mr. Petritsch correctly, I believe he hinted that
such moves are only the dying gasp of old forces
whose time has passed. But even if this is so, what are
the measures being taken to bring the Bosnian Croats
back onto the Dayton track? How can the Council
complement his efforts?
The second question is a more general one, and it
is related to Ambassador Holbrooke’s remarks that I
quoted earlier. Can Mr. Petritsch inform the Council
whether there are any elements of the Dayton
Agreements that should be modified or amplified to
better meet the objectives of establishing enduring
political stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
When we recently had a discussion here in the
Council on Kosovo, we noted the paradoxical results of
democracy: the successful democratic elections in

S/PV.4303

Yugoslavia, which we all welcome, led to increased
tensions in Kosovo because they dampened the hopes
of Kosovars who wanted independence. My third
question, therefore, is whether the elections in
Yugoslavia had any ripple effects in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and, if so, whether these ripple effects
were positive or negative. I believe that the Permanent
Representative
of
Bangladesh,
Ambassador
Chowdhury, raised a similar question in that regard.
Miss Durrant (Jamaica): I wish to join others in
welcoming our new colleagues from Tunisia and from
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We look forward to working
closely with them on issues before the Security
Council.
My delegation wishes to thank Mr. Wolfgang
Petritsch,
the
High
Representative
for
the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for his candid and extremely useful
briefing. We commend him and the staff of his Office
for their continued hard work and the initiatives taken
aimed at creating a multi-ethnic society. We encourage
his continued focus on the imperatives of post-war
reconstruction and on achieving sustained economic
growth and sustainable development.
When the Council last discussed the situation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, my delegation expressed the
view that recent democratic developments, particularly
in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, could have a
profound impact on reconciliation and regional
stability and growth. We expressed the view that the
international community should take advantage of
these opportunities to advance the peace process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Petritsch’s briefing today, however,
demonstrates just how fragile the situation is, and how
necessary it is for the international community to
continue to provide sustained support for the
implementation of the Dayton Accords within a
regional framework in order to ensure that the gains
made over the past five years are not threatened.
We see the recent political changes in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, including last November’s elections and
the revision of election rules and procedures, as
positive and essential to the process of establishing a
firm, multi-ethnic political and judicial basis for
progress. It is against this background that we join
others in seeing the bid by the Croat National Congress
to establish Croat self-rule as a dangerous move away

from the multi-ethnic political structure envisioned in
the Dayton Accords. My delegation attaches
importance to the need for all parties to work within
the established legal institutions and constitutional
framework. The pace of progress can only be hampered
by the continued promotion of national and ethnic
differences.
We remain hopeful that, despite the activities of
the forces of separation, the High Representative will
continue to focus in his talks with the different parties
and political representatives on cooperation in various
areas, including in effective border monitoring and in
fostering and promoting multi-ethnic institutions.
Another area of concern for us it the slow pace of
economic development. In his recent report to the
Secretary-General, the High Representative confirmed
that economic and social conditions remain precarious
for most of the population, and that unemployment is
extremely high. We encourage the building of
economic capacity and sustainability, and call on the
international community to continue to supplement
these efforts by providing the necessary resources.
While some progress has been made in the return
of refugees, the overall number remains low. The
reluctance of refugees and internally displaced persons
to return to their homes is related to the political and
economic situation, as well as to the need to provide a
safe and secure environment for all citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
We agree with Mr. Petritsch that indicted war
criminals must be brought to justice. We see the recent
judgement of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia involving the war crime of rape
as sending a strong signal to those who believe that
they can continue to escape justice.
In conclusion, Jamaica continues to support the
work of the High Representative, the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
Stabilization Force aimed at establishing a firm
foundation for effective and sustainable democracy.
Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (interpretation from
Spanish): As my colleagues have done, I too would like
to begin by welcoming our colleague, the new
Ambassador of Tunisia, who has just taken up his
responsibilities in the Security Council. We would also
like to welcome the Ambassador of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

15

S/PV.4303

We are grateful for the information provided to us
by Mr. Petritsch, the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina. His contribution is essential for a full
picture of what is happening in Bosnia and
Herzegovina vis-à-vis the implementation of the
Dayton Peace Accord.
The economic, political and social situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has undergone positive
changes in recent months. The results of the elections
demonstrate the commitment of the citizens of that
country to make real change. The increased return of
displaced persons and refugees has made it necessary
to reformulate the policies designed to deal with this
issue, so as to make them sustainable in the long-term.
The economic reforms being carried out represent the
commitment that exists to achieve the structural
progress and changes suggested by international
economic bodies.
All these changes are still very fragile, which is
why the international community cannot assume an
attitude that would indicate that its commitment to this
country is no longer a priority. History has shown us
how the domino effect has had an effect on the
conflicts in this region in particular. That is why we
must avoid letting the existing institutional fragility
make it possible for the crises in neighbouring
countries to have negative effects on the consolidation
of a multi-ethnic and multicultural society in this
country.
We agree with the priorities set by Mr. Petritsch
with regard to economic reform, the return of refugees
and the consolidation of institutions. We also agree that
working seriously to reach those goals would ensure
the structural changes necessary to guarantee stability
in the country. Nevertheless, we are concerned by the
fact that the current political instability may diminish
the efforts being made to reach those goals.
As many others have said, we reject the attitude
taken by the Bosnian Croat nationalist party, which has
become a threat to the implementation of the Dayton
Agreement. We are concerned at the latent threat posed
by that party’s creation of an autonomous government,
regardless of the fact that a decision to do so has been
put off.
We have several questions in this regard that we
hope Mr. Petritsch will help us clarify. First of all,
notwithstanding the explanations he gave us in his

16

briefing, it is clear that the attitudes of nationalists
have found a response among various populations.
What actual support do they have in the Bosnian Croat
population? Secondly, what actions can, or should, be
taken to prevent a negative effect on military forces? I
would also like to ask Mr. Petritsch whether the
initiatives of the Bosnian Croat nationalists could be
imitated by other nationalist parties having the same
tendencies? Finally, I would like to hear Mr. Petritsch’s
views as to whether the Security Council can make any
contribution to ensure that this nationalist group
abandon its objectives, which are contrary to the
necessary process of democratization and the
implementation of the Agreements.
To conclude, we would like to reiterate something
we have said on other occasions. The conflicts in the
Balkans cannot be dealt with one-by-one or in
isolation; they must be analysed in a regional context.
If we make a mistake in this regard, we will not reach a
definitive solution; rather, we will consciously be
putting off problems in order to solve them in the
future. The achievements attained in Bosnia and
Herzegovina must contribute to solving those problems
by seeking to strengthen a model for international
cooperation that leads to the establishment of a multiethnic society that can live in peace.
Mr. Touré (Mali) (interpretation from French):
Allow me, on behalf of Ambassador Ouane, to
welcome to the Security Council the new
representative of Tunisia, a country with which Mali
has fraternal relations. I would also like to welcome the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As previous speakers have done, I too would like
to thank Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his very
detailed statement on developments in the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. My delegation would like to
take advantage of today’s opportunity to commend, and
express its support for, the commendable efforts made
by the High Representative in the area of implementing
the peace agreements on Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
believe that the results that have been achieved in
implementing the Dayton/Paris Agreement are
encouraging despite the plethora of difficulties
encountered along the way.
On the political level, my delegation welcomes
the formation of the new State Administrations and

S/PV.4303

entities after the holding of general elections on 11
November 2000. The people who have been entrusted
with leading the Administrations should always bear in
mind that they have a responsibility to work for the
strengthening of the common institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina by promoting good governance and
democracy, as well as by transcending ethnic and
partisan considerations. The sharing of power and
responsibilities should inspire everyone as they carry
out their functions. We believe that effective use of the
new Administrations will contribute to strengthening
the still fragile foundations of the democratic process
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and will make it possible
to restore the integrity of its multicultural past.
The conclusion of an agreement on a privileged
relationship between the Republika Srpska and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is in itself a good
thing, as long as the agreement shows respect for the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of all of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
On the economic front, my delegation believes
that institutional reform must be accompanied by
economic restructuring that allows Bosnia and
Herzegovina to rely on itself by tapping its domestic
resources. Along those lines, we would appeal urgently
to the authorities to discharge their obligations to their
communities, if they indeed wish to provide a better
future for their country.
Economic development is the best guarantee of
peace, and therefore my delegation urges the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to persevere in
the path of macroeconomic reforms already undertaken
and to cooperate with international financial
organizations to integrate the country into EuroAtlantic structures.
The establishment of an efficient judiciary system
that can provide sound justice to citizens is a cause of
concern for my delegation. We welcome and encourage
the efforts made in the reform of justice and
institutions for the defence of human rights.
In the humanitarian field, my delegation notes
with great interest the return of refugees, who are
returning to their pre-war homes. This trend should be
encouraged. All useful measures should be taken to
assist those who are returning home and whose living
conditions are precarious.

In conclusion, Mali reaffirms its support for the
outstanding efforts made by the High Representative
for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch. For
us, the stabilizing role played by the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina is essential for
peace-building in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): I join my colleagues in
extending a warm welcome to the new Permanent
Representative of Tunisia.
My delegation wishes to thank Mr. Petritsch, the
High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the
candid briefing that he has given us this morning. We
also thank him for the comprehensive report that he has
submitted under the cover of his letter dated 12 March
to the Secretary-General.
We have taken note of the strenuous efforts
undertaken by Mr. Petritsch to implement the Peace
Agreement. We appreciate the courageous measures
taken to establish and strengthen vital institutions, so
important for the consolidation of multi-ethnic
democracy in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In particular,
we welcome the establishment of an independent
judicial commission charged with bringing about
reforms to the justice system and the measures being
taken to strengthen human rights institutions. We
believe that the education sector should equally receive
the highest possible attention since schools are where
the younger generation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
have to translate into reality the ideal of multi-ethnic
harmony and coexistence.
We note with satisfaction that important
economic reforms are underway. Obviously, a
prosperous economy provides opportunities for
employment for the people and reduces the risk of
inter-communal tensions. We are also pleased that
refugees are now able to return home in larger
numbers. This is indicative of an improvement in interethnic understanding. We have no doubt that Mr.
Petritsch will continue to do, as a high priority,
everything possible to help create conditions so that all
refugees and displaced persons can return to the homes
that they abandoned due to the conflict.
We understand fully the challenges that Mr.
Petritsch faces with ethnic tensions rising again across
the border of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We wish to
encourage him to confront any new nationalistic action

17

S/PV.4303

that spills over into Bosnia and Herzegovina with the
determination that he has demonstrated in all his work
so far. We assure him of the total support of our
delegation.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Ukraine.
First of all, let me join the previous speakers in
thanking High Representative Petritsch for his
comprehensive briefing and report covering the
activities of his Office and the developments in Bosnia
and Herzegovina over the past six months.
Ukraine welcomes the undeniable successes of
the international community, represented in Bosnia and
Herzegovina by Mr. Petritsch, in assisting the peoples
of that country to implement the Dayton/Paris Peace
Accords. We are encouraged by the positive tendencies,
proving that the general situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is becoming increasingly stable. In
particular, we are satisfied with the increase in refugee
returns, a continuation of the development of political
pluralism and growing support among the population
for more moderate political parties, which was clearly
demonstrated during the general elections in November
2000. We also believe that the formation last month of
the non-nationalist Council of Ministers is also a
favourable factor for further progress.
We commend the efforts by the High
Representative over the period under review in pursuit
of implementation of the peace, specifically in the
three key strategic areas of economic reform, refugee
return and the consolidation of the common
institutions, as identified by the Peace Implementation
Council in May 2000. We welcome the Office of the
High Representative’s focus on the implementation of
the decision by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court, known as the “constituent
peoples’ case”, as well as the decision to restructure
the constitutional commissions in the parliaments of
the Federation and the Republika Srpska.
In our view, the advancement of economic
reforms should continue to be a key element of the
international community’s strategy for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In this respect, we welcome all the steps
made by the High Representative in pursuit of
economic reforms in the financial, labour and pension
sectors, in creating a favourable environment for the
effective functioning of industry and trade and in
promoting the privatization process.

18

While noting the remarkable progress on the
returns of minorities over the past year compared with
1999, we believe that more should be done to ensure
conditions of security for their return and equality of
their citizen rights. In this respect, it is of particular
importance to make the property laws effective, to
promote further comprehensive judiciary reform and to
establish human rights institutions. My delegation
applauds measures taken by the High Representative in
this regard.
I would also like to stress the importance of
ensuring respect for the human rights not only of the
three constituent peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
but also of its national minorities. For example, the
Ukrainian national minority constitutes the fourth
largest ethnic group in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
following the Muslims, Serbs and Croats. Along with
other peoples, the Ukrainians experienced considerable
suffering during the war in Bosnia, victims of ethnic
cleansing. At present, conditions for their national,
political and cultural revival in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are far from being satisfactory. In our
view, this situation could be partly remedied if the
necessary additional legislation that would ensure full
respect for the rights of national minorities was passed.
Therefore, we invite the High Representative to give
proper thought to this idea.
This delegation is convinced that only the
consistent and continued commitment of the parties to
the implementation of the Peace Agreement in all its
aspects will pave the way towards further progress and
economic reconstruction in Bosnia. Therefore, we
cannot support any attempts to revise the Dayton
process. In our view, any amendments to that process
would risk destabilizing the situation, both in Bosnia
and in the region as a whole.
We are seriously worried at the recent
aggravation of the relations between the High
Representative and the Croat political parties of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Federation, united in the Croat
National Congress. Of particular concern is the fact
that the conflict is developing in the light of the results
of last year’s general elections. These developments
could seriously destabilize the situation in the whole
country, threatening to reverse the positive changes of
last year’s elections, in which moderate forces
overtook nationalists for the first time since the signing
of the Peace Agreement.

S/PV.4303

We reject any unilateral attempts to establish any
parallel structures or governing bodies on the territories
dominated by the Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina
which are inconsistent with the Dayton Agreements
and the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Thus
we support the intervention of the High Representative
in this situation. There is an obvious need to avoid any
further escalation of tensions in the current situation.
We call on the leaders of the Croat National Congress,
the international community and the legitimate
governing institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
engage in a constructive dialogue, with a view to
reaching compromise decisions.
However, being supportive of the activities of the
High Representative, we would caution him to weigh
once again all of the pros and cons of the possible
decision to impose economic sanctions on the areas
populated by Croats. This step could have negative
consequences for all the population of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
In our view, a constructive mediatory role in
working out the differences between the Croatian
political leaders of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Federation and the international community can be
played by the Republic of Croatia, as a country which
has clearly demonstrated its European aspirations and
its devotion to democracy and peace and stability in the
region and to the Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement.
We also encourage the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, which has recently signed a special
relationship agreement with the Republika Srpska, to
do its utmost to ensure the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina for the sake of
promoting the consolidation of democracy, stability
and national reconciliation in that country.
It is our belief that the final goal of the
implementation of the Dayton Accords should be the
creation of a multi-ethnic, multicultural, united state of
Bosnia and Herzegovina that is based on the
democratic and humanitarian ideals of modern Europe
and oriented in its development towards integration
into the European Union and friendship and
cooperation with other democratic States of the region.
We hope that the presidential statement to be
adopted shortly will serve to achieve this goal.

Finally, my delegation reconfirms its support for
the activities of the High Representative and wishes
him and his staff every success.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to whom I
give the floor.
Mr. Zivalj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): It is my
honour and pleasure, Sir, to address the Security
Council under your presidency. Since this is the first
time I am making a statement before the Security
Council in my new capacity as Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the
United Nations, allow me to express my gratitude to
the Security Council for all of its efforts to strengthen
peace and assist Bosnia and Herzegovina on its path to
full and consistent implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. I should like also to convey my
appreciation for the kind words of welcome expressed
to me and for the support for my future work in this
Organization, and to offer my unreserved cooperation
and state my preparedness to work closely with the
members of the Security Council.
Allow me also to express our appreciation to
Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement, for all his
efforts and the work he has done in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I thank him for the comprehensive and
up-to-date briefing we have just heard.
In my statement, I would like to focus on two
issues which are crucial to the full and consistent
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement and, in
the long run, to the establishment of a stable,
democratic, multi-ethnic and multireligious State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as it once was.
The first issue is the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons, which is stipulated by the
provisions of annex 7 of the Peace Agreement,
pursuant to which each and every internally displaced
person or refugee has the right to return to his or her
prewar home in safety and dignity. As pointed out in
Mr. Petritsch’s report,
“progress has been made in the field of refugee
return,” (S/2001/219, p. 3)

19

S/PV.4303

and 67,000 so-called minority returns were registered
in 2000 throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina.
One the one hand, this is encouraging, but, on the
other, more than five years after the signing of the
Peace Agreement, the number of people still waiting to
return is incomparably larger. This might be the
consequence of many factors, ranging from fear for
personal safety to lack of job opportunities. But one
thing is certain: the return of all displaced persons and
refugees, in accordance with the Peace Agreement,
should be accelerated, or time will become a major
factor, and too many refugees and internally displaced
persons will simply accept the fact that ethnic
cleansing has been successfully completed. That is why
we should do everything in our power to accelerate
returns
throughout
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina,
particularly to minority areas.
Secondly, the full deployment of the State Border
Service, established pursuant to the New York
Declaration, is of the utmost importance if we want to
be successful in combating the problems of drug
trafficking, trafficking in human beings, illegal
migration, corruption, smuggling and customs evasion.
With approximately 60 per cent of the State border
controlled, and only for a month, it is almost
impossible to effectively and successfully combat those
crimes. In this context, I would like to underline the
importance of the rapid and full establishment of the
State Border Service on all border crossings with
neighbouring countries. Given the transnational nature
of most of those crimes, this would contribute to
successfully combating them not only in Bosnia and
Herzegovina but in the region as a whole.
Finally, I would like to express our deep
appreciation to the High Representative, Mr. Petritsch,
and, indeed, to all those who are providing aid to
Bosnia and Herzegovina in support of peace and of the
implementation of the Peace Agreement, subsequent
declarations of the Peace Implementation Council, and
the New York Declaration.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Sweden. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Schori (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union — Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,

20

Slovakia and Slovenia — and the associated countries
of Cyprus, Malta and Turkey align themselves with this
statement.
I, too, would like, first of all, to thank the High
Representative, Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, for his
comprehensive and enlightening briefing on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The European
Union expresses its continued support to the High
Representative in his endeavours to ensure the
implementation of the Dayton/Paris Accords.
For the first time, more than five years after the
Dayton/Paris Agreements, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
a Government without the participation of nationalistic
parties. The Union expresses its hope that this
Government will carry out much-needed reforms and
work for the benefit of all the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The new Government will have the full
support of the EU in fulfilling commitments
undertaken in Dayton/Paris, notably as elaborated at
the Ministerial Meeting of the Peace Implementation
Council on 25 May 2000.
The European Union wishes to recall that the
citizens and peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina can
move towards Europe only in the framework of the
State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this context, the
EU condemns recent unilateral moves by the so-called
Croat National Congress of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
place itself outside the provisions of the Dayton/Paris
Accords. The EU calls on the Croats of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to work within the legal institutions of
their country at all levels to promote their interests.
The EU reiterates its support for the decision of
the High Representative to remove the Member of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Ante
Jelavic, and others from their publicly held offices and
their positions within the Croatian Democratic Union
(HDZ) following their repeated undermining of the
Dayton Peace Agreement. At the same time, the EU
welcomes the High Representative’s express desire to
maintain a dialogue with Bosnian Croats and to
encourage their participation in improving economic,
social and cultural conditions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The EU underlines the crucial role of
neighbouring countries in promoting a stable and
multi-ethnic Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The EU notes the recent establishment of a
special parallel relationship between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and Republika Srpska of

S/PV.4303

Bosnia and Herzegovina, and urges the High
Representative to monitor any further amendments to
it, in order to ensure that it remains consistent with the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
The EU notes with satisfaction the progress
which is being made across the region in bringing
individuals to account for abuses of power and criminal
offences which were committed under the cover of
previous undemocratic regimes. The EU welcomes the
decision by the former President of the Republika
Srpska in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mrs. Biljana
Plavsic, to voluntarily present herself at The Hague in
order to cooperate with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). The EU
calls upon all other persons indicted by the ICTY to
surrender themselves to the Tribunal and urges relevant
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as
elsewhere, to comply with their obligation to fully
cooperate with the Tribunal and to arrest all indictees
who remain at large.
The EU wishes to encourage the High
Representative to review current international civil
implementation structures in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and to make proposals as to their streamlining with a
view to ensuring the most effective coordination of all
international actors. Being one of these actors, the EU
is determined to sustain its long-term commitment to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Union is the main troop
contributor to Bosnia and Herzegovina and remains by
far the largest donor of long-term economic assistance.
The commitment of the EU is also expressed in the
Stabilization and Association Process, this being the
path for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s rapprochement with
the Union. The EU wishes to stress the urgent need to
implement political, economic, democratic, human
rights and rule of law reforms, as outlined in the EU
Road Map, in order to allow a move to the next stage
of the Stabilization and Association Process, namely, a
feasibility study.
The EU expresses its support for all efforts aimed
at enhanced regional cooperation, in conformity with
the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and
the inviolability of the borders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the States in the region. In this
context, the EU recalls the role of the Stability Pact and
the instruments it has put in place in order to increase
cross-border cooperation and achieve regional stability.

The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Croatia. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): First of all, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
discussion, and High Representative Petritsch for his
comprehensive report. Let me also greet the new
Permanent Representatives of Tunisia and especially of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, who arrived in New York just
at the most appropriate time.
Croatia
remains
vitally
interested
in
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The fact that
Croats are one of the three constituent peoples in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is far from being the only
reason for our interest in that country. The stability of
Bosnia and Herzegovina bears direct relevance for the
stability and, moreover, the prosperity of Croatia itself.
The shape and the length of our country’s border with
Bosnia and Herzegovina alone supports this argument.
Moreover, Croatia’s aspirations towards European
integration are greatly influenced by developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Croatian foreign policy
has often been evaluated in terms of its policy towards
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Both countries rely heavily
on each other’s traffic infrastructure and are important
trade partners.
It is therefore self-evident why my Government
firmly supports a stable, politically and economically
self-sustainable Bosnia and Herzegovina. Croatia
supports a Bosnia and Herzegovina that will be able to
take its place in the European integration processes.
However, we recognize that these goals still lie a long
way ahead. Croatia is unsatisfied with the progress
made so far, and is concerned with the present state of
affairs. It is an appropriate time to assess where we
stand now, where are we going and what we can do to
speed up the attainment of a self-sustainable Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The major problems in Bosnia and Herzegovina
remain refugee returns, economic revitalization and
proper functioning and development of its institutions.
So far, no substantial refugee returns have occurred,
particularly in regard to minority returns in Republika
Srpska. Just as an illustration, only 1 per cent of Croats
have returned to their homes in Republika Srpska since
1995. As time goes by, fewer and fewer people,
especially Croats, see their future in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. They have already settled in

21

S/PV.4303

neighbouring or third countries, and they are losing
hope. Despite the fact that the international community
spent more then $5 billion trying to sort things out in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the economic development
and substantial growth have not yet taken place.
The present constitutional arrangement in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is the one that could have been agreed
upon by all sides at the time when it was negotiated.
Even though it has not been fully implemented, it
served the primary purpose of the Peace Accords: to
stop the bloodshed. Today, the major task that the
international community and the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina face is to prevent the constitutional
structure of the country from becoming its permanent
source of instability. The constitutional structure of
Bosnia and Herzegovina must continue to develop and
evolve with the dynamics of the country’s political,
economic and social life.
For a long time, Croatia has been drawing the
attention of the international community to the main
contradiction within Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
constitutional structure: namely, the integrity of the
country on the one hand, and its de facto partition, on
the other. Dayton tried to reconcile the peoples of
Bosnia and Herzegovina via pledges to create joint
institutions which, in turn, were to secure their
respective basic interests and preserve the values of a
multi-ethnic society. The pledge to reverse ethnic
cleansing and to restore the pre-war demographic
composition fed people’s hopes and raised
expectations. At the same time, Dayton did not provide
any guidance as to how to manage this inbuilt
conceptual contradiction in the Peace Agreement. It
thereby froze the lines of confrontation between the
Republika Srpska and the Federation to a certain
extent, legitimizing the borders drawn by force. In this
regard, Dayton remains unfinished business.
Besides refugee returns, the crucial test of
implementing both the letter and the spirit of Dayton as
a living document lies in the full implementation of the
decision of the Constitutional Court on the
constitutionality of all three constituent peoples, as
well as in bringing the Constitution of the Republika
Srpska and the structure of its Parliament into line with
the spirit of Dayton and the Constitutions of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the Federation. As long as some
of the three constituent peoples are excluded from
exercizing their rights in Republika Srpska, the

22

integrity and self-sustainability
Herzegovina remains unrealistic.

of

Bosnia

and

The Republika Srpska has led its own life as an
ethnically, almost pure, para-State of Serbian people,
whilst the Federation has been struggling to maintain a
proper balance between its lesser Croat and larger
Bosniac population.
The Croatian Government regrets that some of
the political grievances of the Croatian population in
Bosnia and Herzegovina have been addressed in an
inappropriate manner by some of its elected
representatives. Primarily, I refer to unilateral decisions
taken by some Croatian political actors at their recent
gathering in Mostar. The Mostar Declaration leads the
Croatian community in Bosnia and Herzegovina onto
the road of isolation and, thereby, furthers
marginalization. This course of action, can by no
means, be of any benefit to them. At the same time, it
is damaging both for the interests of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and for Croatia. As a matter of principle,
ultimatums are not the method that we approve of now,
or in the future, when it comes to dealing with sensitive
issues. This principle applies equally to all parties,
including international actors involved in settling
political problems in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We understand the reaction of the High
Representative to the Mostar Declaration. My
Government views the High Representative’s
intervention as an act directed only against individuals,
and not as an action directed against the Croatian
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina as a whole. We
see it as a reaction against radical methods being used,
and not as a step against the legitimate interests of the
Croatian community in Bosnia and Herzegovina as
recognized by Dayton. We do hope that the Croatian
people in Bosnia and Herzegovina will also see it in
this way.
Leaving aside the radical and inappropriate
reaction by some political forces, the existence of real
problems and legitimate fears held by the Croatian
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot simply
be ignored. A striking indicator that something is not
right is the systematic departure of the Croatian
population from Bosnia and Herzegovina, which has
continued even after Dayton. Altogether, in the past ten
years the proportion of the Croat population in Bosnia
and Herzegovina dropped from 17 to 10 per cent.

S/PV.4303

The Croats form the smallest constituent nation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. They live in ethnically mixed
territories of Bosnia and Herzegovina and they do not
have their own entity. Consequently, they cannot rely
on the same factors as the other two constituent nations
in Bosnia and Herzegovina for protecting their identity
and interests, such as size or having a separate entity.
They can only rely on the functioning institutions of
the Bosnian State, that is, the institutions that reflect
fully the decision of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina regarding the equality and
constitutionality of all three constituent nations
throughout the entire territory of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina can
lend their trust only to a political system that
guarantees them the preservation of their national,
cultural and religious identity, and allows them to be
genuinely represented in all joint institutions. These are
also the very goals of the living Dayton Peace Accords.
Have they been achieved? Have the measures
undertaken by the international community facilitated
their achievement?
On the eve of the elections in October last year,
my Government expressed its concern about some of
the regulations of the Provisional Election
Commission. Croatia approached the officials of the
Organization for Security and Development in Europe
(OSCE) and advised them that the adopted regulations
were contrary to the Constitution of the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the spirit of Dayton. We
expressed our concerns that the Croats in Bosnia and
Herzegovina could perceive these regulations as a
threat to their genuine representation in joint
institutions. Croatia feared that, if those regulations
were to be implemented, they could backfire and
radicalize the Croatian community in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Unfortunately, we were right.
Croatia believes that the Dayton goals must be
implemented. However, we do not conceive the project
of implementation as a static notion, but rather as a
dynamic one. It requires an appropriate evolution of
joint institutions, which must ensure genuine
representation and protection of all three constituent
peoples throughout the territory of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. All problems must be resolved within
these joint institutions through a democratic process.
This is the road to a democratic and self-sustainable
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Croatia stands ready to
facilitate this process.

Following the elections in the Republic of Croatia
in January last year, Croatia’s assistance to the
Croatian people in Bosnia and Herzegovina changed in
terms of method and substance. It became transparent
and oriented towards economic, cultural and social
programmes instead of military ones. At the same time,
Croatia will continue to support the territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the efforts to develop
democracy and preserve the equality of all the
constituent peoples. In this respect, the admission of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Council of Europe can
be an important contribution, and should therefore be
speeded up. We will do our utmost to provide help and
assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina because we need
a stable neighbour — a partner we can count on in our
joint quest for a European future.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Sahovic (Yugoslavia): As another newcomer
here today, I should like to assure you, your
Excellency, and other members of the Security Council
that I am looking forward to our future cooperation.
I should like, first of all, to thank Mr. Wolfgang
Petritsch, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for his very informative statement, as
well as for his report on the implementation of the
Peace Agreement.
I wish to assure Mr. Petritsch of my
Government’s continued support for his work and its
readiness to cooperate with him in the future.
May I also on this occasion emphasize the full
commitment of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to a
consistent implementation of, and full respect for, the
letter and the spirit of the Dayton/Paris Agreement. We
expect that all other participants in the implementation
of the Agreement are also committed to that process.
This, we believe, is in the best interest of the three
constituent peoples in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well
as of stabilization and the development of cooperation
in the region.
Since the last meeting of the Security Council on
the implementation of the Dayton/Paris Agreement, the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has taken a number of
important steps which confirm, in word and in deed,
the resolve of my country to normalize relations with

23

S/PV.4303

Bosnia and Herzegovina and to address problems of
particular interest both for Yugoslavia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina and for the region as a whole. To begin
with, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina have established diplomatic relations
and will soon exchange ambassadors. Our two
countries are determined to develop all-round
cooperation based on good-neighbourliness and mutual
respect, as well as on respect for the principles of
territorial
integrity,
sovereignty
and
political
independence.
Several representatives have mentioned the
agreement on special relations between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republika Srpska,
some of them expressing some concern over the issue.
Let me say a few words on that subject. As members
know, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
Republika Srpska recently signed an agreement on the
establishment of special relations, in accordance with
the Dayton/Paris Agreement, which fully respects the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Agreement is not only based on the
Dayton/Paris Agreement, but provides also for its
further affirmation. It reflects the need of both the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republika
Srpska to regulate mutual relations in the fields of the
economy, culture and science, as well as in other fields.
Certainly, transparency of cooperation is the essential
element of the agreement.
The harmonization and finalization of a
substantial number of inter-State agreements is under
way between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, primarily in the fields of
economic cooperation, trade, investment, customs and
transport, as well as with regard to providing legal
assistance in criminal and civil matters. The aim is to
make it possible for the citizens of the two countries,
tied by family, friendship or business bonds, to solve
outstanding problems, particularly in the sphere of
social and related issues that affect people’s everyday
lives.
Also nearing completion are negotiations with
Bosnia and Herzegovina on establishing an inter-State
council at the level of State Presidents, aimed at
coordinating and encouraging overall bilateral
relations.
Finally, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is
vitally interested in the return to their homes of all

24

refugees and displaced persons from across the former
Yugoslavia. It is our expectation that the registration of
refugees and displaced persons now under way in
Yugoslavia will provide a complete picture of the
situation and important parameters for solving this key
issue.
We are convinced that there is no alternative to
the consistent implementation of the Dayton/Paris
Agreement in all its segments. All efforts and solutions
in the framework of the Agreement and serving the
interests of the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
peace and stability in the region will be supported by
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which is ready to
take part in those efforts. Well aware that the primary
responsibility lies with Bosnia and Herzegovina, its
leaders and its peoples, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, however, as a next-door neighbour, is
willing and ready, in the best possible way, to make a
constructive contribution, alongside other international
actors, to the well-being of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Petritsch to respond to comments and questions
raised.
Mr. Petritsch: I know that time is running short,
but I believe that it is very important to try to answer
the questions that were put to me, because the
questions and issues raised indicate the great interest of
the Security Council and its continued commitment to
supporting the peace implementation process in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. That is not a small matter; it is a lot.
It means a lot to me as the High Representative there,
as well as to the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
who really count on the Council.
A whole array of pertinent issues have been
raised. Let me start with the Russian Federation, whose
representative raised three questions. First, there is the
question of the defence doctrine. I can assure the
Council that solid progress has been made on getting
the Presidency to agree on a common defence policy.
All the contentious issues were agreed upon at the
recent 7 March meeting, with the exception of the
status of the Croat component in the Federation army. I
believe that final agreement will now have to await the
selection of the new member of the Presidency, which
will take place in due course. I am quite confident that
very soon thereafter we will have a common defence
policy paper agreed upon by all three ethnic
communities — by all three constituent peoples.

S/PV.4303

The next question related to cantonization. The
Russian representative quoted me as saying that I had
found the proposal interesting. Yes, I find it interesting
in academic terms, but there is no time and no space, as
I have repeatedly stated publicly in interviews; now we
need to follow, and fully implement, Dayton. There are
means — to which I will come back later — by which
to make progress within the Dayton Accords and based
upon the Dayton Accords. Basically there is the
Constitutional Court, which serves as such an
instrument. The constitutional commissions which I
established are of an interim nature; they need to come
up with proposals, in both entities, on how to improve
the two constitutions, and on how to put in place
Constitutional Court decisions.
I very much appreciated the statement made by
the representative of France. His Foreign Minister,
Mr. Védrine, on 9 March, was the first to visit the
newly established authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. That visit was very well received, and I
would like to encourage other Governments to
demonstrate support for the new Governments, both at
the State level and at entity level. What was so
important about the visit of Mr. Védrine was the fact
that he referred to the urgency of economic reform.
That is really centre-stage in my programme and in the
Government programme. The European Union road
map shows the way towards the “Europeanization” of
Bosnia and Herzegovina — another of the key words
that I would like to use in this context. I am convinced,
together with the European Union, that the next year
and a half will be a window of opportunity for starting
genuine reform that will be truly embraced by the local
Government and not just by the international
community.
With reference to the Srebrenica issue, I very
much appreciated the statement by the representative of
Bangladesh. I can give the Council a progress report.
In the interim, I have established a board, including the
United Nations, to oversee the implementation of plans
for the cemetery and the memorial. However, in
parallel I have asked the international agencies on the
ground to come up with a Srebrenica action plan,
because I believe that it is very important to put to rest
the victims of the Srebrenica tragedy. But at the same
time, we should also prepare for the future and support
reconstruction — in a physical sense as well as in a
social sense for the people of Srebrenica. I am
convinced that the Srebrenica action plan will in fact

do its job, in terms of accelerated return and economic
revival.
I very much appreciate the support of the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) in particular, in providing
the necessary security environment, as well as the
United Nations mission, for providing the financial
means needed to put the multi-ethnic police in
Srebrenica in place.
With regard to the question on the conclusion of
the United Nations mission, I must say that Jacques
Klein has assured me that he will be able to keep to the
timetable. So I am quite confident that the remaining
tasks of the United Nations will be properly
implemented. In addition to the changing role of
United Nations engagement there, the role of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) is changing — the most recent elections were
the last ones where the OSCE was fully in charge. As
indicated by the presidency of the European Union, I
have been asked by the European Union to look into
the streamlining of the international presence in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and, of course, I intend to do so in
accordance with my mandate and in close consultation
with the steering board. I will, of course, cooperate
very closely with the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) and the OSCE in this.
My contacts with Belgrade are, in fact, very
close. I very much appreciate what the representative
of Yugoslavia said. We have close relations with
Belgrade, and we are working together very closely, in
particular in conjunction with the Special Parallel
Relationship Agreement. My office was able to secure
a leading role for the Office of the High Representative
in the further implementation of, as well as in
negotiations in regard to the annexes for, the Special
Parallel Relationship Agreement.
The representative of the United States described
the priorities which I set, and which I have been
following since I took on this job one and a half years
ago: refugee return, strengthening the State-level
institutions and, above all, as the driving force behind
them, economic reform. We now realize how important
these priorities are; over time, they have even increased
in relevance. I believe that we need to continue to
follow this three-pronged approach.
Of course, in general I must say that I am taking
what I would call a dual approach: on the one hand, I
am reaching out to try to convince the local leadership

25

S/PV.4303

to implement what Dayton is asking them to do; and on
the other hand, of course, — and if necessary — I will
continue to act decisively in order to ensure that the
Dayton Accords are being implemented.
When it comes to the issue of ownership, it was
very helpful when the representative of China pointed
out that there is a certain tendency towards
dependency. Early on, I called this the “dependency
syndrome”, which we must be aware of: the local
authorities depend too much on the international
community. That was the reason why I put forward the
concept of ownership, which is basically building
awareness. This is a process; it will not happen
overnight. Indeed, it is not happening overnight. But
the new Government has, I believe, moved decisively
closer to embracing my idea of ownership.
Again, as I have said, I will, wherever necessary,
continue to act very decisively, because I know that
time is running out. The patience of the international
community is running out, and there are other problems
throughout the globe that the Security Council needs to
address.
With regard to refugee return, a nongovernmental organization from the United States —
Human Rights Watch — pointed out that last year
refugee return in Bosnia and Herzegovina produced a
“breakthrough”. I am very much appreciative of this
report, because it points out the progress that has been
made without obfuscating the fact that there are still
many, many issues that need to be addressed.
With regard to the Special Parallel Relationship
Agreement, which I have already touched upon and
which was also addressed by the United States
representative, I can assure him that there is going to
be
continued
international
engagement
and
involvement. I have managed in my talks and
negotiations with President Kostunica, first and
foremost, to secure that, in the preamble to this
Agreement, the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina is
mentioned very prominently, so that, by signing on to
the Special Parallel Relations Agreement, both the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the entity of the
Republika Srpska are also signing up to the idea of the
integrity and sovereignty of the State — to the idea that
there is a State of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and not just
two entities. I consider this extremely important, and
we will, of course, continue to monitor the
negotiations. I have also reserved the right to be the

26

final authority in this context when it comes to the
implementation of the Special Parallel Relationship
Agreement.
Of course, we also attach priority to the early
passing of the election law. Again, that is one of the
recurring issues. Another issue of specific importance
was raised by the representative of Tunisia — that of
demining. I can assure him that I raised this issue just
two days ago during my last steering board meeting at
the political director level. I asked the steering board
political directors to go back to their individual capitals
and support what I put forward there: continued
support for funding demining in Bosnia and
Herzegovina — a very important prerequisite for
stabilizing and normalizing the country.
The United Kingdom also raised a few issues. I
have in part already answered some of them. One of
the questions related to what more can be done to get
the refugees back. That question was also raised by
Jamaica. Of course, now, with the new governments,
domestic efforts need to be reinforced. For a couple of
months, we have had a refugee Ministry at the State
level. We have a new Minister there now from a
moderate Croat party, and I expect efforts to be
redoubled at the domestic level. Naturally, we will only
be successful eventually with refugee return if we
manage the economic revitalization of the country. It is
one thing to return; it is another thing to find a job in
the area that has been returned to. It is also a question
of education — a question that was raised here, and I
very much appreciate that, too. It is a matter of
security. Again, SFOR plays a crucial role in this
context, and it will need to continue to do so.
The questions and problems relating to refugee
return are different now. Up until 1999, the question
was, “Is there going to be refugee return at all into
minority areas, in particular into areas like the
Republika Srpska?” Now the question is only, “How
fast?”. This needs our full support — our full political
and economic support and, of course, financial support
for those brave returnees who dare to return.
The Croat representative here in the Council also
raised the question of the regional aspect of refugee
returns. I believe this is a very important issue, and that
the Stability Pact is working in this regard. I would
very much like to encourage Croatia and Yugoslavia to
cooperate fully with the Stability Pact. We in the Office
of the High Representative are in very close contact

S/PV.4303

with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), which is one of
the leading, driving forces in the area of refugee
returns.
However, there is one problem with regard to
Croat refugees. The representative of Croatia rightly
addressed the issue of the poor results in returns of
Croats to the Republika Srpska. Unfortunately, I must
say that a few of the many Croat villages and houses
that the international community has restored are still
uninhabited because the Croats who lived there simply
do not want to go back home. This is for several
reasons, all of them probably legitimate ones.
Nevertheless, I believe that if the international
community reaches out and makes an extra effort, then
we can also expect the host countries to make an extra
effort to motivate and encourage returns as well. I
consider this particularly important in the case of
Croats.
The next question, from the United Kingdom, had
to do with whether there is an outreach effort, so to
speak, with regard to the Croats. The answer is, very
much so. This is because my strategy is a two-pronged
one. On the one hand, we need decisive and tough
action to be taken on my part because I simply cannot
allow the President of a country to breach the
Constitution to try to establish illegal institutions. That
is something that simply cannot be tolerated. This is an
exercise in the establishment of the rule of law, and
there cannot be any compromise here. On the other
hand, we are trying to reach out wherever possible
because the Croat people — one of the three
constituent peoples — are part and parcel of the idea of
a State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. There is no State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina without the Croats.
But that also has to be recognized by the Bosnian
Croat leadership. I can assure the Council that the
Croats who are now in the Government are all very
much appreciative with regard to the idea of a multiethnic Bosnia and Herzegovina. We now have a Croat
Prime Minister in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have a
Croat President in the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, where most of the Croats live. We have
many ministers, of course. We have a Minister for
Refugees who is of Croat origin, as well as many more.
So the Croats are equally represented in the new,
reformed Governments. They are not members of the
Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ).

This is what a democratic party needs to take into
consideration: change is possible in a democracy. This
is what the voters decide. That is the real cause of the
turmoil in the HDZ; because, for the first time in 10
years, they are excluded from Governments. By the
way, they are excluded in the same manner as are the
two other parties in the Republika Srpska, including
the Democratic Action Party (SDA). They are excluded
from governing or holding the posts of Prime Minister
or those of any other minister. That needs to be
accepted by parties. This is also something of a novel
situation confronting nationalist parties.
The HDZ has chosen the path of confrontation,
which is naturally not acceptable in a democracy. Of
course, there are other reasons why the HDZ feels so
much pressure now. As the representative of Croatia
has expressed, the new Croatian Government has
completely stopped supporting the HDZ politically and
financially. We need to continue to support the Croat
people, but we need to make it clear to them that they
are not represented solely by the HDZ. There are many
other opportunities and possibilities to be represented,
the most important being the Governments of the
Federation and the State. They, in turn, also have the
greatest responsibility in inviting the Croat community
to take part in the political processes in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Going back to the Special Parallel Relationship
Agreement, I think it is also important to point out that
I have succeeded in having some of the issues included
in that Agreement taken out because they need to be
regulated at the State level. I very much encouraged
President Koštunica to establish State-to-State relations
and to have the pertinent agreements made at the State
level, and he promised to do so. For example, the dual
citizenship issue was taken out of the Special Parallel
Agreement by me. This issue will now be handled at
the State level.
I also appreciate very much the United
Kingdom’s support for the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, as well as its
continued focus on this issue. I consider this to be one
of the most basic and important of issues. There is
never going to be reconciliation in the area unless
justice is done. That is something that we need to keep
in mind constantly.
The next very important question, which was
raised by the representatives of Ireland and Bosnia and

27

S/PV.4303

Herzegovina, has to do with the State Border Service. I
appreciate very much that Ambassador Zivalj has
placed so much emphasis on the State Border Service.
As the Council knows, I had to impose this law at the
beginning of last year after it was put forward in the
New York Declaration by the Presidents but,
unfortunately, not followed up by the tripartite
Presidency. The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) is now implementing it in a
very professional way. I appreciate very much the
efforts being made in this regard.
However, we also need to keep in mind that the
functioning of viable State institutions needs to be seen
in the wider context of what a country can afford. I
believe we need to see to it that the local budgets are
eventually able to finance the State Border Service. We
are therefore working very closely with the local
authorities to come up with realistic budgetary figures
so that the State Border Service will move forward as
expected. At the same time, I do not think we currently
need a Mercedes in Bosnia and Herzegovina; I think a
Volkswagen is good enough in order to establish an
efficient and very professional State Border Service in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I think I have already answered the first question
asked by Singapore. My interpretation is that the Croat
rebellion is now really more of a dying gasp than
anything else. Nevertheless, we need to be very
vigilant when it comes to such issues. Unfortunately, in
Bosnia and Herzegovina the idea of the rule of law and
fully embracing the Constitution is not very
widespread. We need to enforce and reinforce
awareness of the rule of law as the basis of every State
and community. This idea very much needs to be
promoted. I have already spoken about the parties that
are now out of power and the fact that Croatia no
longer supports the activities of the HDZ.
With regard to whether the Dayton Agreement
should be modified or rectified, I would like to indicate
again that the Dayton Accords will remain the basis for
peace implementation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I
know that the Dayton Accords are not perfect — this
has been mentioned here. It is a living document. There
are two institutions that can improve the situation. The
first is the High Representative as the final authority in
the implementation of the Dayton Accords; I am using
my powers to the utmost in order to make progress, but
that, of course, needs to be within the framework of the
Dayton Accords. The second and more important one

28

in the long run is the Constitutional Court, and it has
already acted. In unison with the Constitutional Court,
I have implemented, as an interim measure, the fact
that all three constituent peoples are now constituent
throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina.
To again touch upon the Croat side, Croats for the
first time are now a constituent people, along with the
Bosniacs and of course the Serbs, in Republika Srpska.
Since I issued the decision on 11 January, Croats and
Bosniacs have the veto right in Republika Srpska. They
can oppose and veto any legislation that goes against
their vital interest. This is the way forward for Bosnia
and Herzegovina. This is the way that I see the
improvement — or rather the evolution — of the
Dayton Accords.
Regarding the elections in the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and ripple effects, there were indeed
generally very positive effects, because now, for the
first time, we have in Belgrade an interlocutor — we
have a partner again. But, on the other hand, in the
short-run in a way it had some problematic aspects —
this very quick move to establish the Agreement on
Special Parallel Relations is one such indicator.
However, in general I must say that I am quite
optimistic that Belgrade, in the medium-term, will
become as responsible a partner in the Dayton
implementation as Croatia already is.
Let me move on to the next question. Colombia
asked where the real support for the nationalists comes
from. We need to keep in mind that — talking again
about the Dayton Accords — the nationalist parties
were left in place in Dayton. Even worse, they were
able to legitimize their existence through elections
under Dayton. We needed a long time — up until the
last elections, almost five years — to get, through the
democratic process of elections, the three nationalist
parties into some sort of a minority situation. Again, it
was already pointed out that it is a very thin majority
that exists at the State level and at the Federation level
in regard to moderate parties. Nevertheless, for the first
time now, we have a realistic opportunity that moderate
politics will succeed in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Let me just refer to the President and to Ukraine
in regard to the Ukrainian minority in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which is the fourth largest group in the
country. Let me assure you that when implementing the
constitutional commission and the Constitutional Court
decision, I took the liberty to include as the fourth

S/PV.4303

group “the others.” So, for the first time now, the
minorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, be it Ukrainians
or Roma or others, have a say in both entities, are
represented in the constitutional commissions and will
have a say in the future permanent establishment of
this body.
I can also assure you that economic sanctions
against the Croats were never envisioned. We are
moving against individuals, as I have indicated time
and again, and not against the Croat people. I deeply
believe that the majority of the Croats, who are decent
people, want to cooperate. But of course, as long as the
leadership is such, it is indeed quite difficult. I am,
however, quite confident that this will change over
time. This will change now also with the new
Governments in place.
I very much appreciate the statement by Sweden
on behalf of the European Union. I fully agree and very
much appreciate the support of my work in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The European Union naturally is one of
the most important partners there.
I have already made reference to the last two
speakers and would commend the excellent analysis by
the representative of Croatia. I believe that the
Constitutional Court decision will in fact do the trick
for the smallest community, the Croats. The legitimate
fears that exist are indeed legitimate, inasmuch as we
are looking into how to reach out and how to resolve
the issues that are of real concern to the Croat people. I
can assure you that I will find a way to accommodate
the legitimate concerns of the Croat people. I have
already
established
a
dialogue
with
Croat
representatives,
including
moderate
HDZ

representatives. Only three days after I had to dismiss
President Jelavic and three of the Vice Presidents of the
HDZ, the two remaining Vice Presidents asked for a
meeting, and we actually had a quite constructive first
meeting about the issues that concern the Croat
community. Again, I am quite confident that we will be
able to find a way out.
Lastly, the representative of Croatia raised the
issue of accession to the Council of Europe. Let me
assure you that I am quite confident that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will manage to join the Council of Europe
in the course of this year. We are working very closely
in order to fulfil the last remaining preconditions set
forth by the Council of Europe. Incidentally, right now
there is a delegation from the Council of Europe
travelling in Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to make
a last assessment of the situation there.
As I am coming to a close, let me say how much I
appreciate the interest that you have demonstrated in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in my work there. I very
much appreciate all the support that was expressed and
am looking forward to my next report here with,
hopefully, even better results and better information
from the ground in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The President: I thank Mr. Petritsch for his
detailed reply to the questions raised and for the
clarifications that he has provided.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

29
