United Nations

S/PV.6473

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6473rd meeting
Tuesday, 25 January 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Barbalić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bosnia and Herzegovina)

Members:

Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 24 January 2011 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2011/30)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-21518 (E)

*1121518*

S/PV.6473

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Minute of silence
The President: At the outset of the meeting, I
should like, on behalf of the members of the Security
Council, to ask that all those present now stand and
join in observing a minute of silence in memory of the
victims of the heinous terrorist act perpetrated at
Domodedovo International Airport in Moscow on
24 January 2011. We express sincere sympathy and
condolences to the relatives of the citizens of the
Russian Federation and other countries who were
killed or injured.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 24 January 2011 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2011/30)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I should like to invite
the representative of Somalia to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Jack Lang, Special Adviser
to the Secretary-General on Legal Issues related to
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, and Mr. Stephen
Mathias, Assistant Secretary-General for Legal Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them a
photocopy of a letter dated 24 January 2011 from the
Secretary-General, transmitting the report of the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Legal
Issues Related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
which will be issued as document S/2011/30.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lang.
Mr. Lang (spoke in French): I have the honour to
present to the Security Council the main conclusions of
the task entrusted to me by the Secretary-General, in

2

coordination with the Security Council, on legal issues
related to piracy. Many observers have welcomed the
Secretary-General’s initiative to consider in-depth this
issue, which has become a priority and of which the
Security Council is clearly and resolutely seized.
Allow me first to commend the remarkable work
carried out by the Secretary-General, in particular in
his report (S/2010/394) on the seven options that the
Council reviewed in late August (see S/PV.6374). That
report guided my thinking and was an excellent basis
for my work. I would also like to thank Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Ms. Patricia O’Brien and their colleagues. The
task very greatly benefited from their support, and we
had ongoing and honest exchanges.
I would also like to thank Ambassador Augustine
Mahiga, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia, and Ambassador Thomas
Winkler, Chairman of the judicial working group of the
Contact Group on Somali Piracy. Our cooperation was
unwavering, honest, ongoing and enriching. We visited
the various countries of the region together.
As soon as I was appointed by the SecretaryGeneral on 26 August, I conducted numerous
consultations
with
50
States,
international
organizations, private companies and research
institutes. I went to most States in the region, in
particular Somalia, and to Puntland and Somaliland. I
visited prisons and talked with pirates detained not
only in Somalia, but also in Mombasa, Kenya.
I came from those consultations with a feeling of
extreme urgency. The situation is serious. I would even
say that it is worsening. Far from slowing down, each
day the phenomenon develops significantly. We have
seen the industrialization of the phenomenon, an
increasing number of pirates, sophisticated operations,
the increasing use of mother ships, the latest
technology, such as GPS, heavy weaponry, better
organization during attacks, seizures and the
negotiation of ransoms, and the gradual emergence of a
true industry and new professions linked to piracy,
including intermediaries, negotiators and interpreters.
Those signs of deterioration have been
complemented by intensified violence, the frequent use
of weapons, the occasional organization of simulated
executions, increasing recourse to private companies,
and the use of open force in taking hostages. We have
seen some examples of that over the past few days. In
addition, people are held longer — an average of 120

11-21518

S/PV.6473

days and sometimes up to a year. Lastly, we have seen
the geographical expansion of attacks to the entire
Indian Ocean. Such attacks, long restricted to the north,
today reach the southern and eastern Indian Ocean up to
1,500 kilometres off the coast. To some extent — I may
exaggerate a little here — the pirates are increasingly
becoming the masters of the Indian Ocean.
The situation is tragic for the victims, above all.
Nearly 2,000 hostages have been taken in two years.
Crews who have been taken hostage are sometimes
used as human shields in other attacks. It is a tragic
situation for the economies of the region, which have
seen loss of revenue, higher prices, lack of security in
the delivery of energy supplies, and the penetration of
piracy into the economy of local systems.
It is a tragic situation for Somalia itself, which
has endured difficulties in access to food aid and the
breakdown of traditional societies. Ultimately, it has
become an increasingly tragic situation for
international trade. Some 22,000 ships and 30 per cent
of the world’s oil transit that area every year, and at the
moment we are seeing an astonishing increase in
insurance premiums for that area, which has been
classified as a war zone.
In brief, the race between the pirates and the
international community is progressively being won by
the pirates. It is difficult to accept that the international
community should be so persistently defied by 1,500
pirates. The status quo is therefore no longer
satisfactory. I believe that the extreme gravity of the
situation requires emergency remedies.
Hence, the plan I am submitting focuses on two
ideas and two questions. The first question is: How can
we improve the current solutions? The second is: Can
we formulate new and ultimately more effective
solutions? I shall respond briefly to the first question,
which addresses an issue that the Council is well aware
of.
The report proposes a series of measures to lift
the legal obstacles to prosecuting pirates at sea and
imprisoning them. For example, the report suggests the
incorporation of the crime of piracy into the domestic
legislation of all States and the adaptation of maritime
detention to operational constraints. Similarly, in order
to improve the situation, we suggest facilitating the
submission of evidence, for instance by making it
easier to give testimony via video teleconferencing.
Perhaps the main point is the report’s proposal for the

11-21518

removal of a key obstacle hindering States’
prosecutorial jurisdiction — that is, the lack of
detention facilities in the States of the region. Concrete
proposals have been submitted for the Council’s
consideration in the report.
However, I believe that we need to face the truth.
Even if these and other proposals are adopted to
improve the outstanding work already carried out by
our navies — including those of Kenya, Seychelles and
Mauritius, which we congratulate on carrying out a
task of great importance to the international
community and international law — and even if these
proposals enhance current solutions, we will still
encounter difficulties in eradicating piracy. It is quite
clear and undeniable that nine out of 10 pirates
captured by our navies have to be released because
there is no effective agreement among most States to
prosecute them. Thus, impunity prevails. Nine out of
10 pirates are released because no jurisdiction is
prepared to prosecute them.
That is why I decided to seek other options not to
replace but to complement the very important solutions
that the members of the Council have supported and
encouraged. The consultations I have held pursuant to
the task conferred upon me have enabled me to focus
on the key idea that only making the legal and
detention processes Somali-owned can ensure that
prosecution is effective and end, to the extent possible,
the impunity enjoyed by pirates.
It is well known that Somalia is the main source
and Puntland the principal victim of piracy. For moral
and religious reasons linked to the devastating
consequences — including drugs, prostitution and
alcohol consumption — the Somali people themselves
are growing increasingly hostile to piracy. They are
ready to support efforts on the ground against piracy.
The fight against piracy must be supported by the
populations affected.
I would therefore suggest that a genuine plan
agreed with Somaliland and Puntland would help us to
increase the pace of our fight. The plan would
incorporate reciprocal, clearly affirmed and clearly
publicized commitments in compensation for real,
concrete evidence provided by the local authorities of
their actions against pirates. The international
community could thereby support the economic,
security, legal and detention efforts of the authorities of
those two regions.

3

S/PV.6473

Somaliland has already demonstrated its resolute
commitment against piracy. I have met the leaders of
Puntland, and in particular President Farole, on
numerous occasions, and they claim to be determined
to fight piracy and have taken initial detention
measures, in particular against one commander of the
pirates. I received a letter from President Farole
yesterday confirming his resolve and commitment.
I should just like to add a few comments on the
proposals I am submitting to the Council. I wish to
assert clearly, simply and directly that there is a need to
tackle piracy on the ground with the agreement of the
Somalis, or at least certain Somalis. I dare say that we
must target both the head — the commanders — and
the body — the pirates themselves. The mafia-like
gang leaders and the ordinary pirates clearly work hand
in hand.
Regarding those who give the orders, the Security
Council has already considered and spoken on this
subject. Thanks to the task conferred upon me, I have
been able to meet with representatives of many
specialized organizations — Interpol in particular, but
others as well — on this matter. My initial conclusion
is that everything has not been done to reach the top
and to get our hands on the instigators of these crimes.
We know the names of some dozen of these
masterminds, who receive the increasingly vast
ransoms that fuel piracy. Organizations that launder
money from piracy have been identified.
The report contains three relevant proposals. I
will not go into them in detail as I do not want to speak
at great length. These three proposals concern the
strengthening of forensic policing capacities, the
gathering of elements for investigation and evidence
that are often overlooked — such as fingerprints and
DNA from the boats that have been released, the
registration numbers of engines on motherships, the
registration numbers of transferred banknotes, the
systematic monitoring of financial flows — and the
application of individual sanctions against those who
order attacks, whose names are well known. The
Security Council knows how to target, reach and attack
these criminal leaders. That, in brief, is what I wanted
to tell the Council regarding those who lead and are the
principal beneficiaries of these criminal enterprises.
Secondly and in conclusion, with regard to what I
would call the “basic pirates”, those who actually do
the work at sea, the anti-piracy plan that I am

4

proposing to the Council includes both prevention and
clamp-down measures.
The prevention measures are above all economic
in nature. In this area it is very difficult to separate the
law from socio-economic reality. It is absolutely
crucial that young Somalis be given an alternative to
piracy. Support for economic development is possible
in very specific areas where a dynamic for
development can be put in place right away. I am
thinking in particular of the ports of Bosaso in
Puntland and Berbera in Somaliland. I am also thinking
about animal husbandry and livestock export, as well
as of developing telecommunications and, perhaps first
and foremost, fisheries.
The proposal with regard to fisheries — which
stems from different international experiences, in
particular lessons learned off the coast of Guinea —
calls for developing fisheries and for fishing
agreements to impose a requirement that 30 per cent of
fish be processed in Somalia. Along the same lines, it
is proposed that Somalia be able to declare the
contours of its maritime area with the help of the
United Nations. As the Council knows, as of today,
nothing has been defined — neither the limits of the
territorial waters nor the borders of the exclusive zone,
or the borders separating the different countries.
With regard to an issue that has often been
discussed here in the Security Council and in other
bodies, namely, the harm caused by illegal fishing and
the discharge of toxic waste off the coast of Somalia,
and particularly off of Puntland, I suggest that an
independent international committee of experts carry
out an objective study of the situation.
Other prevention measures are also proposed to
prevent pirates from taking to the seas and with regard
to monitoring and controlling of the coasts, the setting
up of police stations in pirates’ villages and the training
of coast guard personnel who can monitor from land
the departure of suspicious boats.
Those are some of prevention measures. I have
not mentioned them all; the report before Council
members includes additional proposals.
I should like to conclude by referring to the plan
for clamping down on acts of piracy on land, which
entails a range of measures to be supported by an
agency whose specific local effectiveness I have been
able to witness for myself, namely, the United Nations

11-21518

S/PV.6473

Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). The staff of the
Office do a remarkable job in providing assistance for
the construction of prisons, in particular in Mombasa
but also in Puntland and Somaliland.

UNODC and international organizations such as the
United Nations and the African Union, which I
consulted on several occasions, the European Union
and other organizations must contribute to this effort.

The proposal I have made to the Council calls for
the establishment of two specialized jurisdictions, one
in Puntland and one in Somaliland. The applicable law
would be Somali law, reformed under the aegis of
UNODC as a part of the Kampala process, in
association with the Transitional Federal Government
and other entities, such as Puntland and Somaliland.
This work, which consists of drafting Somali law, is at
an advanced stage and is very important from the
jurisdictional standpoint.

Those are some of the main points. We cannot
look at all of the proposals; to do that would take up
far too much of the Council’s time and patience. But I
would like to conclude with a final point. If the
Council decides to promote solutions such as those, it
would entail a degree of investment. I know the extent
to which we need to be attentive today to not wasting
public resources and to being frugal with public funds.

Furthermore, a parallel idea has been put
forward — upon which the Council will have the final
word — that the President of Tanzania, with whom I
met a few weeks ago, establish a Somali court in
Arusha during a transitional period. Following that
period of transition, during which we very much hope
that peace would be restored in Somalia as soon as
possible, the court would be transferred to Mogadishu.
The Tanzanian President has told me that he is open to
such a proposal.
The question of prisons and incarceration also
needs to be addressed. Prison capacity needs to be built
in Puntland and Somaliland — once again, with the
assistance of the United Nations Development
Programme and UNODC. This agency, which I have
consulted on many occasions, has told me that it is
possible to build prison capacity in less than a year or
faster in order to provide space for prisoners tried both
locally and abroad — in Kenya or in other countries.
UNODC is proposing a double-control system to
ensure that these prisons run smoothly, namely, internal
monitoring within the prisons through a standing
UNODC office that would train prison guards and help
with prison management, as well as external
monitoring that would carry out regular checks by a
surveillance committee, which UNODC has agreed to
set up and assist.
Another idea put forward by UNODC is to
associate each prison with a farm in order to enable the
prison to have a degree of self-sufficiency and to
facilitate prisoner training and social reintegration.
Another important issue that is not easy to solve
is the training of judges, prosecutors, attorneys and
prison guards. Again, though, it seems to me that

11-21518

In that regard, I asked UNODC to undertake an
evaluation — and it is only an evaluation — of what it
would cost over three years to set up these new
jurisdictional and penitentiary capacities in Puntland
and Somaliland. The UNODC’s estimate is that it
would cost $25 million. I would like to draw the
Council’s attention to how that figure — if it turns out
to be correct — compares with the cost of piracy today,
which is reaching considerable heights. Although
estimates vary, for Somalia and the Indian Ocean the
cost is between $5 and 7 billion. If we factor into those
costs of piracy the additional costs for naval operations
and the revenue losses to the countries of the region
associated with tourism, blocked ports and
impediments to trade, to say nothing of the increase in
the cost of transporting raw materials and industrial
and other goods, then the total costs are significant
indeed — and will inevitably continue to rise in the
coming years.
The choice therefore seems to be clear. If we
leave the situation as it is, with some improvements
here and there, we will not manage to resolve it. I
could be wrong, but that is my feeling: we will not
succeed in eradicating this problem. It will therefore be
very expensive for our countries and for international
organizations alike.
It will also be very expensive in human and
political terms. I do not want to be overly dramatic, but
let us try to look beyond the situation. Despite the
significant risk that it currently poses, piracy today is
fairly discreet from terrorism. There are some links
here and there in Somalia, but they are limited. But if
the scope of the phenomenon were to expand and move
decisively southward — and, again, I do not wish to be
overly dramatic — then we cannot disregard the

5

S/PV.6473

possibility that it may one day become more closely
associated with terrorism.
Those are some of the thoughts I wanted to share
with the Council. I believe that it is perhaps someone
looking in from the outside who can feel sufficiently
free to say these things. The Council bears a
responsibility to States and to the Organization. I
believe that, if in the course of the next few weeks our
Organization and the Security Council were to adopt a
clear, robust and resolute resolution that speaks to and
is awaited by the entire world, it would serve to
encourage initiatives and facilitate the mobilization of
the financial resources to which I have just referred.
And everyone would feel that that would indeed be a
resolute, robust and concrete action by the Council.
I apologize for taxing the Council’s patience and
speaking at some length. I just wanted to share with the
Council the beliefs of someone who, thanks to the
Council, was able to meet with many leaders. My
message to the Council is that it should act quickly and
robustly.
The President: I thank Mr. Lang for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mathias.
Mr. Mathias: I would like to thank Mr. Lang for
his wide-ranging and multidimensional report (see
S/2011/30) to the Secretary-General, as well as for his
presentation this morning. Mr. Lang was appointed on
25 August 2010 as the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Legal Issues related to Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia. In just four months, he has
travelled and consulted widely and has brought
together a large amount of information into a coherent
report that identifies various strands of possible actions
by the international community.
Some of those strands relate to piracy-related
issues that are not of a legal character. While those are
not of direct concern to the Office of Legal Affairs, I
note that among the proposals in Mr. Lang’s report are
proposals with respect to improving the operational
aspects of the fight against piracy, economic and
development proposals and proposals to build the
capacities of Somalia’s security forces. His report to
the Secretary-General and the recommendations
contained therein are being reviewed by the SecretaryGeneral and his advisers.
I will now make just a few brief comments on
some of the legal aspects of the report, and also refer

6

members of the Council to the relevant parts of the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/394) of 26 July
2010, which dealt with some of the same issues.
First, I would like to underline the Special
Adviser’s references to the international legal
framework applicable to piracy. The legal framework
under international law is set out in the 1982 United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which also
reflects customary international law. Other instruments,
such as the 1988 Convention for the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime
Navigation, may also be relevant to combating piracy,
since some elements of the act of piracy may also
constitute offences under such instruments.
In the context of Somalia, the legal regime is
complemented by a number of Security Council
resolutions. The Djibouti Code of Conduct concerning
the repression of piracy and armed robbery against
ships in the Western Indian Ocean and the Gulf of
Aden is also an important vehicle for cooperation
among regional States.
Regarding the repression of piracy, States remain
bound by other applicable rules of international law.
Clearly, apprehension, detention, prosecution and
imprisonment must all take place in accordance with a
State’s international human rights and other obligations.
The Special Adviser has rightly underlined that
the Law of the Sea Convention and customary
international law provide for universal jurisdiction over
acts of piracy; that is, all States are entitled to take
criminal jurisdiction over acts of piracy, no matter
where they occur and no matter what the nationality of
the suspect or the victim. No connection between the
prosecuting State and the act of piracy is required. This
is the broadest possible legal basis for States to
exercise jurisdiction under international law.
Any State may seize a pirate ship or a ship under
the control of pirates, any State may arrest the suspects
and any State may prosecute them. The key to
increasing the number of States that are able to
prosecute acts of piracy, whether they be in the region
or elsewhere, lies in national implementation of this
international legal regime and in the will to take on
prosecutions. This is consistent with the call in
resolution 1950 (2010) for all States to criminalize
piracy under their domestic law and to favourably
consider the prosecution of suspected, and
imprisonment of convicted, pirates apprehended off the

11-21518

S/PV.6473

coast of Somalia, consistent with applicable
international law, including international human rights
law.
Given the large number of suspects being
detained at sea by naval forces, the Special Adviser has
emphasized that putting in place adequate prison
arrangements is equally as important as considering the
options for prosecution. The potential size of the
piracy-related prison population and the fact that most
of the suspects are not nationals of the prosecuting
States have certainly contributed to the difficulties
associated with finding a potential host State for any
new judicial mechanism.
The Special Adviser has proposed a three-part
Somali court system, comprising specialized courts in
Puntland and Somaliland and an extraterritorial
specialized court to sit in a third country in the region.
It may be helpful for members of the Council if I
briefly relate those proposals to the options that were
set out in the Secretary-General’s report.
The specialized courts sitting in Puntland and
Somaliland, as proposed by the Special Adviser, would
be special chambers, sitting within a national
jurisdiction. As we understand it, they would receive
capacity-building assistance but would not have United
Nations participation through United Nations-selected
international judges or prosecutors. Those tribunals,
therefore, would fall under option 3, as set out in the
Secretary-General’s report of July 2010. That report
identified a number of potential advantages and
disadvantages of such special chambers. Our
understanding is that the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime is already supporting national
prosecutions in the regions of Somalia and working
towards the establishment of such special courts.
The proposal for an extraterritorial specialized
court, applying Somali law, to sit in a third country in
the region, would fall under option 2 in the SecretaryGeneral’s report of last July. Again, the report
identifies advantages and disadvantages of this option.
The President: I thank Mr. Mathias for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Somalia.
Mr. Duale (Somalia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for inviting us to participate in this very important
meeting and briefing on piracy in Somalia. I also very

11-21518

much wish to thank the members of the Security
Council for being steadfast in their efforts to find
viable solutions to the problems of piracy in Somalia.
Special thanks are also due to Mr. Jack Lang, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Legal Issues
related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, for his very
comprehensive briefing. I hope as soon as I receive the
report to be able to study his very important proposals
and options, which are, as far as I can foresee, very
viable and to-the-point, and require nothing more than
immediate action, as he has said.
We also thank Mr. Stephen Mathias, Assistant
Secretary-General for Legal Affairs, who has also
supported the proposals of options for jurisdiction,
both international — that is, outside Somalia — and
within Somali territories.
The problem has been with us for a very long
time, and every time the Secretary-General issues a
report — such as his most recent very comprehensive
report on piracy (S/2010/394) — unfortunately funds
do not materialize. The funds required to be able to
take the actions that Mr. Lang has proposed are very
minor compared to what has been spent on the high
seas and considering the problems that piracy creates
not only internationally but also for the Somali people
and Somali communities, as was also highlighted by
Mr. Lang.
What remains to be done now, really, is to take
action — and quickly — both on the legal aspects of
the problem and on concrete steps to support and
enable regional authorities and the Transitional Federal
Government to police and monitor all the coastal areas
where piracy originates, so that pirates can be caught
there, with good policing, before they go onto the high
seas. Without exaggeration, we know that since March
2010 more than 30 vessels have been taken. The
number of hostages is 699; if we include the hostages
taken in 2009, the number is at least 1,000, if not more.
That creates a humanitarian situation for all those
involved, including the families of those unlawfully
detained by the pirates. On both the humanitarian and
security fronts, action should be taken as quickly as
possible, not only by the members of the Security
Council but also by the international community. I
hope that the Security Council will deeply look into
this problem and take every appropriate action in
support of the report of the Secretary-General and the
reports of Mr. Lang and Mr. Mathias.

7

S/PV.6473

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would first like to express our gratitude to
all the members of the Security Council and the United
Nations for their solidarity and support in the aftermath
of the terrorist attack on Domodedovo International
Airport.
We are grateful to the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Legal Issues related to Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia, Mr. Lang, for his substantive
report (S/2011/30), which includes a whole range of
measures to increase the effectiveness of anti-piracy
measures. It is important that its conclusions are based
on material gathered through direct work in the region,
including broad consultations with interested parties,
including the regional authorities of Somalia. We share
Mr. Lang’s objective assessment of the dismal situation
of the fight against piracy, and we agree that the time
has come to take decisive measures to reach a new
level in combating that threat. Indeed, not only is
piracy not decreasing, but it is expanding like a
cancerous disease with alarming speed. This criminal
activity is attracting increasing numbers of people and
resources, and pirates are using new technological
means. Their reach is extending ever wider.
2010 was a record year. According to the
International Maritime Organization, in the Horn of
Africa 49 vessels were hijacked and more than 1,000
hostages taken. Some of these were killed. We are
deeply concerned by the news that, in territorial waters
off the coast of Seychelles controlled by national naval
forces, a vessel flying under the flag of Antigua and
Barbuda was recently hijacked. Most of the crew are
citizens of Ukraine and according to some reports,
some are Russian.
The damage to the world economy from piracy
runs to billions of dollars, despite the fact that a few
years ago the international community’s expanded its
anti-terrorism efforts and increased resources to control
waterways where pirates operate and to combat
impunity. Clearly, this problem cannot resolved
without tackling the root causes of piracy, which are a
lack in Somalia of stability, the rule of law and normal
economic and social conditions. The problem is also
that piracy is no longer just one of the consequences of
the country’s fragmentation. It has actually become a
self-sustaining, profitable and well-organized criminal
industry.

8

An important factor that fuels piracy is the
complete impunity of pirates and its kingpins. The
current anti-piracy measures are not adequate in terms
of prosecuting the participants. In order to significantly
improve the situation, we need a breakthrough. We
view Mr. Lang’s recommendations as a strong basis in
that regard.
There is also a need to focus on the instruments
used for combating piracy. Significant experience has
been garnered in this area, and there are impressive
institutional provisions in place. New measures should
focus on the solid foundation provided by the work that
has already been done.
We agree with the recommendation to expand and
increase the preventive capacity of naval forces.
Control of dangerous areas in the region needs to be
strengthened. The Russian Federation continues to
participate in the anti-piracy force. To that end, at the
end of December 2010, the fifth-ranking detachment of
the Russian Pacific fleet was dispatched to the Gulf of
Aden, where it has been accompanying merchant
vessels of different countries. In 2010, Russian military
vessels were also involved in escorting vessels of the
World Food Programme. However, we must realize that
the problem cannot be solved by the means of force
alone; there needs to be a whole range of efforts
encompassing political settlement, socio-economic
aspects
and
security
and
law
enforcement
considerations.
An important aspect to which we must devote our
attention is the prosecution of pirates. The fact that
pirates are not held to account is undermining antipiracy measures in other areas. The figures speak for
themselves: according to sources, 90 per cent of those
detained for piracy activity are released. We have
drawn the attention of the Security Council on a
regular basis to the lack of existing mechanisms for
prosecuting pirates. It is clear that current opportunities
in Somalia and neighbouring countries in terms of
prosecuting pirates mean that the capacity in this area
cannot be harnessed properly.
In this regard, the proposal by Mr. Lang to set up
two special anti-piracy courts in Somaliland and
Puntland and an extraterritorial special court deserves
our close attention and further consideration. It is
important to focus on an appropriate mechanism in this
area. We are convinced that it will only be effective if
it is supported by international specialists. There are

11-21518

S/PV.6473

currently not enough professionals in Somalia with
sufficient expertise.
In practice, we have good experience in assisting
national courts, such as the assistance provided to
Kenya and Seychelles by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.
The time has now come for us to tackle piracy
properly. Further developments in this area will really
depend on the extent to which the Council will be able
to take decisive steps to curb this threat. We are
prepared to make specific proposals here in the near
future. If this opportunity is not taken, then control of
the situation in Horn of Africa will be lost.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me also
thank Special Adviser Lang, Assistant SecretaryGeneral Mathias and the representative of Somalia for
their briefings today. I especially want to thank Special
Adviser Lang for his comprehensive and creative
report (see S/2011/30) on piracy prosecution.
The United States fully agrees that to truly address
piracy we must find solutions both on land and at sea.
As Mr. Lang has rightly noted, piracy off the coast of
Somalia threatens us all. Captured crews are used as
human shields or held for ransom, and the region faces
higher prices for basic commodities. Piracy endangers
the critical delivery of humanitarian aid. The rising
sums of illicit funds flowing into Somalia through
ransom payments further destabilize the region and fuel
the growth of organized crime and terrorism.
Many members of the Council participate in the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
which has proved a flexible and efficient forum for
coordination and information sharing. Much is being
done to combat piracy, from disseminating best
practices to youth employment projects but, plainly,
much more work remains to be done.
As the report notes, industry adoption of best
management practices in naval operations off the coast
of Somalia reduced the rate of successful pirate
attacks. Several mechanisms can certify such steps —
for example, reviewing measures as part of the process
whereby a vessel’s security plan is approved under the
International Ship and Port Facility Security Code.
Under other International Maritime Organization
provisions, such as the International Safety
Management Code, documentation that a vessel has
implemented the appropriate best practices can be

11-21518

issued. We welcome assistance in further encouraging
the adoption of such best practices. We encourage
nations to contribute ships to patrol the waters off the
Somali coast, as several of our fellow Council
members have already done.
We also support the recommendation in the report
that targeted cooperation with Somaliland and Puntland
be increased. But the best long-term solution to piracy
is a stable Somalia. That is why the United States
supports a wide range of economic development
programmes there, including microcredit and good
governance initiatives. Tailored initiatives that actively
involve the local community may do the most good.
The United States also agrees that prevention,
prosecution and incarceration are essential elements of
any counter-piracy initiative. We strongly support the
report’s recommendations that all States criminalize
piracy as defined in the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea and adopt universal jurisdiction
with regard to this grave crime. The report recognizes
the need to raise awareness, to encourage piracy’s
victims to testify against their attackers and to explore
means to provide such testimony, including via
videoconference. We agree.
The United States has long encouraged flag States
and States whose crews and vessel owners have fallen
prey to pirates to pursue prosecutions in their domestic
courts to the greatest extent possible. We welcome the
call in the report for all States to strengthen their
commitment and ability to prosecute. In cases where
American vessels have been attacked, we have
prosecuted the suspects. We also recognize the need to
develop one or more reliable, practical options for
prosecution in the region. Kenya and Seychelles are
successfully prosecuting piracy cases in their national
courts. Tanzania has changed its laws to allow it to
prosecute suspected pirates captured elsewhere. The
experience of these countries indicates that prosecution
in the region is potentially viable. We should continue
to support efforts by States in the region to try
suspected pirates in their national courts. Not only does
such support help ensure that piracy bears judicial
consequences; it also enhances the judicial capacity of
the region as a whole.
As we continue to discuss additional
mechanisms, we should also support and strengthen
prosecution-related programmes in the region that are
already under way.

9

S/PV.6473

My Government also remains open to exploring
creative solutions to increase and facilitate domestic
prosecution. The report suggests forming specialized
piracy courts in Somaliland and Puntland, as well as a
Somali court seated in another country in the region.
We would support further consideration of these ideas,
including in the legal working group on piracy off the
coast of Somalia, which has been exploring
prosecution mechanisms for some time now.
But as the United Nations report recognizes,
incarceration may be the most significant constraint on
piracy prosecutions. The United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) are supporting prison
rehabilitation projects. But additional support and
options for long-term incarceration are needed. We
encourage States to work with and through UNODC to
develop additional facilities where convicted pirates
can serve their sentences. The lack of places to
incarcerate convicted pirates significantly hinders
additional national prosecutions and makes it harder to
ensure judicial consequences for piracy.
Finally, as the report notes, we must pay more
attention to the instigators, leaders and financiers of
piracy. We look forward to the conclusions of the next
Contact Group plenary meeting about how to move
forward. It is critical to disrupt the financial flows that
make piracy both possible and profitable. To that end,
the United States will convene, on 1 March, in
Washington, D.C., an ad hoc meeting of Contact Group
participants on the financial aspects of piracy, as called
for by the Contact Group, to develop a strategy and an
action plan on this topic.
Over the past few years, pirates having been
using more and more violence. Their tactics have
become more sophisticated, and their vessels have
hunted further and further out at sea. We must work
together and remain vigilant. In cooperation with the
international community, the United States will do its
part to combat this common and urgent threat.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I, too, would
like to thank the Secretary-General’s Special Adviser,
Jack Lang, the Assistant Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs and the Permanent Representative of Somalia
for their briefings this morning, and Jack Lang for his
report (S/2011/30) presenting a plan in 25 proposals. I
also take this opportunity to express the United
Kingdom’s continued appreciation for the contribution

10

of the United Nations and its agencies to the
international effort to combat piracy off the coast of
Somalia.
The United Kingdom agrees with Mr. Lang’s
assessment of the seriousness of the threat posed by
piracy, which has also been spelled out very clearly by
Ambassador Churkin and Ambassador Rice, and we
also agree on the need for an urgent solution. We
welcome Jack Lang’s proposals for action, many of
which we have been supporting through the work of
the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia.
We agree in particular on the primary importance of
securing additional prison capacity as a key measure to
facilitate the prosecution of greater numbers of
suspected pirates apprehended at sea.
I turn first to the proposals in the report dealing
with options for prosecution and imprisonment. As
noted in the report, the international community’s
efforts to date have focused on agreements with
regional States to accept suspected pirates for
prosecution and imprisonment. We believe that, in the
short term, this must continue to be our focus. The
European Union is moving towards concluding an
agreement on prosecution with Mauritius, and
negotiations are likely to resume soon with Tanzania
on a similar agreement, which is most welcome.
Discussions will also be taken forward in March, under
the auspices of the Contact Group, on post-trial
transfer agreements between Seychelles and both
Somaliland and Puntland.
However, we agree with Mr. Lang that it is vital
that work continue in parallel to develop judicial and
penal structures in Somaliland and Puntland in line
with current, well-planned and executed United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
programmes. The establishment of effective Somali
court and prison structures is the best long-term
solution, as it will provide the region with a sustainable
capability to deal with the problem of piracy, which is
likely, unfortunately, to endure for years to come.
As for the proposal to establish a delocalized
Somali court in Tanzania, we understand this to be a
temporary measure until local Somali courts are
established. However, we are doubtful that it would be
possible to have such a court operational within the
timetable envisaged.
Implementation is clearly linked to the
completion of other proposals in the report, including

11-21518

S/PV.6473

prison facilities in Somaliland and Puntland; prisoner
transfer agreements between Tanzania and Somalia;
and the UNODC project to update Somali counterpiracy law. Strong cooperation between the
Transitional Federal Government and Somali regional
authorities will also be required.
Even with the highest degree of international
political will, we believe that it would take time to
conclude the necessary legal agreements, recruit and
train staff, and identify and equip suitable premises for
a delocalized court. We also note that the cost and
timing assessments appear to be based on a working
assumption that such a court could use the premises
and detention facilities of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), but those premises will
be required by the Rwanda Tribunal and the ICTR
residual mechanism for the foreseeable future. We are
open to discussing this proposal further, but we would
need a more detailed assessment of costs and
feasibility before reaching a considered view.
There are a number of recommendations in the
report aimed at facilitating the domestic prosecution of
piracy and enhancing judicial cooperation. We agree
that all States should be encouraged to adopt laws
naming piracy as a crime of universal jurisdiction in
their domestic law. We would welcome further
information on the proposals for a legal framework for
detention at sea — that is proposal 7 — and the idea of
a “model case report”, which is proposal 8. We support
discussion within the Contact Group of other practical
measures to facilitate the conduct of prosecutions,
including the provision of testimony by seafarers —
that is proposal 10.
In relation to the proposals to enhance the selfprotection of ships — proposals 1 and 2 — we
welcome work taken forward by the shipping and
insurance industries to certify compliance with
elements of best management practice, including
registration with the Maritime Security Centre — Horn
of Africa. But we agree that more needs to be done on
this through the Contact Group, in liaison with the
International Maritime Organization.
The United Kingdom has also been active as
chair of working group 1 of the Contact Group in
promoting cooperation with the Somali regional
authorities in Puntland and Somaliland — that is
proposal 4. The Kampala process was created as a
means of implementing capacity-building programmes

11-21518

by creating a technical cooperation mechanism through
which the Transitional Federal Government, Puntland
and Somaliland could discuss how to cooperate with
each other as well as enable foreign assistance to their
counter-piracy efforts.
In conclusion, we agree with the Special
Adviser’s overall assessment that there must be a
comprehensive approach to tackling piracy off the
coast of Somalia through the political, economic,
security, jurisdictional and correctional tracks. We
welcome the agreement by regional ministers to a
regional action plan on maritime security in Mauritius
in October 2010, as well as the consistency between
the main elements of this action plan and the key
recommendations of the Contact Group’s own needs
assessment report, agreed in January 2010. We must
generate the political will to implement the necessary
measures as a matter of priority and ensure the
coordination of actions of States and international
bodies. We agree that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Mahiga, and the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia have an important role to
play in this regard, and remain grateful for their
continued close cooperation with the Contact Group,
which retains the key coordination role across the
region.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): I, too, would like to thank
Special Adviser Jack Lang for his excellent briefing
and report (S/2011/30) on legal issues linked to piracy
off the coast of Somalia. We commend the report for its
high level of detail and its systematic and
comprehensive approach. The report is a most thorough
analysis of the legal issues connected with piracy.
Germany is very concerned about the persistent
and indeed growing threat of piracy and armed robbery
off the coast of Somalia and in the region. The Security
Council needs to address this threat to peace and
security in a comprehensive manner.
In recent months, pirates have increased their
level of violence and extended their range of operation.
Piracy is a serious crime. It has detrimental effects on
the security and safety of international navigation and
commerce. It also threatens urgently needed
humanitarian aid to Somalia. The destructive effects of
piracy ultimately jeopardize our common efforts to
stabilize Somalia. The overall cost of piracy is
immense — as Mr. Lang has pointed out — not only to

11

S/PV.6473

the international community and to the States in the
region, but first and foremost to the people of Somalia.
The Security Council and the international
community have shown unity and resolve in tackling
the problem of piracy, but we do indeed have to step up
our efforts. The European Union is substantially
engaged in the fight against piracy. It has deployed its
first naval operation, Operation Atalanta, off the coast
of Somalia. Germany has participated in this operation
from the very start and will continue to do so. Many
other partners are committed. Kenya and the Republic
of Seychelles have assumed responsibility by trying
and imprisoning pirates. Mauritius will, it is hoped,
soon follow suit. We would like to thank those
countries for their important contributions. We hope
that more partners will join in these efforts.
The Special Adviser’s report proposes the
strengthening of existing measures and the introduction
of new ones. All of his proposals deserve our close
attention.
Military and judicial action is indispensable in
the short term, but both deal only with symptoms. We
will have to address the factors facilitating piracy and
look at the situation on shore in Somalia. The
international community must continue to support the
Somali people in their efforts to re-establish peace,
security and development in their country. We need
economic opportunities and State actors that prevent
and prosecute piracy ashore. These are tasks for police,
coast guard and law enforcement authorities that need
to be set up and strengthened in Somalia.
The effective prosecution and imprisonment of
those responsible for piracy and armed robbery have
seen progress, but remain a huge challenge. The legal
framework is set out in the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea, which reflects the customary
international law giving all States the right to prosecute
pirates. All States should create the legal conditions
that enable them to effectively prosecute pirates.
We concur with the goal, as stated in the report,
that it ultimately must be in Somalia that pirates are
tried and imprisoned. To reach that goal, we have to
support the establishment of adequate structures in
Somalia.
The activities of the Contact Group on Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia and, in particular, the Trust Fund
supporting its initiatives, are a very useful contribution

12

in that regard. A number of projects of the law
enforcement sector in Somalia were funded by the
Trust Fund. Germany was among the first contributors
to that effort, and we invite others, including the
shipping industry, to participate and commit funds.
Setting up an extraterritorial Somali court in a
third country in the region, with the perspective of
transferring it to Somalia, could be an essential part of
a solution. It could constitute an important element of
support to a nascent Somali legal and judicial system,
with active international support and the recruitment of
qualified lawyers, for instance from the Somali
diaspora. It would combine Somali, regional and
international efforts in a truly joint endeavour. We
should further explore that proposal.
We have to acknowledge that the Somali judicial
system and its prisons still face a number of
challenges, as pointed out by the Secretary-General in
his most recent report on Somalia (S/2010/394). The
system must be improved so that it meets international
standards and respects international human rights and
other applicable rules of international law. Germany
commends and actively supports all activities in that
respect, especially those of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and the United Nations
Development Programme.
In the meantime, broader and stronger regional
efforts and international support for them are required.
States of the region are most affected by the scourge of
piracy. Increased cooperation among them would
considerably strengthen the fight against piracy. It
would also be of benefit to their judicial systems in the
fight against crime in general. We look forward to
continued cooperation among partners in the Security
Council and in the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia to address piracy in Somalia and the
factors contributing to it.
In conclusion, I should like to once again thank
the Special Adviser for his impressive report. He has
rightly pointed out the urgency of the matter. The
Security Council should take up the many thoughts and
issues he has raised and discuss them in the near future
as part of the Council’s larger strategy on Somalia.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We thank the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Legal
Issues related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
Mr. Jack Lang, for his briefing and his comprehensive
report (S/2011/30). We also want to express our thanks

11-21518

S/PV.6473

to Assistant Secretary-General Stephen Mathias for his
briefing. We welcome the Special Adviser’s
recognition that the legal response to piracy must be
located within the framework of a comprehensive
multidimensional approach. My Government continues
to study and review the legal aspects of the report.
South Africa remains deeply concerned about the
multiple challenges facing Somalia, including piracy
off the coast. As we have stated on many occasions,
piracy in Somali waters should be addressed within the
broader context of addressing peace and security and
the economic and humanitarian challenges facing the
country.
In his report to the Secretary-General, the Special
Adviser notes that the counter-piracy effort will be
successful only when a series of measures are put in
place. We will go further, however, and suggest that the
piracy issue will be truly resolved only when the
conflict and political challenges in Somalia have been
fully addressed.
We are pleased that the proposals presented in the
report of the Special Adviser go beyond the legal
imperatives and also incorporate the economic and
preventive dimensions of piracy. In that regard, my
delegation underscores the sentiment expressed in
paragraph 81 of the report, in which the Special
Adviser states that
“eradicating piracy requires the development of
economic alternatives so that the ‘economy of
piracy’ does not corrupt the whole of the Somali
economic system and to give hope to the young
people who too often believe themselves to have
no future”.
South Africa firmly supports the view that
addressing the scourge of piracy will require a
comprehensive approach that addresses two of the
underlying causes of the problem: the illegal dumping
of toxic waste and the illegal exploitation of Somali
maritime resources. In that regard, we support proposal
17 of the report, in which the Special Adviser calls for
the establishment of a committee to investigate illegal
fishing and maritime pollution.
Regarding the legal dimension of piracy in
Somalia, we look forward to continued engagement by
the Security Council on the options proposed by the
Secretary-General and his Special Adviser, Mr. Jack
Lang. In considering those proposals, our efforts

11-21518

should be framed by obligations under the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which sets
out the legal framework and parameters applicable to
combating piracy and armed robbery at sea, as well as
other ocean activities.
Any effort to address the multiple challenges of
piracy should also seek to build capacity in Somalia’s
domestic legal system and law enforcement
institutions, so that Somalia remains the epicentre of
long-term strategies to effectively deal with the
scourge of piracy.
We wish to state our appreciation for the efforts
of the United Nations Development Programme and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in
assisting States in the region with respect to
prosecutions. South Africa is heartened by the efforts
of all States that have taken on the burden of
prosecuting alleged pirates, especially our sister
countries Kenya, Seychelles and Mauritius. We support
the call for States to criminalize piracy in their national
jurisdictions. In that regard, assistance should be given
to regional States in their efforts to prosecute and
imprison pirates.
In conclusion, my delegation is of the firm view
that with a stable and prosperous Somalia, the
challenges of piracy off the coast of that country will
be overcome. We should therefore do all that we can to
help Somalia achieve the peace and stability that it
deserves. The investment of the international
community in combating piracy cannot be
disproportionate to its efforts to fight the root causes of
piracy on land and address Somalia’s challenges
holistically.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to join previous
delegations in expressing our appreciation to Special
Adviser Jack Lang for his briefing and for his very
comprehensive and thoughtful report (S/2011/30). Our
appreciation also goes to Assistant Secretary-General
Stephen Mathias for his remarks and to Ambassador
Elmi Duale, Permanent Representative of Somalia, for
his statement.
Along with the July 2010 report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2010/394), Mr. Lang’s report provides a
solid basis for an in-depth analysis and effective
response by the Council to piracy and armed robbery at
sea off the coast of Somalia. In particular, Brazil values
two aspects of Mr. Lang’s report, one methodological
and the other substantive. The first aspect involves the

13

S/PV.6473

extensive consultations with numerous stakeholders,
which served as a basis for its conclusions and
recommendations. The second is the effort to deal with
the many facets of the problem, including the socioeconomic one. While a thorough assessment of the
report’s content is still under way, I would like to make a
few preliminary comments.
The document highlights a sense of urgency in
the search for sustainable solutions to the issue of
piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of
Somalia. This urgency is all the more evident when it
comes to the political and security situation in Somalia,
as indicated by the fact that, according to the report,
the insurgency does benefit from piracy. Such
cooperation between crime and terrorism, which at the
moment seems based on mere mutual convenience at
the local level, should be effectively combated before it
becomes a true alliance that could destabilize Somalia
further. In this regard, it is important that the Council
act on the counter-piracy recommendations in a manner
consistent with our efforts on Somalia, in particular our
decision to authorize the strengthening of the African
Union Mission in Somalia and the consideration of the
outstanding African Union recommendations.
We are pleased that Mr. Lang’s report seeks to
translate our common comprehensive approach to
fighting piracy off the coast of Somalia into concrete
recommendations aimed at prevention and suppression.
Regarding prevention, we welcome the attention he has
rightly given to the social and economic rehabilitation
of Somalia’s coastal areas and to illegal fishing and
dumping of toxic wastes. Support for job creation,
especially for young people, seems key in this regard.
At the same time, assistance provided to help Somalia
reform its legal framework on anti-piracy and maritime
jurisdiction would be most beneficial if it were
extended to suppressing illegal fishing and toxic waste
dumping in Somali waters.
Another cross-cutting aspect of the report is its
emphasis on the importance of strengthening and
implementing the Kampala process. Cooperation among
the Transitional Federal Government, Somaliland and
Puntland in the fight against piracy can also serve as a
confidence-building measure to address sensitive
political issues in the long run. In this regard, the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia, through its
regional offices in Hargeysa and Garoowe and its
increasing footprint in Mogadishu, could play a
fundamental role in supporting the Kampala process

14

and the implementation of Mr. Lang’s recommendations
concerning the regional administrations.
We welcome the recommendations contained in
the report regarding prosecution of the instigators of
acts of piracy. Such action is necessary to deal with the
problem in a meaningful way. Encouraging the private
sector to do more in preventing and suppressing acts of
piracy, protecting the rights of seafarer victims of
piracy and financing the international efforts is also
positive. Many shipping companies that have benefited
from international efforts to provide security off the
coast of Somalia could be further encouraged to
comply with the best-management practices agreed on
by the industry itself. Seafarers — so far the greatest
victims of piracy off the coast of Somalia — should
also be better protected, in terms both of prevention
and of assistance during and after a hostage situation.
The collaboration of the private sector can be equally
key to substantiating strong cases against suspected
pirates and their instigators, as highlighted in the
report.
On the central issue of the judicial mechanisms,
we appreciate the Special Adviser’s proposal
concerning alternatives that could lead to a
Somalization of the response. One key aspect of that
recommendation, as we see it, is the strengthening of
the rule of law in Somalia and the creation of judicial
and penal capacities in Puntland and Somaliland. We
fully concur with this view. We also believe that the
new solutions proposed in Mr. Lang’s report are
compatible with efforts to improve, in the short term,
the solutions currently in place.
Although the challenges are considerable and the
means to overcome them complex, I reiterate my
delegation’s active support for fighting impunity in the
waters off the coast of Somalia and bringing peace and
stability to those waters and, above all, to Somalia
itself.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): The international
community and the Security Council cannot and, I
know, will not turn a blind eye to Somalia at this
critical juncture. The range of piracy activities is
spreading to neighbouring countries, and the number of
reported piracy acts is growing, as is the number of
victims. The sophistication of the attacks has also
increased. The number of hostages taken by pirates is
both impressive and disturbing. The other victims,
perhaps less visible or not so frequently mentioned in

11-21518

S/PV.6473

the news, are the Somalis themselves, condemned in
their daily lives to suffer the corrosive social impact of
piracy.
The United Nations, through its programmes and
funds, along with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and other international organizations and
donors, in coordination with the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, all have a role to play
in dealing with the subject at hand in its different
dimensions. They have to be further supported in
countering piracy and in addressing its root causes and
overall impact in Somalia. Increased funding,
including through voluntary contributions, cannot be
avoided. The cost of inaction would be much, much
higher.
It is for these reasons that I wish, like others, to
thank the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jack Lang, for his detailed, comprehensive and, I
must add, very disturbing report (S/2011/30). I also
thank our Somali colleague for his comments, and have
taken note of the points raised by the Assistant
Secretary-General. The Special Adviser gave us a
thorough and accurate overview of the situation on the
ground. Moreover, he presented us with a set of
proposals for overcoming the difficult challenge that
confronts us today in the issue of piracy off the coast
of Somalia — a challenge first of all for Somalia, but
also for the region and for the international community
as a whole.
Portugal stands ready to work on those proposals,
with the aim of preventing and punishing piracy in the
region. We are guided by the conviction that the
success of any strategy on this matter lies with the
empowerment of Somalia and the need for Somalia to
be entrusted in the near future with added capacity to
fight this phenomenon from within. We will look into
the realization of these proposals as potential tools for
promoting institution-building and the rule of law, and
for encouraging economic activity adequate to sound
and peaceful progress in the country.
We all know that the roots of piracy off the coast
of Somalia lie inland, not at sea. They are to be found
in the difficult living conditions that result from a
persisting situation of conflict and instability, weak
institutions for fighting impunity, and serious
development problems. Such circumstances make it
particularly difficult for Somalis to create alternatives

11-21518

to an economy in which piracy’s influence is
increasingly preponderant.
Despite the complexity of the subject, the Special
Adviser has managed to present us with a simple
approach. We must improve the solutions that are
currently being pursued. In this regard, we commend
the efforts being undertaken by the States of the region
and regional organizations, and call for their continued
engagement to this purpose. But we agree with the
Special Adviser that we must also embrace new
solutions of an economic, security and judicial-penal
nature. In this regard, we are ready to work in the
Council to help achieve a prompt outcome on the basis
of these proposals.
Concerning the new measures described in the
report, Portugal strongly supports the multidimensional
approach suggested, comprising three parts that are, in
our view, equally important — the economic, security
and judicial/correctional components, including the
need to invest in efficient programmes of social
reinsertion appropriate to the socio-economic situation
in the country, in order to allow the prison population
to find legal employment and build their future once
they have served their sentence. Special attention
should also be given in this context to the situation and
treatment of children, attracted or mobilized into
piracy, who end up caught in the net of justice.
Furthermore, we welcome with particular
interest, as a complement to the specialized courts in
Puntland and in Somaliland, the suggestion of creating
another specialized Somali court outside Somali
territory, now proposed for Arusha. It is an interesting
solution that builds on converging ideas and specific
proposals that my country has been developing and
debating within the framework of the Contact Group
on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. It is a solution that
seems flexible and useful enough to help attract
international capacity support, capable of responding to
needs as they evolve on the ground, and also able to be
swiftly set up, since it relies on existing facilities. We
will continue to engage in this reflection and to offer
our experience to materialize such proposals in the
ensuing discussions in the Council.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to thank Mr. Jack Lang for the report
(S/2011/30) he introduced to us and to express
appreciation for the remarks made by Mr. Mathias and
the Ambassador of Somalia.

15

S/PV.6473

The outlook presented, in particular the increase
in pirate attacks, their sophistication and the longer
time for which hostages are being held, is of great
concern. Piracy is another of the harmful consequences
of precarious economic conditions and institutional
weakness. It is urgent to adopt a new approach that
includes strengthening the rule of law and building
institutions that ensure the governability and the social
and economic development of Somalia.
The assistance provided by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, in coordination with the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
continues to be of great importance. A lasting
commitment to assistance and training in strengthening
the legal, penal and prison systems, as well as the
provision of logistical infrastructure and information
technology, can encourage more countries of the region
to help with the trial and imprisonment of pirates, as
Kenya and Seychelles are doing.
The critical situation and limited capacity of the
Transitional Federal Government to intercept pirates
and bring them to justice, to patrol and to provide
security in the waters off its coasts require the adoption
of concrete measures to facilitate the trial and
imprisonment of pirates, in accordance with applicable
international law. The picture of impunity painted by
Mr. Lang is regrettable. In that regard, curbing arms
trafficking through the Gulf of Aden and the imposition
of selective sanctions against the most important
leaders and those who protect them would contribute
significantly to international counter-piracy efforts.
The Monitoring Group for Somalia underscores
that, while the volume of arms transfers to Somalia
remains consistent and is small-scale, their effect is
devastating in the context of a continuing armed
conflict, the absence of an effective central authority
and a worsening humanitarian crisis. The Group
stresses that the increased piracy is also due in part to
the lack of implementation of the arms embargo. In
accordance with resolution 1844 (2008), sanctions
should be extended to those who obstruct the delivery,
access or distribution of humanitarian assistance in
Somalia.
Colombia stresses the primacy of the
jurisdictional and correctional components of any
international strategy to combat piracy. We reiterate
that the primary responsibility in the fight against
piracy and armed robbery off the coast of Somalia lies

16

with the Transitional Federal Government. In that
regard, we welcome the proposal to reform the penal
and procedural legal framework to include provisions
that enable the investigation and prosecution of pirates.
Piracy has become one of Somalia’s most
lucrative economic activities, and its perpetrators use
part of the ransoms to improve their arsenals and to
make their operations more efficient. While we seek to
remove the impunity enjoyed by the offenders, it is
necessary to develop economic alternatives for the
population and to ensure that society sees that crime as
an activity that limits its development options.
Mr. Lang’s report proposes encouraging unskilled
labour-intensive activities, such as fishing, port
operations and livestock exports. In the long term, such
investments, which provide lasting results by
preventing the population’s growing dependency on the
criminal industry developed through piracy, are less
costly to the international community.
We are convinced that the United Nations should
lead the international response to this growing problem
and that a stable and lasting solution requires a
comprehensive approach to the stabilization and
strengthening of the State in Somalia. Mr. Lang’s call
for urgent action merits our full consideration.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General Mr. Jack Lang
for his report (S/2011/30) and proposals, Assistant
Secretary-General for Legal Affairs Mr. Mathias for his
support for those proposals, and the Permanent
Representative of Somalia for his statement.
Not only is piracy is a threat to international
peace and security, but, as the report presented to us
today underscores, the phenomenon is growing. The
means of the pirates are becoming increasingly
sophisticated, as Mr. Lang explained, the number of
attacks is increasing, and the geographical area
affected continues to expand.
Faced with that phenomenon, the international
community must act. The Security Council has
facilitated the establishment of a legal framework for
the deployment of a large fleet of vessels at sea.
However, we have seen that the military tool is not
sufficient. Suppression must be complemented by a
legal and judicial arrangement whereby pirates arrested
by vessels at sea can be tried and imprisoned in
appropriate conditions. Today, 9 of 10 pirates are

11-21518

S/PV.6473

released owing to the lack of capacity for judicial and
correctional action.
In that regard, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2010/394), drawn up pursuant to
resolution 1918 (2010). That report sets out the various
possible options to find a solution to the legal aspects
of the fight against piracy. It is now time to take a
decision.
In examining those proposals, we have identified
several criteria that we believe to be priority. First, we
must find a solution forthwith. Mr. Lang’s report
underscores the urgency of that requirement. Next, we
must find a realistic solution. We must keep in mind
the most cost-effective and beneficial option in the
report. Lastly, we must find a lasting solution that
Somalia can ultimately own and perpetuate.
It is from that perspective that we considered
Mr. Lang’s report and all 25 proposals identified
therein. In the legal sphere, the avenues proposed by
the report are clear. To address legal shortcomings, the
report proposes updating Somali legislation on piracy
in order to strengthen the criminalization and
jurisdictional treatment of pirates. To prosecute the
growing number of pirates more quickly, it proposes
the establishment of system based on an extraterritorial
Somali court located in Arusha, Tanzania, and two
specialized courts, one in Somaliland and one in
Puntland. Lastly, to address the glaring lack of
correctional infrastructure, the report suggests building
three prisons in Somaliland and Puntland.
Those proposals respond to the urgency of the
situation. They can be operational in less than a year.
Those proposals are realistic. Their cost is estimated at
$25 million, which is low in relation to the overall cost
of piracy, estimated today at $7 billion. Finally, those
proposals seem to us sustainable because they closely
associate Somalia not only with capacity-building in
the regions of Puntland and Somaliland, but also with
the establishment of a court that, although located in
Tanzania, would be above all a Somali court. The
report is pragmatic because it proposes that those new
avenues complement the jurisdictional and correctional
components already operating in a number of States of
the region and for which international support could be
increased.
The Secretary-General and his Special Adviser
have devoted much time and effort to proposing
options to the Security Council to change the paradigm

11-21518

in the Indian Ocean. It is now up to the Security
Council to turn those proposals into action. To that end,
France encourages the start of negotiations on a draft
resolution of the Security Council reflecting the most
relevant recommendations in Mr. Lang’s report. It is of
capital importance that the implementation of any
decision we may take be followed up. The Lang report
proposes that such follow-up be undertaken by an
experienced figure. In order to ensure the best possible
coordination of action on land and at sea and the
integration of United Nations action in Somalia, we
might consider entrusting the mission to follow up the
proposals to a Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General
working
with
the
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Mr. Augustine Mahiga.
Lastly, I recall the importance of securing
funding to implement the proposals we recommend.
Mr. Lang stresses that a relevant instrument — the
Trust Fund of the Contact Group on Piracy — already
exists. Its purpose is to strengthen the judicial and
correctional capacities of the countries of the region. It
is up to the international community as a whole, as
well as to private individuals and bodies involved in
the fight against piracy, to contribute to that
instrument. In order to bolster the Trust Fund, France
supports in principle the convening of an international
donors’ conference once the Security Council has
finished its work.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I thank the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Legal Issues
Related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, Mr. Jack
Lang, for his comprehensive briefing and in-depth
analysis of the legal options available to combat piracy
off the coast of Somalia. We appreciate the additional
comments provided by the Assistant Secretary-General
for Legal Affairs and thank the representative of
Somalia for his participation in this meeting.
The
increasing
industrialization
of
the
phenomenon of piracy and its rapid expansion in the
Gulf of Aden endangers the integrity of the nascent
authorities in Somalia and Puntland. It also threatens
not only to erode the tenuous gains made by the
international community in the Horn of Africa region,
but also provide a fertile environment for extremism
and violence.
We therefore share the Special Adviser’s sense of
urgency on the need for swift action to address the

17

S/PV.6473

threat. We also agree with his basic premise that
convergent measures will be required to curb piracy
and prevent its occurrence. To that end, we welcome
his recommendations for improving the operational
component of counter-piracy, such as extending the
scope of on-board self-protection, strengthening and
adapting naval operations, and intensifying monitoring
of the Somalia coastline. We also welcome the judicial
and correctional components of counter-piracy,
particularly the measures to overcome the legal
obstacles to the prosecution of piracy suspects.

Adviser on the need to revive and develop domestic
industry and to reform domestic legal institutions.
Nigeria’s long-held view is that piracy is a symptom of
the internal strife within Somalia and the absence of
governance structures. A long-term solution to piracy
hinges on improving Somalia’s stability and helping
Somalis to forge a State with viable governance
institutions capable of ensuring respect for the rule of
law and of promoting peace and reconciliation. We
renew our call for generous contributions to the Trust
Fund for this purpose.

We believe, however, that the effectiveness of
these measures is contingent on the elimination of the
immediate constraints on the coordination of the
international prosecution of pirates and closer
transnational partnerships. Additionally, initiatives to
suppress piracy and protect vulnerable ships passing
through the waters off the coast of Somalia, such as the
European Union’s Operation Atalanta, NATO’s Allied
Protector and Ocean Shield operations, and Combined
Maritime Forces, must be streamlined in a coherent
framework.

We must, however, acknowledge the tumultuous
political, economic and legal environment in which
this must take place. We note with growing alarm the
increasing sophistication of pirates. In 2009, revenues
from piracy in Puntland were approximately
$82 million, compared to $16 million for all of
Puntland. The traditional industries of fishing and
livestock trading have been decimated. Additionally,
the once robust commercial international shipping
lanes have been significantly impaired by piracy.

As we have heard, nine out of 10 pirates are not
prosecuted due to the absence of a clear international
legislative framework. Although article 101 of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and
resolution 1918 (2010) both define piracy as a criminal
act, few States of the region have incorporated this
definition into their criminal code. We therefore call
for a coherent international legislative framework to
address these enduring gaps and uncertainty in
international law.
In our view, the Security Council has established
precedent in this area. In resolution 1950 (2010), the
Council underlined the importance of continuing to
enhance the collection, preservation and transmission
of evidence of acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea
off the coast of Somalia to competent authorities.
Further agreements relating to the exchange of
prisoners, a common definition of piracy, uniform
evidence collection measures and jurisdictional
standards are necessary.
Nigeria notes the Special Adviser’s suggested
cluster of measures for preventing piracy. Going
forward, the Council must provide support for an
internal mechanism to complement the efforts of the
international community to deal with the menace. We
therefore support the recommendations of the Special

18

Consequently, there is an urgent need for the
penalization and prosecution of piracy. Clear and
enforceable laws must be promulgated by the
legislature and enforced by a fair and impartial
judiciary and police force. As a first step, we encourage
the Somali Parliament to enact a statute criminalizing
piracy. States in the region should also take similar
action under their domestic law, in accordance with
resolution 1918 (2010). Considering the negative
effects of illegal fishing and maritime pollution, Nigeria
fully supports the Special Adviser’s recommendation on
the establishment of an independent investigation
committee on allegations of illegal fishing and dumping
of toxic waste in Somali waters.
Piracy is one of the many hurdles the Council
must clear on its path to stabilize Somalia and the Horn
of Africa. The Special Adviser’s report (S/2011/30) is a
meaningful contribution to the current efforts to
address the problems. In our view, his constructive
suggestions require timely and more in-depth
consideration. The measures outlined by the Legal
Adviser will be further enhanced by extensive
international support and coordination through regional
arrangements.
Finally, resolving the problem off the coast of
Somalia will require tackling the root causes of
political instability in Somaliland.

11-21518

S/PV.6473

Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would also
join others in thanking Mr. Jack Lang, Special Adviser
to the Secretary-General on Legal Issues related to
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, and AssistantSecretary-General
Stephen
Mathias
for
their
comprehensive and useful briefings on the problems of
piracy off the coast of Somalia. I would also like to
thank the Representative of the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia for his perspective on the issue.
We have carefully gone through Mr. Lang’s
report on the legal issues relating to piracy off the
coast of Somalia (S/2011/30). It is comprehensive and
contains many useful recommendations. It draws our
attention to the disturbing fact that Somali pirates are
operating further and further from the Somali coast.
The shift of attacks to the south and east of the Indian
Ocean reflects the pirates’ ability to adapt in order to
bypass the security corridor established by naval forces
and to extend their reach to areas approximately 1,000
to 1,200 miles from the Somali coast. Piracy has also
gotten more sophisticated and has become an organized
and lucrative activity. Indeed, as Mr. Lang’s report
states, piracy is gradually becoming an organized
industry. Pirates have developed significant support
structures whereby they are able to hold hijacked ships
and crews hostage for months while their instigators
and supporters hold negotiations for ransom. It is
particularly worrying that the pirates have developed a
modus vivendi with terrorist organizations.
According to the International Maritime Bureau,
a record number of people — 1,181 sailors — were
taken hostage by pirates worldwide in 2010, of which
the Somali attacks account for 1,016 hostages.
Currently, Somali pirates are holding 28 ships with
more than 638 crew members on board. During the
year 2010, 53 ships were hijacked worldwide, of which
49 were hijacked by Somali pirates. Compared to 2009,
there was a 10 per cent increase in the number of pirate
attacks in 2010, the total number being 445.
Studies by different think tanks say that maritime
piracy costs the global economy anywhere between
$7 and 12 billion a year. The figures I cite are global
figures, in contrast to the figures cited by Mr. Lang
were perhaps for the cost of Somali piracy alone.
Nevertheless, since there is still some discrepancy
there, I would, at some stage, like to get a firmer grip
on the figure, but it is certainly in the vicinity of $7 to
10 billion. These figures are cause for major concern to
the international community.

11-21518

The continuing instability in Somalia does not
permit an effective response to the problem of piracy
even though the Transitional Federal Government has
identified counter-piracy as a major area for
cooperation under the Kampala process. Therefore, the
process needs to be revitalized, and a major capacitybuilding exercise needs to be undertaken in areas of
security and police forces, legal and legislative
frameworks, jurisdictional and correctional systems,
and so on.
We agree with the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the need to further strengthen
international cooperation to tackle the problem of
piracy. A comprehensive approach to tackling the
problem has to be found in order to address this serious
issue. In this context, my delegation wishes to propose
the following measures.
There should be reinforced tracking of the trail of
ransom money to different parts of the world, a duty
that was conferred upon INTERPOL at the sixth
plenary meeting of the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia. The beneficiaries of ransom money
should be prosecuted for abetting piracy. Consideration
should be given to making the conduct of naval
operations under United Nations auspices the preferred
option. The Somali coastline should be sanitized
through identified corridors and buffer zones, and
fishing vessels around the Somali coast should be
tracked. National laws should be enacted as a priority
to criminalize piracy as defined in the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, and suspected
pirates apprehended off the coast of Somalia should be
prosecuted and, upon conviction, imprisoned, as
required under resolution 1918 (2010). This last
suggestion has been made, I believe, by other
colleagues.
Criminal activities in international waters pose a
serious threat to India, a country with a coastline of
over 7,500 kilometres. A large volume of our trade
passes through the Gulf of Aden, estimated at about
$110 billion annually. Approximately 24 Indianflagged merchant ships transit the Gulf of Aden every
month. Moreover, more than 6 per cent of seafarers
engaged in international shipping companies are Indian
nationals. We therefore have a strong interest in
ensuring the security of maritime traffic off the Somali
coast and in the Gulf of Aden and the Arabian Sea.

19

S/PV.6473

India has been actively engaged in anti-piracy
operations. The Indian navy commenced anti-piracy
patrols in the Gulf of Aden in October 2008. A total of
23 Indian naval ships have been deployed in the Gulf
of Aden since then. In addition to escorting Indianflagged vessels, our navy has provided protection to
ships of other countries. A total of 1,487 ships,
including 1,321 foreign-flagged vessels from different
countries, have been escorted by Indian naval ships in
the Gulf of Aden since October 2008. Twenty-six
piracy attempts have been thwarted, and no ship under
Indian escort has been hijacked by pirates. We have
also set up a 24/7 communication centre within the
Indian Maritime Administration for coordination and
facilitation in case of piracy.
Taking serious note of the recent spate of dhow
piracy incidents, India has banned operation of Indian
dhows in pirate-infested areas. As the piracy-prone
area has expanded eastwards, the Indian navy has made
additional deployments off the eastern and northeastern Arabian Sea. The Indian navy has also
deployed units to the exclusive economic zone of
Seychelles and Mauritius, and its ships and aircraft
routinely patrol the waters off Maldives. Following
these deployments, there have been no hijack incidents
in the eastern Arabian Sea since December 2010,
following one or two stray incidents that suddenly
occurred during a very brief period at the end of
November 2010.
India, as a founding member of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, has been
fully engaged in the efforts of the Group to share
information, coordinate the actions of navies in
combating piracy in the Gulf of Aden, raising public
and merchant marine awareness, and examining legal
and criminal justice issues with respect to apprehended
pirates. Further, the Indian navy has proactively
cooperated with other navies through the Shared
Awareness and Deconfliction mechanism, and
otherwise.
India will continue to contribute to international
efforts aimed at increasing effective cooperation
among States to tackle the problems of piracy. We also
propose to actively engage in the Council’s work in the
follow-through to the recommendations made by the
Secretary-General’s Special Adviser and in ensuring
the development of effective operational, legal and
institutional responses to the problems of piracy.

20

Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Legal Issues related to Piracy off
the Cost of Somalia, Mr. Jack Lang, for his briefing. I
would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Stephen Mathias for his briefing and the representative
of Somalia for his statement.
At the present time, the Somali peace process is
facing multiple challenges. The security situation
leaves no room for optimism. Piracy remains rampant.
To address the issue of Somalia, we must treat both the
root causes and the symptoms.
The Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and
the international community must adopt a holistic
strategy to promote, in parallel, work in the political,
security, economic, development and humanitarian
areas. China has consistently supported the TFG and
the implementation of the Djibouti Peace Agreement.
We welcome the new Cabinet established not long ago
by the TFG. We hope that the TFG will continue to
work for national reconciliation, a stronger security
sector and a speedy completion of the tasks that remain
in the transitional period.
China supports the African Union Mission in
Somalia and is in favour of the United Nations playing
a greater role in addressing the Somali issue. The
international community must respond actively to the
appeals by Somalia and the African Union by
providing more assistance to Somalia.
China is of the view that the effective prosecution
and imprisonment of perpetrators of acts of piracy
form an important link in combating piracy in Somalia.
The Special Adviser has put forward in his report (see
S/2011/30) 25 proposals on combating Somali piracy
more vigorously. The proposals are wide-ranging in
content. As a follow-up to the Secretary-General’s
report issued last July (S/2010/394), the report will
serve as an important reference for all parties to
identify gaps that hinder the effective prosecution and
imprisonment of Somali pirates, as well as to explore
feasible solutions. The report warrants further study.
The United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea and other relevant international instruments
provide a basic legal framework for States to exercise
jurisdiction and engage in judicial cooperation against
piracy. China supports the international community on
the basis of the existing international legal framework
and the relevant Security Council resolutions in

11-21518

S/PV.6473

strengthening international cooperation on
prosecution and imprisonment of Somali pirates.

the

China appreciates the work of various countries
in that regard, especially by coastal States.
Strengthening the judicial capacity of coastal States
will be critical in prosecuting and imprisoning Somali
pirates. China supports efforts towards strengthening
the judicial capacity of coastal States and calls upon
the international community to continue to provide
necessary assistance to coastal States. Moreover, China
also welcomes various feasible programmes conducive
to the prosecution and imprisonment of Somali pirates.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): At the outset, allow me to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting,
and to thank Special Adviser Lang for his report and
his valuable introductory remarks. We also thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for Legal Affairs for his
briefing and the representative of Somalia for his
statement.
Lebanon reiterates the importance of developing
a holistic approach to the situation in Somalia that does
not only deal with the security situation but also
supports the building of institutions and economic
development in that country. We reaffirm our
condemnation of acts of piracy and armed robbery,
which pose a threat to international navigation and
trade and obstruct humanitarian access. We also agree
with the call by the African Union Peace and Security
Council, in its communiqué of 15 October 2010, for
the Security Council to deal with
“the issue of piracy off the coast of Somalia in a
holistic manner, with the view to effectively
addressing its underlying causes and other
equally serious threats which affect the livelihood
and well being of the Somali people, in particular
illegal fishing and dumping of toxic substances
and waste off the coast of Somalia”.
In that regard, we support Mr. Lang’s proposal to
establish a committee to investigate illegal fishing and
maritime pollution.
Although the international naval presence in the
region contributes to containing the problem of piracy,
it does not address its root causes. Those continue to
lie in the lack of security, stability, the rule of law and
development in Somalia. Somali pirates are not born at
sea but on Somali land. Strengthening maritime
surveillance in a particular area will not be enough to

11-21518

stop them. The continued evolution of their methods of
work and the expansion of their area of operations
from the Gulf of Aden into the Indian Ocean attests to
that.
Therefore, today we need to respond quickly and
effectively. In that context, we welcome the report of
the Special Adviser (see S/2011/30), which emphasizes
the extreme urgency of the situation and the pressing
need to act before we reach the point of no return. We
take note of that report and would like to highlight the
following points.
First, international law, and particularly the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, sets
the legal framework applicable to combating piracy
and armed robbery at sea.
Secondly, the failure to prosecute those
responsible for acts of piracy and armed robbery and
the reluctance of States to incarcerate them for long
periods undermine anti-piracy efforts. It is indeed
alarming to learn that more than 90 per cent of pirates
captured will be released without prosecution — a
practice described as catch-and-release by Mr. Lang
and already noted by many colleagues.
Thirdly, naval and coast guard forces are
necessary in combating crimes at sea. However, the
ability of Somalia is very limited in that regard. We
therefore call for building and equipping Somali
forces, particularly its coast guard.
Fourthly, a legal structure is needed to authorize
the required executive and judicial jurisdiction over
suspected pirates.
Fifthly, we encourage the United Nations to assist
Somalia and neighbouring countries in delimiting their
maritime zones, which would clarify jurisdictional
matters among them and allow them to perform their
necessary duties within their areas of authority.
We could not agree more with Mr. Lang’s
recognition of the need for economic and social
development to create incentives that would steer local
Somalis away from a piracy-based economy. The
international community needs to remain one step
ahead of the pirates. We therefore welcome the main
recommendations in the report and support the adoption
of a new Security Council resolution on this matter.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): Like previous speakers, I too would like to

21

S/PV.6473

thank Mr. Jack Lang, Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on Legal Issues Related to Piracy off the Coast
of Somalia, for his briefing. We are confident that his
work will contribute to progress on this complex and
sensitive question. We would also like to thank
Mr. Mathias, Assistant Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs, and the representative of Somalia for their
statements.
By appointing Mr. Lang as the Special Adviser on
Legal Issues Related to Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia, the Secretary-General has both assessed the
scale of the threat of piracy off the Somali coast and
has shown the commitment of the United Nations to
combat this phenomenon. While we await a more indepth analysis of the report (see S/2011/30), I would
like to make some comments.
First of all, my delegation considers — as is often
said — that the question of piracy needs to be
considered from two angles. One the one hand is the
importance of setting up an inclusive judicial
mechanism, and on the other is the need to tackle the
question of piracy off the Somali coast in conjunction
with the security threat in the interior of the country.
Piracy is a shared security challenge; protecting the
coasts of the Gulf of Aden from acts of piracy as well
as implementing a rapid and effective crackdown on
perpetrators require a coordinated international
response. The establishment of legal instruments
should primarily involve regional actors directly
affected by the unstable situation off their coasts.
As Mr. Jack Lang clearly underscored in his
report, we must strengthen both the financial and the
judicial support provided to States in the region in
general, and to Somalia in particular, in order to enable
them to ensure the security of their territories.
Strengthening Somali security capacity, adapting
national legal instruments to deal with piracy and
ensuring effective international cooperation are all part
of such an approach.
My delegation supports the proposal by the
Special Adviser for the establishment of jurisdictional
provisions in Puntland and Somaliland, as well as a
special Somali court. This legal framework for action
should enable States in the region to take more
effective steps against the phenomenon of piracy.
Nevertheless, it is essential that complementary
measures also be contemplated to specifically take into
account the security threats within Somalia.

22

Whenever the topic of piracy has been addressed
in the Council, my delegation has always advocated for
a comprehensive strategy for resolving the Somali
crisis. Guaranteeing security on the ground in Somalia
calls for the imposition of a naval blockade and a noflight zone over Somalia, as recommended by the
African Union. Among other things, such a blockade
would make it possible to prevent the entry of foreign
elements and the theft and transfer of weapons and
ammunition to armed groups, thereby leading to an end
to the fighting that has ravaged the country for just
over two decades.
It is also important to link the number of
maritime and judicial anti-piracy initiatives with
international initiatives supporting the Transitional
Federal Government in its economic development
efforts, especially since poverty is one of the root
causes of piracy. Indeed, many pirates are ex-fishermen
who became pirates because their traditional
occupation disappeared as a result of industrial fishing
practices off the coast.
Finally,
I
underscore
my
delegation’s
endorsement of Mr. Lang’s position that the United
Nations must take swift, strong action. For its part,
Gabon will continue contributing to the consideration
of the report of the Special Adviser. We reaffirm our
gratitude and support to Mr. Lang for his work in
seeking concrete, effective and rapid solutions in the
fight against piracy in the Gulf of Aden.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
At the outset, I would like to thank Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General Jack Lang for his
report (see S/2011/30) and for his informative briefing.
I also thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs and the representative of Somalia for their
statements.
The phenomenon of piracy is a challenge that has
yet to receive an adequate and effective response from
the international community. Although some measures
have been taken in the areas of security, judicial
arrangements, prevention best practices and awarenessraising, we cannot say there has been a reduction in the
number of piracy attacks off the coast of Somalia.
Unfortunately, on the contrary, we can see how, over
time, piracy is acquiring structured features in financial
and organizational aspects. We are also concerned by

11-21518

S/PV.6473

the further expansion of the area threatened by piracy
attacks, southwards along the coastline of Somalia and
eastwards into the Indian Ocean.

Secretary-General in the Council last August. We
should therefore all welcome the fact that this
convergence is emerging.

Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly condemns acts
of piracy and expresses its concern regarding the
impact of such acts — first on regional security and,
subsequently, on the global economy and international
security. In that context, we share the view expressed
by Special Adviser Lang that there is an urgent need to
establish effective counter-piracy measures before
spillover effects produce further instability in the
region.

I also find it positive that a strong, powerful and
determined collective resolve is emerging from the
Council, on behalf of the international community, to
seek to defeat this dangerous and destructive criminal
activity that is disrupting both economic and social
activity. I therefore think that this meeting provides
hope and shows that the United Nations and the
Security Council in particular are determined to take a
new course.

We believe that the Somalization of a solution, as
Mr. Lang wrote in his report, is a valuable proposal for
beginning a new phase in fighting piracy, which is
evidently needed. We consider that institution-building,
especially in the security sector, will make the
Transitional Federal Government and regional
authorities in Somaliland, and principally in Puntland,
critical partners of the international community in
fighting piracy.

I should like to repeat what every speaker has
said in their own way: we must not waste time. This
race between the whole host of international forces and
highly mobile, well equipped and swift pirates is at the
moment being won by the pirates. In a civilized world
in which national and international law continue to
make progress it would be a great flaw in our laws and
civilization if we were unable to prevail over this
phenomenon that is spreading across the Indian Ocean.

Impunity, as most delegations that have spoken
before me have stated, is a factor that leads to an
increase in piracy activities. The fact that a catch-andrelease method is applied in 90 per cent of cases points
out the serious flaws in the international approach to
combating piracy. We therefore believe that the new
proposals outlined in the Special Adviser’s report
aimed at establishing specialized piracy courts in
Somaliland and Puntland, along with an extraterritorial
court in Arusha, as well as an increase in incarceration
capacity in Somaliland and Puntland are a good basis
for creating a new approach and instruments in
counter-piracy activities.

I hope that the Council will, if possible, very
quickly take into account the various statements that
have been made and the conclusions put forward by the
Secretary-General and in the report (see S/2011/30) I
have submitted and come up with a resolution of
historic importance that is firm, clear, determined and
useful to the countries of the world, international
organizations and the private sector in more robustly
tackling piracy.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Lang to make some
concluding remarks.
Mr. Lang (spoke in French): I think we have now
come to the end of this debate, and I certainly do not
wish to take up more of the Council’s time. I would
just like to say how much I personally appreciate the
positive comments expressed by various speakers
today. In that regard, Assistant Secretary-General
Mathias comprehensively clarified the legal scope of
the proposals put forward today and the way in which
they dovetail with the proposals made by the

11-21518

As several representative have said today, I
should like to reiterate that not only is it desirable that
the Council adopt a clear and firm resolution, but also
that the Council — and this is its responsibility, not
mine — ensure that the resolution it adopts be swiftly
followed up with real, practical action on the ground. It
must be clear that the world is ready to act quickly,
vigorously and well.
The President: I thank Mr. Lang for his
statement.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

23
