UNITED NATIONS

,SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

COUNCIL
RECORDS

YEAR

2:159th

MEETING:

NEW

20 JULY

1979

uN,s:#:::.l;,

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

.....................................

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Report of the Security Council Commission established under resolution 446 (1979)
(S/13450 and Corr.1 and Add.1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2159)

SA’V.2159

1

r

I
‘

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations’ :
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the Oflcial Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions L
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.
*‘,

2159th MEETiNG
Held in New York on Friday, 20 July 1979, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Ivor RICHARD (United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

consultations among members of the Council and which
members have requested me to place before the Council.

Present The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Social% Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

3. Before calling on the representative of Portugal to
introduce the draft resolution, I should point out that I have
been asked by the members of the Security Council Commission established under resolution 446 (1979) to say that
they are not the authors of the commendation of their work
expressed in operative paragraph 1. We are indeed grateful
to the three members of the Commission that, in the interests of the expeditious dispatch of the Council’s business,
they nevertheless feel able to vote for it.

Provisionalagenda(S/Agendai2159)
1. Adoption of the agenda

4. Mr. MATHIAS
(Portugal) (interpretation
from
French): My comments on the draft resolution will be very
brief because, as a result of the discussion on the item on our
agenda, the Council has clearly defined views on the
question.

2. The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Report of the Security Council Commission established under resolution 446 (1979) (S/13450 and
Corr. 1 and Add. 1)
The meeting was called to order at 4.10 p.m

5. The text now before us takes up the conclusions and
recommendations in the report of the Commission, above
all, it reflects the spirit in which the Commission tried to
carry out its mandate-a pragmatic, realistic and constructive spirit. It seems to us established that the States members
of the Council regard the settlements policy as illegal, that
they believe that the continuation of that policy has the
gravest consequences in regard to a peaceful solution of the
Middle East conflict, that the policy violates the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949, and that the effects of the
policy are felt particularly by the local Arab and Palestinian
people. In that context, the Council, in the draft resolution,
calls upon the Government and people of Israel to cease,on
an urgent basis, the application of that policy in the occupied territories, including Jerusalem.

Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted

mesituation
illtheoccupied
Arabterritories:
Report of the Swurity Comcil Commission established
m&r resolution 446 (1979) (S/l3450 and Corr.1 and
Add.1)

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
taken at previous meetings, I invite the’representative of
Jordan to take a place at the Council table. I invite the
representatives of Egypt, Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic and the Acting Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber. I invite the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization to take a place at the Council
table.

6. In my delegation’s opinion, that is the least the Council
can do at this stage. We hope that the measures advocated
in this text will be understood in Israel with all the gravity
and seriousness they imply and with the urgency they
require.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nuseibeh (Jo&n)
took a place at the &ncil table Mr. Abdel Meguid.@flpd,
Mr. Lam& (Israel), Mr. El-Chouf (Syrian Arab Republic)
and Mr. Roa Kouri (Acting Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People) took the places reservedfor them at the side of the
Council chamber and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organisation) took a place at the Council table.

7. On behalf of the Commission, I wish to thank the
Council for the confidence it will show in the Commission’s
work if it adopts this text. On the same assumption, and
taking into account operative paragraph 4, the members of
the Commission will meet and then contact you, Mr. President, for an exchange of ideas on the Commission’s future
work.

2. The PRESIDENT: I wish to draw the Council’s attention to document S/l 346 1, which contains the text of a draft
resolution which has emerged in the course of informal

8. I should like to take this opportunity to thank all the
delegations that were good enough to say such encouraging
1

,

and friendly words about the Commission and its work. We
were deeply moved by those words.

and lasting settlement of the conflict in the Middle East was
stated in these words:

9. The delegation of Israel accused us of lacking objectivity. We reject that accusation. We would have hopedindeed, we continue to hope-to have the co-operation of
and contacts with the Government of Israel, and to be able
to work jointly with it; but that was refused to us. This
refusal in itself takes away from the Israeli Government’s
arguments and comments on the question any value that
they might have had.

“In the end, only a settlement which recognizes
Israel’s right to exist within secure and recognized
boundaries and the legitimate national rights of the Palestinians can bring a just and lasting peace to the Middle
East.” [213Zst meeting, para. 7.1
17. That remains our position and has been fundamental
also to our stand on the resolution which the Council has
just adopted.

10. The PRESIDENT: If I hear no objection, I shall take
it that the Council is ready to proceed to the vote. I now put
to the vote the draft resolution contained in document
S/1.3461.

18. Mr. PETREE (United States of America): I should
like first to express to you, Sir, the congratulations of my
delegation on your assumption of the ofice of President of
the Council. Your service .this month is a fitting climax to
one of the most distinguished careers of leadership in the
Council and the United Nations. Your many friends will
sorely miss the presence and contributions of Ambassador
Richard. We join all in wishing you warmly all successin
your future endeavours.

A vote was taken by show of ham&.
In favour: Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,
France, Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Zambia

19. I also want to express our appreciation to Ambassador Troyanovsky of the Soviet Union, who smoothly led us
through a busy month of work on a number of important
questions with his usual firmness and fairness.

Against: None
Absiaining: United States of America
The draft resohrtion wasadopted by 14 votes to none, with I
abstention. 1

20. The United States would have supported the resolution, if it had not also raised issues other than settlements,
which have to be resolved through sensitive negotiations.

11. The, PRESIDENT: I shall now call on those representatives who have asked to be allowed to speak following the
vote.

21. The United States, on a variety of occasions, has
stated in forceful terms its position on the question of Israeli
settlements in the occupied territories. We have stated-and
I repeat here today-that
we oppose such settlements.
Those settlements prejudge the outcome of Middle East
peace negotiations and are inconsistent with international
law and the fourth Geneva Convention. We have asked
Israel to cease its practice of establishing settlements, and I
repeat that request here today.

12. Mr. AASEN (Norway): My delegation is very pleased
to see you in the chair, Mr. President, presiding over the
work of the Security Council this month. The many difficult
and delicate issuesconfronting us require the kind of leader:
ship by a President which we know you are eminently
qualified to give.
13. My delegation would like also to join previous speakers in thanking Ambassador Troyanovsky for the way in
which he presided over the Council during the month of
June.

22. Since this resolution, like the recommendations of the
Commission which this resolution accepts and incorporates, goes beyond the question of settlements to deal with
such matters as Jerusalem, the United States did not support it, and abstained. This is not to say that these questions
are not important: they are. However, these matters, as well
as issues such as settlements and the future of the occupied
territories themselves, can only effectively be dealt with in
the course of negotiations
between the partiesnegotiations which are now under way and which, we hope,
will be extended to incorporate all parties with an interest in
them. The important objective, and the one which more
than anything else will influence our approach to matters
such as those presented in the resolution, is the advancement of those negotiations. To that end we pledge
ourselves.

14. My delegation was able to vote in favour of the resolution which the Council has just adopted. We do not necessarily subscribe to each and every word of it but, in
principle, the resolution reflects the views of my Govemment on the settlement policies. We do consider these policies to be inconsistent with international law, and an
obstacle to peace, threatening inter alia the ongoing peace
process which my Government has welcomed and fully
supports.
15. Peace should be the main concern of all parties to the
conflict. Consequently, they should refrain from such steps
as can prove detrimental to the bold initiatives taken on
behalf of peace over the past months.

23. One last point: While we do not agree with all of the
points contained in the report, we recognize that the
members of the Commission have worked diligently and in
good faith on an issue of considerable sensitivity and
emotion.

16. In an intervention in the Council on 19 March, the
position of my Government with regard to a comprehensive
‘See resolution 452 (1979).

2

participation of the Chairman of the Commission, Ambassador Leonardo Math&, I thought we were on the brink of
obtaining a consensus. Unfortunately,
power politics
played their role.

24. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): I do not want to make an
explanation of vote; I want to make some observations on a
vote-and that is the vote of the United States.
25. I listened with great care and keenness to the statement just spelt out by my friend Ambassador Petree, and I
must say it is a far cry from the vote: the words are in no way
convincing; the action is discouraging.

31. The United States has no objection to the resolution
on its merits, I am sure: it abstained not on the merits of the
resolution-not
because of the elements of the resolution,
notwithstanding what my friend Ambassador Petree saidbut because of power politics. And the poor Palestinians
have no role in the power politics inside the United States.

26. Mr. Petree, I would say to you the following-and do
not hold it against me, as you know the spirit in which we
have been working together for two years: I must say that
your vote to&y is, to borrow from Shakespeare again,
“untender”. It isa vote that makes the moderate radical, the
radical insane and the insane beserk in our area. It is a vote
which I would describe, if you will excuse me, as the callousness of the powerful. Your vote, in my view, is an’encouragement to Israel to continue with its policy of piracy, of
violation of the Charter, of plundering and looting and of
expulsion of the people of Palestine. Your vote, I must say
in all frankness, adds fuel to irrationality and ammunition
to further turmoil in our area.

32. I seem always to go back to English literature: I think
we live in the famous “Waste Land” of T. S. Eliot, because
we work hard, we follow logic, we pursue the demands of
give and take and, all of a sudden, we find that it all
backfires.
33. As I said earlier, we were accommodating. We showed
flexibility, and I myself stuck my neck out-so much so that
I was accused by my kith and kin of defending a wishywashy resolution. But the important thing wasto solicit for
the cause of the poor, defenceless Palestinians. Unfortunately, we did not achieve a consensus, again through no
fault of the Palestinians or of members of the Council, or of
the members of the Commission who worked so assiduously and incorruptibly on behalf of the Palestinians to
achieve a consensus.

27. We have shown through the conduct of consultations
the maximum of restraint-the maximum of accommo
dation-and
nobody, not even members of the United
States delegation, can deny that. We have even gone so far
as to delete words which went against the grain for the
United States, such as ?lismantling”. I myselfsuggested the
word “confronting”, and I thought that we were approaching&e final consensus which the Chairman of the Commis._
sion had so assiduously sought and worked for. Unfortunately, through no fault of his, through no fault of
- OWS-through
no fault of the members of the Council-the
United States chose to abstain.
28. Mr. Petree, I regret to say that your vote displays
isolation from the mainstream of international intellectual,
moral and political thought, and this hurts me. I remember,
when I was in Kuwait two months ago, I had left the
Ministry of Finance after meeting with the Minister, and
was walking to my car in the heat of Kuwait, when an
elderly man who had been following me shouted in a Palestinian Arabic accent: “Ambassador Bishara”. I turned to
him and said: “Yes? What do you want?’ He said: “Please
do not forget us, the Palestinians; do not forget us in the
work of the United Nations.” Then he said in a very innocuous, harmless, indeed innocent, manner: “But what is
wrong with the United States? It has made us its enemy.” I
answered him by borrowing a famous quotation from Jefferson, who swore to fight to eternity the issue of injustice. I
uttered those words to soothe that miserable man.

34. I can only say that,.in my view, it is’unwholesome and
unhealthy for the United States to be associated in our
region of the world with abstentions or vetos. If we read the
record of the United States with regard to issues concerning
the Middle East, we always find it accompanied by abstention or its friend, veto. Hardly-or rarely-is there a positive vote, except on that famous monument, General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) for the return of the refugees,
a document that has become a chronic yearly ritual. What a
distance there is between the present situation in which a
veto is cast on an innocuous, harmless resolution, and the
words of President Jefferson, the great founder of this great
Republic, when he said he would swear to tight to eternity
for justice. Sometimes, however, we are forced to real&,
again as I have read in English literature, that even idols
have their feet of clay.
35. Sometimes we are overcome by a senseof frustration,
but in politics we should resist that. We are ready to give the
United States the benefit of the doubt on this issue. We are
hurt, we are taken aback and, in simple language, we are
disappointed. But the sun, as I have said earlier, will not rise
in the west simply because there was an abstention on this
resolution. The Palestinians will remain. Their camps will
remain. Their resistance will be strengthened.

29. On every issue pertaining to the Middle East in the
past .I6 or 18 months that I have been working on the
Council, the fust thing we have done has been to solicit,
consult, negotiate with, talk to, confabulate-if you likewith the United States delegation with a view to achieving
one thing: securing the vote of the United States. Nobody
from the Mission of the United States can deny that fact.
And sometimes I have thought that the vote of the United
States was the key to the doors of heaven. But we have acted
in good faith and in good spirit, and no member of the
United States Mission can deny that fact.

36. In the lounge before we came here today, a Palestinian
said to me, “My God”, he said, “‘what happened7 The
Americans are so eager and so earnest about the human
is praiseworthy and
cargoes of Viet-Nam” -which
excellent-“What
about the human objects in the miserable
refugee camps of Palestine?” I said to him: “The crude facts
of power politics play their role, and you have to understand that your battle is fierce, your tight is arduous, but in
the final analysis, your goal will be achieved.**

30. Last night, when we left the caucus room after serious
negotiations on the draft, with the active coilaboration and

37. Today, we have celebrated-I
am sure the entire
world celebrated-the downfall of a Somoza, and many
3

Somoxas will disappear. Every disappearance of a Somoxa
is a victory for those who are fighting assiduously and with
sacrifice for a noble cause. I say that, and I regret having to
say it, and I apologize to my friend, Mr. Petree, if I have
irritated him. I am stating a fact, and it is a fact we cannot
deny. You CaMOt deny how flexible we were, nor can you
deny that we displayed a willingness to reach accomodation
through give and take, but-unfortunately-we
have not
obtained consensus. The issue, however, remains, and we
will come back to the United States on another occasion.

held in the near future, the Council will adopt a tougher,
firmer position with respect to Israel’s annexationist policy.
45. The PRESIDENT: I should now like to make a statement in my capacity as representative of the UNITED
KINGDOM.
46. It is no secret that when resolution 446 (1979) was
adopted earlier this year, my delegation had reservations
about the decision to establish a commission to examine the
situation relating to settlements in the occupied territories,
including Jerusalem. Nonetheless, that resolution and its
recommendations were adopted with no dissent. Once the
decision to send the Commission had been taken, we think
that all Members of this Organization should have sought
to co-operate with it. We were disappointed, therefore,
when the Government of Israel declared itself unable’to do
thii. Given their lack of co-operation, an important source
of information was denied to the members of the Commission. This made it difficult for them to-gather sufficient
first-hand material to make all the statistics and conclusions
wholly water-tight. Inevitably, therefore, there are one or
two areas where the statistics and conclusions leave some
room for doubt. According to our own researches, for
instance, we estimate that the total number of settlers in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem is some 58,080, compared
with the figure given in the report of 90,000. This may reflect
different figures for the settlement population of East Jerusalem. Then again, the figure of 27 per cent for land seized
by Israeli authorities for settlement and other purposes,
whilst close to our own estimate of 25 per cent, may also be
somewhat misleading. We believe that only some 2 to 3 per
cent of West Bank land is, in fact, in use for actual
settlements.

38. Mr. HRCKA (Czechoslovakia) (interpretation from
Russian): In its statement at this morning’s meeting, the
Czechoslovak delegation pointed out that in order for the
Security Council to respond to the demands of the task
incumbent upon it, it must condemn Israel’s policy of occupation and envisage taking the coercive measures provided
by the Charter to that end.
39. Nevertheless, we voted in favour of the resolution,
although we feel it is unduly marked by compromise and
lacking in substance. Unfortunately, the resolution does not
contain elements designed to prevent the creation of new
settlements and to ensure the dismantling of existing
settlements.
40. The Czechoslovak delegation would like to express
the hope that in the future the Council will be able to adopt
specific, firm decisions on the question.
41. Mr. KHARLAMOV.(Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics (interpretation from Russian): The Soviet delegation
voted in favour of the resolution just adopted by the Security Council, although it.believes the resolution is very weak.
It does not duly reflect the discussions that took place on
this important issue.

47. But those discrepancies are few and relatively minor
and my delegation is in broad agreement with the statistics
and the conclusions of the report. We have no difficulty in
accepting the recommemlations which, in our opinion,
reflect a praiseworthy effort to avoid acrimonious polemics
and represent a genuine contribution to the solution of this
most difficult problem. My Government’s attitude towards
settlement activity in the occupied territories remains
unchanged. We consider the settlements to be illegal in
international law. We continue to consider that they make a
negotiated solution to the over-all problem in the area more
difficult and that they represent a major obstacle to peace.
That view was again publicly stated in the latest statement
on the Middle East by the Governments of the nine member
countries of the European Community on 18 June
[S/13423$ I do not therefore intend here to rehearse at
length those clear expressions of our views.

42. We understand that other delegations share our view.
In drawing up the draft resolution, there was a question of
making the resolution acceptable to all, and the sponsors
made great efforts to make the resolution one that could be
adopted by consensus. In that connexion, we cannot but
express our regret that one member of the Council, the
representative of the United States, abstained during the
vote, even though during the preparation of the draft everything possible had been done to eliminate what were not
unduly strong words or expressions in order that the United
States would be able to vote in favour of the resolution
along with other members, as the representative of Kuwait
has just stated.
43. In the view of the Soviet delegation, the Council
should have adopted a firmer, tougher position with regard
to the illegal actions of Israel in the occupied Arab territories. It should not only have demanded that Israel ceaseits
policy of establishing new settlements but have adopted
measures for the dismantling of the settlements already in
existence. As pointed out earlier, the Security Council has
adopted many resolutions on the issue. Although the present resolution contains a general reference to previous decisions and resolutions, we believe that some of these should
have been referred to directly, and I am thinking in particular of resolution 252 (1968).
44. I must reiterate that my delegation regrets the fact that
the resolution as adopted is weak, but it hopes that in the
course of the broader discussions on Palestine that will be

48. In conclusion, may I pay a tribute to the endeavours of
the authors of the report before us. The reservations my
delegation initially felt about the setting up of a commission
reflected a concern that its activities might only serve to
complicate the peace efforts currently under way. The representatives of Portugal, Bolivia and Zambia are to be congratulated for the balance and objectivity of the outcome.
Since the resolution before us is based almost entirely on
their report’s recommendations, which we have no dificulty in accepting, my delegation wasable to vote in favour
of it.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

4

:

Unite t Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
tbe world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAIC

COMO

IIOJIY’IHTb

CONSEGUIR

SiOD.AHEIII

PUBLICACXONES

OPI’AHXi

3AWiEi

DE

OE’bEAHHEHHhlX

LAS

NACIONES

HA4HH

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas
estan en vents en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo. Cons&e
a su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in Uoited Nations, New York

Prlcc: su.s.

1.50

.

79-70002~March

1982-2.250
