S/PV.8511

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8511th meeting

Friday, 12 April 2019, 10.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Heusgen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2019/265)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-10832 (E)
*1910832*

S/PV.8511

Colombia

The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2019/265)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Colombia to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia. It is wonderful to have him here.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. Carlos Ruiz
Massieu, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia; and Ms. Rosa Emilia Salamanca,
Executive Director, Corporación de Investigación y
Acción Social y Económica.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/265, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ruiz Massieu.
Mr. Ruiz Massieu: It is an honour to present
to the Council the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia (S/2019/265) and to update the Council
on developments since its publication. It is a pleasure
to do so in the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo,
and the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and
Consolidation, Mr. Emilio Archila, who are both vital
partners of the Verification Mission.
2/22

12/04/2019

I also welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of Rosa Emilia Salamanca, representative of
Colombian civil society, which plays a critical role in
the peace process.
As the Council has acknowledged, Colombia’s
Final Agreement for the Termination of Conflict and
the Construction of a Stable and Lasting Peace is a
historic achievement. It has helped to end decades of
armed conflict and provides an example to countries
around the world that negotiated solutions are possible.
At the same time, we know that it is during the long
and often difficult process of implementing such
agreements that peace is truly forged. Today, a diverse
array of Colombian institutions, as well as community
leaders, rural families, former combatants and members
of civil society, remain actively engaged in the process
and count on the international community’s continuing
support and engagement.
Colombia’s final peace agreement is a broad
agreement that includes interconnected commitments
to ending the conflict as well as to foster rural reform,
political participation, the reintegration of former
combatants, security for conflict-affected communities,
illicit-crop substitution and transitional justice. It
is therefore key to implement the agreement in a
comprehensive, integrated manner so as to ensure that
all areas of its implementation are adequately resourced.
Many of the connections across those areas of the
peace agreement were evident last week on a visit,
during which I had the honour of joining President
Duque at a territorial area for the training and
reintegration in Icononzo, in the mountains of central
Colombia, where 200 former combatants and their
families live. That was his third visit to a territorial
area. At that time, the former combatants conveyed a
range of concerns, including Government support for
their productive projects, security and uncertainty
regarding their legal guarantees and with respect to the
status of 24 territorial areas after the current legal status
expires on 15 August. President Duque’s message on
that visit was to reassure the former combatants about
the Government’s commitment to their reintegration.
Those are valuable opportunities to sustain dialogue and
address the continuing insecurity and uncertainty that
are highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General.
Additional visits by members of the peace commissions
of both houses of Congress to the territorial areas have
also helped convey the commitment and engagement of
Colombian institutions in the peace process.
19-10832

12/04/2019

Colombia

With regard to reintegration, individual and
collective projects for 1.774 former members of the
Fuerza Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército
del Pueblo (FARC-EP), including 520 women, have
now been approved. A recent census completed by the
Agency for Reintegration and Normalization identified
more than 10,500 former FARC-EP members within the
reintegration process. Nearly two years after they laid
down their arms, a critical challenge is to maintain their
optimism in the face of continued uncertainties about
their future. In that respect, I respectfully encourage
the Government to accelerate the approval of more
projects and the prompt disbursement of funds, as well
as the implementation of a gender-sensitive approach
and timely decisions on access to land.
Former combatants are undertaking productive
initiatives as diverse as establishing bakeries and
restaurants, producing clothing, shoes and agricultural
products, and opening tourism projects in areas of the
country that were previously inaccessible owing to the
conflict. For most of those projects, a key challenge
remains access to markets. The Government, together
with the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común
(FARC), regional authorities, the private sector, the
United Nations country team and, of course, the
Mission continue to facilitate opportunities to connect
the markets to products and services offered by former
combatants, in partnership with local communities.
In its latest press statement on Colombia (SC/13676),
the Council encouraged timely decisions concerning
the future of the territorial areas, once their current
legal status expires, to help provide greater certainty
and reinforce the confidence of former FARC-EP
members in the peace process. I welcome the recent
efforts of the Government to formulate proposals for
each of those territorial areas. It is also important to
ensure an inclusive discussion on those proposals that
involve former combatants, as well as local authorities.
Those decisions should be taken and communicated
to the former combatants as soon as possible so as to
ensure a smooth transition. As always, the Mission
stands ready to support the Government and the FARC
in the transition process.
With regard to security guarantees, the killing of
community leaders, human rights defenders and former
FARC-EP combatants continues and remains a grave
concern. The deployment of Colombian military and
police near the territorial areas has been and remains
critical, but violent competition among illegal armed

S/PV. 8511

groups for territorial control in areas outside those
security perimeters continues to threaten the security
of former combatants and communities, as well as to
undercut the overall peace-implementation efforts.
During a recent visit to Tumaco on the Pacific
coast, I had a sobering discussion with a group of
courageous Afro-Colombian social and community
leaders, several of whom are under direct threat from
armed groups and criminal organizations. All of them
have friends, family members or colleagues who
have been assassinated, displaced or threatened by
criminal elements, including groups involved in illicit
economies. They shared with me specific proposals and
ideas for ensuring their safety that should be taken into
account in devising local protection strategies.
In that regard, I welcome the Government’s
efforts to hold sessions of the National Commission on
Security Guarantees in the territories. One such session
actually is being held today in Cúcuta. I encourage the
Government to ensure that those sessions translate
into prompt decisions and concrete actions tailored
to local dynamics. The leaders with whom I talked
in Tumaco were also emphatic that security in the
territories demands an integrated and coordinated
presence of State authorities — civilian institutions
and security forces alike. This is a message that I have
heard consistently across the country. In that regard, I
welcome the approval of the 16 development plans, with
a territorial focus that will benefit 170 municipalities
affected by the armed conflict, and I encourage the
Government to devote the resources necessary to ensure
the implementation of those plans. More than 200,000
community members contributed to the formulation of
those plans, which is a positive example of effective
dialogue between communities and State institutions.
Recent weeks have been dominated by divisive
debates regarding transitional justice, which is a
contentious issue in most peace processes. Last month,
President Duque objected to six articles of the draft
statutory law of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
Following a vote against those objections in the Chamber
of Representatives earlier this week, consideration
of the objections is still pending in the Senate. The
Secretary-General has called for prompt action by all
concerned to ensure that a statutory law consistent with
the peace agreement is adopted as soon as possible.
That statutory law is the last missing element of the
legal framework for the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
and is needed to ensure that the institution can operate

19-108323/22

S/PV.8511

Colombia

with the necessary independence and autonomy. The
Special Jurisdiction for Peace, under the leadership of
its President, Patricia Linares, continues to advance
its work with impressive results. It has now initiated
seven large cases that are examining significant
violations affecting 820,000 victims. Moreover, close
to 9,700 former FARC-EP members and almost 2,000
individuals from the armed forces have subjected
themselves to its authority.
President Duque has also announced his intention
to propose three constitutional reforms to the articles
underpinning the transitional justice framework of
the peace agreement. In introducing the first of those
proposals, the Government assured that they would
be applicable in the future. Indeed, no such initiatives
should be applied in a retroactive manner to those
who laid down their arms in good faith and on the
strength of commitments made under the agreement.
As the Secretary-General has stated, the principle of
non-retroactivity is critical in preserving confidence in
the process going forward. In a climate of uncertainty
for victims, those subject to the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace, FARC members awaiting funding for social
and economic reintegration and communities that have
suffered from the conflict, the greatest uncertainty
would be to reopen core elements of the underlying
peace agreement itself.
As the peace process continues, it is fundamental
to bring Colombians together and to heal divisions,
just as President Duque signalled on the day of his
inauguration. The path to consolidating peace requires
consensus, and consensus can be achieved only
through dialogue. I strongly encourage all such efforts
in that regard. I am encouraged that at the local level
Colombians throughout the country are engaging with
one another across ideological lines to embrace the
opportunities provided by the peace process. In the
territorial areas I have visited, I have seen soldiers
and former combatants playing football and living and
working together, when only a few years ago they were
fighting against each other. A few weeks ago in Cali,
Colombia’s third-largest city, the Mission participated
in the launch of the Municipal Pact for Peace, Life and
Reconciliation, which was signed by all political forces
in the city, as well as civil society. In the Mission’s
ongoing work on youth, peace and security, we have
been inspired by young Colombian men and women
coming together across political, geographic and class
4/22

12/04/2019

divides to embrace reconciliation and support former
combatants in their reintegration into society.
In those and all their efforts to consolidate peace,
Colombians, as always, can count on the unwavering
support of the United Nations. The Security Council’s
firm and unified support to the peace process remains
as crucial as ever.
The President: I thank the Special Representative
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Salamanca.
Ms. Salamanca (spoke in Spanish): My name
is Rosa Emilia Salamanca. I am the co-Director of
the Corporación de Investigación y Acción Social
y Económica. I have been working for years in
peacebuilding and in defending human rights.
I welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, the Permanent Representative of Colombia
to the United Nations and the other members of the
Colombian Government.
For us this forum is of great importance in our
dialogue with the international community and with the
Colombian Government in addressing the challenge of
peacebuilding in my country. We, together with many
civil society organizations and very diverse women’s
organizations, continue to help transform Colombia
with resilience and determination. In addition to
being a time for us to speak of hope and faith in the
future, this is also a challenging time when it comes
to implementing the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, as
I will explain later, and we are being asked to remain
unwavering in our focus on and support to a process
that will continue to be an example of innovation and
contributions to the entire world.
Let me recall that the agreement is designed based
on a comprehensive approach and its greatest asset
lies in its interconnected approach to peace and the
way it places victims at its centre. Its transformational
potential is to be maintained and is an opportunity for
change in order to put an end to the cycles of violence,
conflict and pain we have experienced. I would
therefore like to underscore some issues that, although
they are not the only issues, we believe are important
when it comes to implementing the agreement in the
current environment.
With regard to the reintegration of former
combatants, as expressions of civil society, we
19-10832

12/04/2019

Colombia

recognize that, if we invest in people who are in the
process of reintegrating, that is a security issue and
is a way of preventing new conflicts and moving
forward in the reconciliation process. We speak of
issues that will benefit society as a whole and foster
effective and sustainable peace. For that reason, we
must accelerate the decision and routing of territorial
areas and reduce uncertainty about their stabilization
and future. We must accelerate the implementation of a
gender perspective towards reintegration with financial
and technical resources, with the understanding that
projects that involve women ex-combatants guarantee
that they and their families can live free from violence.
At the same time, we must also count on measures
to address the barriers to political participation that
have been noted inside and outside the party formed
following the peace agreement.
As civil society, we want to see women reintegrated
as full citizens and with recognized leadership.
We must reduce the uncertainty surrounding the
physical and legal guarantees for male and female
ex-combatants by accelerating the disbursements for
productive projects that should be operational. We
must operationalize and accelerate the implementation
of the national strategy through the national policy
for the social and economic reincorporation of former
members of the Fuerza Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo, document 3931, and
allocate sufficient resources for that phase through
the national development plan and departmental and
municipal plans. We must stress the psychological
and psychosocial components, which are critical to
the transition of men and women who lay down their
arms in order to stabilize the deep cultural, social and
political changes that this entails. We must disseminate
the value of community reintegration experiences as
good practices and share their examples and lessons
learned as a basis for joint reconciliation processes.
With regard to the comprehensive system of truth,
justice, reparation and non-repetition, which was
highlighted at the global level for the balance it struck
between peace and justice, there must be support for
democratic institutions and respect for the division of
powers, which, in spite of the historic difficulties in
Colombia, has been a treasure that we cannot afford
to lose. We must ensure that there is not a feeling
of loss of constitutionally defined rights, whether
because of objections or other setbacks. It is crucial
to ensure sustainable peace and genuine confidence

S/PV. 8511

in the strength of the institutions — and they must be
respected to reduce the lack of trust and fear throughout
the country.
With regard to sexual violence, that must not
be used to jeopardize the agreements that have been
reached. It has been committed by all actors involved
in the internal conflict in the country. Therefore,
the guarantee of truth and justice, and above all the
non-repetition in those cases, must give the victims the
security that they can bring action against everyone
involved, and that will enable the system and the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace and the Commission on
Truth, Coexistence and Non-Repetition to exist and be
effective. We must provide certainty for those who seek
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and want to tell the
truth, because that is fundamental to reducing doubts
and disincentives to come forward.
The international community and the Colombian
Government must understand that the recent lawsuit
brought before the Commission of Accusations of the
House of Representatives against the President of the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace reinforces the fiction
of a prosecution of that court and does not contribute
to dialogue among and with civil society, but rather
to polarization.
With regard to leadership, the defence of human
rights and peacebuilding in the country, in Colombia
there are deep-rooted inequalities and discrimination,
and the defence of human rights seeks to promote more
rule of law. However, it is a high-risk activity that
sometimes costs lives. In that environment, women
human rights defenders, leaders and peacebuilders
face risks when it comes to their participation, as they
encounter a culture that attacks bodies, goods and
dignity. We must therefore ensure that whoever defends
human rights defends everyone’s human rights without
distinction, as stated in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. As such, that endeavour deserves our
highest respect.
We must implement the comprehensive guarantee
programme for women leaders and human rights
defenders, thereby activating the respective Permanent
Intersectoral Commission for the Coordination and
Follow-up of the National Policy on Human Rights
and International Humanitarian Law to ensure
its development. The reactivation of the national
guarantee process is crucial, and even more so with
its long history of local and national participation.

19-108325/22

S/PV.8511

Colombia

The National Commission on Security Guarantees and
Non-repetition should be highlighted and supported.
The diversity of institutions and organizations, along
with the experience and expertise gathered, offer an
opportunity for the Government to make progress in
designing policies to dismantle the so-called successor
structures of paramilitarism, which is a risk factor
for social leadership and could have other serious
consequences on the country’s security. Social protest
is a legitimate mechanism in all democracies. And,
therefore, within the social collective thinking, that
message, as opposed to its stigmatization, must be clear.
Increasing the presence and response capacity
of the State at the local level is a challenge that
cannot be resolved with military presence. It implies
redistribution, the guarantee of rights, social
reconstruction, the reduction of fear and trauma, the
provision of services and the prevention of dangerous
situations so as to allow for prosperity.
The focus on gender is an aspect that is implemented
more slowly. However, actions included in the gender
approach have the potential to accelerate the benefits
of peace, not only for women in their diversity but for
society as a whole. Investing in women generates peace
dividends, as has been demonstrated through many
examples around the world.
Let us not forget that when we speak of peace in
everyday life, for women and for men, it means accepting
diversity and differences, meeting in the town square,
being treated well by the police, employment, health,
a cow grazing without being tethered, women walking
alone free from danger of being raped, participating
in the country’s decision-making without feeling
threatened on account of their beliefs or thoughts,
and children and young people playing and studying
without fear of being recruited, without fear of losing
a loved one and having an active role in building their
future. That would entail a future that does not cost
people their lives.

12/04/2019

I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
welcome the Foreign Minister since that was not
prohibited in the list of things you said we could talk
about, Mr. President.
With respect to the briefing, I think that it is a
very good thing that we have Ms. Salamanca here
today because it is an important reminder of the role
that women’s organizations have played in the peace
process. What we have heard today from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General shows that the
peace accord continues to set a positive example for the
rest of the world. The commitment of the Government
is very welcome, as are the steps taken towards the
reintegration of former fighters and rural development
crop substitution. The Government is clearly trying
very hard to find national consensus on issues that are
deeply polarizing. There are three areas we would like to
highlight, which we believe deserve the Government’s
urgent attention.
The first is one is the transitional justice system.
We agree with the Secretary-General that the
discussion surrounding the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace has become more polarized. We hope now that
the Jurisdiction will get legal and political support to
build on the progress it has made. We also hope there
might be a stronger legal footing for it in order to
boost public confidence in the peace process and bring
about the national consensus to which President Duque
Márquez is rightly committed.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia for its
work. Its role has been key in helping ensure the
implementation of the agreement.

Secondly, I would like to echo the concerns about
human rights defenders and social leaders and the
fact that they continue to face killings and threats at
the hands of armed criminal groups competing for
territory. That is something in which the Council has
been interested before. The recent regional sessions
of the National Commission on Security Guarantees
are a positive step forward, but I think we need to see
more concrete actions in order to improve security on
the ground. That might include the views of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General with regard to
stronger State presence in rural areas.

The President: On behalf of everyone, let me thank
the briefers so that when we go around the table there
is no need to repeat that. Members will then have more
time to ask questions. Members also do not necessarily
have to repeat what others have said.

Thirdly, we welcome the initial successes of the
territorially focused development plans and cropsubstitution initiative. But I think that our overall point
is that we would like to see the pace of implementation
of the peace process increase across the country. There

6/22

19-10832

12/04/2019

Colombia

have been some delays, as set out in the SecretaryGeneral’s report ( S/2019/265). I think that everyone is
very well aware that the sustainability of peace depends
on transforming the Colombian countryside and
meeting citizens’ needs for viable and legal livelihoods.
But it is also important the international community
support Colombian efforts.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
commend the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral because the areas of progress identified in
the Colombian peace process are a very important
part of how we view these regular meetings. For the
British Government’s part, we recognize the progress
the Government has made and are fully committed
to working alongside it as it builds sustainable peace.
We will continue to support it. The Foreign Minister
was here a few weeks ago and we talked about the
recent objections that the President had outlined (see
S/PV.8450). I know that there have been developments
on that issue, on which I am sure the Foreign Minister
will update the Council on.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the two briefings delivered by
Mr. Ruiz Massieu and Ms. Salamanca, which we
believe complement each other. We thank Mr. Carlos
Holmes Trujillo García, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, and Mr. Emilio Archila, High Counsellor for
Post-Conflict, for being here today.
Three days ago, on 9 April, Colombians
commemorated the National Day for Memory and
Solidarity with Victims of the Armed Conflict, with
the slogan “For the Victims, For Peace”. Peru joins
in paying tribute, first and foremost, to the goal of
reconciliation. We would like to again underscore the
example the peace process in Colombia set for Latin
America and the international community. At the same
time, we acknowledge the complexity of task and the
many challenges encountered in its implementation
phase. In that regard, we would like to address three
elements that we believe could help build trust in the
process of consolidating a shared vision of a future of
hope and belief in sustaining peace, as sustaining peace
is inseparable from sustainable development.
We first want to welcome the commitment of the
Colombian Government to implementing the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace on a basis of national consensus, and
we reiterate our recognition of the Colombian people’s

S/PV. 8511

resilience and commitment to peace. In that regard, we
stress the importance of promoting and strengthening
the inclusive and coordinated dialogue between the
Government and all the parties involved in building
a peaceful future. It is particularly crucial to listen
to the voices of women, young people and indigenous
communities. We therefore support the assistance of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, and
we want to emphasize the excellent cooperation that
has been established between it and the Government.
We especially welcome the efforts to reactivate the
National Commission on Security Guarantees in
order to address a fundamental element of the peace
agreement concertedly.
Secondly, the timely implementation of the peace
agreement is essential, and we should welcome the
words of President Duque Márquez, who has reaffirmed
his commitment to the transition, to freeing the country
from violence and seeking a life for the people of
complete coexistence, with income and opportunities.
We emphasize the importance of restoring the economy,
which is why we are pleased with the approval of the
16 development programmes with a territorial focus,
which will help to promote regional and community
development, and that the necessary resources
have been allocated for those initiatives within the
framework of the 2018-2022 national development
plan. In that regard, we would also like to highlight the
vital role played by the territorial areas in training and
reintegrating more than 3,500 former members of the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias del Común-Ejército
del Pueblo (FARC-EP) and their families, particularly
with a view to ensuring the progress of the transition
process after 15 August.
We also consider it a positive that the transition
strategy addresses the issues of land, security, the
provision of basic services and productivity. We
emphasize how important it is to decide on the future
directions for those areas as soon as possible and with
the full participation of all the parties concerned. Their
implementation also involves dealing with the issue
of security guarantees for former FARC-EP members,
social leaders and the communities in general, which
requires coordinated action on the part of all stakeholders
on the ground, especially in the most vulnerable rural
areas. The deplorable persistence of a pattern of
killings and violence against social leaders and human
rights defenders means that the well-timed Action Plan
for the Protection of Social and Community Leaders,

19-108327/22

S/PV.8511

Colombia

Human Rights Defenders and Journalists should be
fully implemented and complemented by the new
“peace with legality” plan. In that connection, we also
want to highlight the programmes for the substitution
of illicit crops established under the peace agreement,
which promote sustainable rural development as
well as voluntary and peaceful eradication. Our own
experience with alternative development has shown its
effectiveness, and we consider it important to ensure
that the new national strategy to combat drugs, “the path
to the future”, continues to promote those measures.
Lastly, we want to reaffirm the spirit of the
peace agreement and to thank all the parties for their
commitment to respecting it in its entirety. In that
regard, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, which we
recognize as a fundamental pillar of the agreement and
its commitments, not only plays a key role in promoting
access to justice, trust and national reconciliation
in Colombia, but also warrants a statutory law
enacted in accordance with Colombia’s internal
institutional processes.
In conclusion, Peru reiterates its full support
to the authorities and the people of Colombia in the
implementation of the peace agreement and to the
Verification Mission team for their invaluable and
tireless work in this process.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to welcome Foreign Minister Trujillo García to the
Security Council.
Since the signing in 2016 of the historic Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace, Colombia has taken several
important steps and has become an inspiration for
peace, not just in the region but around the world.
The United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
has been vital to that success, and we welcome the
Colombian Government’s continued support for the
United Nations. Colombia’s implementation of the
accord is now at a critical juncture, and much of the
most difficult work lies ahead.
Effective Government agencies that provide
security and Government services in remote areas
are critical to sustained peace. We support the
Government’s efforts to expand its presence in the
conflict-affected areas to keep illegal armed groups
and criminal organizations from taking the place of the
Fuerza Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército
del Pueblo (FARC-EP) and creating new sources of
8/22

12/04/2019

violence. We also urge the Government to strengthen
institutions and programmes to prevent the recruitment
of children into armed groups.
We too remain deeply concerned about the
continuing attacks on social leaders and human
rights defenders, and we encourage the Government
to redouble its efforts to protect these vulnerable
members of society and to continue to protect, support
and empower recently displaced Colombians. Ensuring
meaningful justice for victims and accountability for
the crimes committed during so many years of armed
conflict is also vital to reconciliation. We welcome
efforts to strengthen accountability for war crimes and
human rights violations and abuses. Colombia must
ensure that those responsible are held accountable,
including, when appropriate, by the prosecution and
imposition of sentences proportionate to the crimes
committed. All who committed crimes — whether the
FARC-EP, paramilitaries or State agents, including the
Colombian military — should be held accountable. The
United States considers the accord’s transitional justice
system, including the Special Jurisdiction for Peace,
to be critical to meaningfully addressing war crimes
and human rights abuses in Colombia. We welcome
the Colombian Government’s efforts to ensure that the
law implementing the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
complies with the 2016 peace accord and Colombia’s
Constitution, democratic institutions and obligations
under international law. We reaffirm the importance of
ensuring that Colombia passes a statutory law on the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace as soon as possible in
order to ensure that it has a solid legal framework in
which to operate effectively and independently.
The partnership between Colombia and the United
States has never been stronger. The United States
continues to work with the Colombian Government
to dismantle criminal organizations and curtail
narco-trafficking, including by halving coca cultivation
and cocaine production in Colombia by the end of
2023. Colombia has also demonstrated its strength as
a regional leader by supporting the legitimate interim
Government in Venezuela led by Juan Guaidó in
hosting more than 1.5 million of the Venezuelans who
have fled the man-made crisis in their country. More
than 700,000 of those Venezuelans have been granted
temporary residency permits, facilitating their access
to social services and granting them the right to work.
We are grateful for those efforts.
19-10832

12/04/2019

Colombia

The people of Colombia know better than most that
peace is precious but fragile. The United States stands
firmly with the people of Colombia as they build a
strong and prosperous future.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the personal participation in
today’s meeting of Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García,
Colombia’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, which we
consider extremely important given the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment that the peace process in Colombia
is at a very critical stage.
At the risk of attracting your ire, Mr. President, I
would nonetheless like to thank Ms. Rosa Salamanca and
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Head of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, for the presentation
of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/265) and the
substantive description of the work of the Mission and
the developments in the country’s situation in the past
three months.
Russia has always been a friend of Colombia and
Colombians. As a permanent member of the Security
Council, we have unfailingly provided support to the
Colombian peace process and intend to continue doing
so. We are very encouraged by the fact that Colombia’s
first steps towards a sustainable peace have already
become an inspiration for many other problem regions.
However, in calling ourselves friends of Colombia,
we do not define a friend as somebody who says only
nice things. We will therefore be honest about what
we believe it is important to say, which is that we are
concerned about the situation of the Colombian peace
process, and we are in full agreement with the opinion
of the Secretary-General’s report that the country is at
a major crossroads.
Much has been done in the two and a half years
since the signing of the life-changing Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace to consolidate peace in the country.
Now it is important not to go backwards or allow
any reversals in the country’s national reconciliation
process, which is a difficult one but the only right
way. In that regard, we were extremely alarmed by the
worrying assessments in the Secretary-General’s report
and by other international stakeholders in connection
with Bogotá’s decision to return the bill for the statutory
law for the Special Jurisdiction for Peace for changes.
We know that the decision has caused more than 150
public organizations to call on the people to stage a

S/PV. 8511

nationwide strike. We share that concern, and support
the Secretary-General’s call for enacting the statute for
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace as soon as possible.
We unquestionably appreciate the explanations of
Mr. Trujillo, who has come to New York to meet with
Council members in person and who has informed us in
detail about the motives behind the proposed changes.
We respect that, and we certainly do not intend to
interfere in Columbia’s internal proceedings. However,
in turning to the Security Council, the Colombians have
entrusted us, the members of the Council, with a major
share of the responsibility for the success of the peace
process and a common duty to live up to that trust.
That is why the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral made the decision to use their authority in
support of the specific text and all the key provisions
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, including on the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace. And it is now extremely
important to ensure that the agreements that were
reached remain unchanged. I will not go into detail
about the report’s critical assessments, of which there
are a considerable number. For example, one of the
pivotal elements of the peace process, comprehensive
rural reform, has still not been fully realized. There is a
complex tangle of problems related to ensuring security
in areas where the central Government’s presence
is weak.
The crop substitution programme is also delayed.
Regrettably, we saw no optimistic signs in the report
about a dialogue between the Government and the
armed groups. Needless to say we condemn the
terrorist act of 17 January, but we also firmly believe
that a lasting solution can be achieved only through
direct dialogue with those who are ready to talk and
reach an agreement. We are not seeing enough progress
in the legal, socioeconomic and political reintegration
of former combatants. The issue of their security and
employment remains urgent, and all of this leads to
growing numbers of dissidents. The humanitarian
demining programme is stalled and there are reports
that mines have again been planted in previously
cleared areas.
There are other worrying developments that for
whatever reasons are omitted or given inadequate
attention in the Secretary-General’s report. Thus we
are beginning to see pockets of discontent among the
population about the delays in the implementation of

19-108329/22

S/PV.8511

Colombia

key provisions of the peace agreement. In south-western
Colombia, for example, the indigenous population has
been blocking one of the country’s main transport
arteries, the Pan-American Highway, for nearly a
month. The illegal armed groups that have resorted to
using terror against the Indian population are trying
to exploit the situation and thereby fuelling popular
discontent. The problem of the internally displaced
remains serious. Half a century of conflict has displaced
more than 7 million people, that is, one in six of the
population, and that figure has unfortunately continued
to worsen. We realize that Colombia is dealing with an
additional burden in the form of the influx of refugees
from Venezuela, and we believe that the international
community should help Bogotá to address that.
The developments regarding Venezuela should not
become a factor that hinders the implementation of the
peace agreement.
We have also noted the opinion of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights that
Colombia’s human rights problems are also directly
related to the setbacks in implementing the final
peace agreement. Nor can we ignore the view of the
International Committee of the Red Cross that the
current situation in the country is even more problematic
that when the Havana peace agreement was signed.
There are at least five internal conflicts in Colombia
that are still going on and are even intensifying. Four
significant anti-Government groups are involved in
them, and according to Colombia’s Ministry of Defence
they involve as many as 10,000 combatants. We should
point out that according to the Secretary-General’s
reports, the number of ex-combatants who had taken up
arms again by the end of 2018 was up to almost 2,000,
including five top military leaders and a significant
number of field commanders.
In this highly sensitive situation, it is very important
to restore trust in the peace process among those who
have met their share of obligations under it in good
faith. As friends of Columbia, we have to say straight
out that the international community, the United
Nations and the Security Council expect the current
Colombian Administration to comply strictly with its
obligations under the peace agreement. We are of course
pleased with the Secretary-General’s assessment that
Colombia’s political leaders are committed to the peace
process, but we urge them not to stop there. It will be
essential to consolidate and build on the progress that
has been made, consulting with the signatories to the
10/22

12/04/2019

agreement at every stage. It will be difficult to bring an
end to the armed conflict without that.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate that the Security
Council has frequently pointed out that Colombia is
the poster-child for how international support can and
should be provided, through close cooperation with a
host Government in the leading role, and a responsible
attitude on the part of the whole of society. It is the
national ownership demonstrated by the Colombian
people and their desire to seek a sustainable political
solution that have made peace in their country possible.
We hope that the United Nations Verification Mission in
Columbia, which we support, will continue to contribute
to the implementation of the peace agreement and play
a major role in facilitating the reintegration of former
members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo into civilian life and
political activities.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I want to welcome the presence of Mr. Trujillo
García, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, here
today. I would like to make four points.
First, Belgium welcomes the renewed commitment
of the Colombian Government to the peace process,
which represents a unique opportunity to break
the cycle of violence, ensure the rights of victims
and create momentum for change. Many indicators
point to significant progress and the country can be
rightly proud of its achievements. The finalization
of territorial development plans is an important step.
It is no exaggeration to say that the peace process in
Colombia is a true source of inspiration for the whole
world. In that context, it is worrying to note the
increase in polarization and tensions in recent months.
Some measures could ease those tensions, particularly
accelerating the socioeconomic reintegration process,
promoting better access to land and clarifying the
future of the areas of concentration, with the full
participation of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Común in the forums established under the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace.
Secondly, we would like to draw attention to the
role of women. The gender aspects included in the
peace agreement represent some of the world’s best
practices. Belgium calls for implementing the national
gender-related reintegration strategy and forming the
intersectoral commission of guarantees for women,
19-10832

12/04/2019

Colombia

leaders and human rights defenders as soon as possible.
Particular attention should also be paid to protecting
the rights of children and combating violations against
them such as their recruitment and use by non-State
armed groups.
My third point concerns the ongoing violence
against human rights defenders and social leaders
outside the security perimeters. We strongly encourage
the Colombian authorities to affirm the State’s presence
throughout its territory, including through social
programmes. Such measures will also help to address
the issue of violence against former combatants of
the Fuerza Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP). The reports of an
increase in forced displacement are also very worrying.
We therefore echo the appeal launched by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in his
latest report regarding respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law by all parties.
My fourth point is about transitional justice, the
cornerstone of the peace agreement. In order to be
implemented as well as possible, the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace must be able to operate in complete autonomy
and independence. Belgium therefore echoes the call of
the Secretary-General and urges all the relevant parties
to take steps to ensure the speedy enactment of the
statutory law for the Special Jurisdiction, in accordance
with the peace agreement. This is important not only
for the legal authority and credibility of the Special
Jurisdiction, but also to ensure the legal security of
former FARC-EP members and military officers who
have already appeared before the Special Jurisdiction
or plan to do so.
Finally, Belgium is concerned about the situation
in Venezuela and understands that the crisis there is
having serious consequences in Colombia. We welcome
the solidarity shown by Colombians towards the many
refugees and migrants arriving from Venezuela.
In conclusion, 2019 will be a crucial year for
peacebuilding in Colombia. We are firmly convinced
that the comprehensive implementation of the peace
agreement will enable Colombian society to achieve its
objectives in an inclusive and sustainable manner.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me thank Special
Representative Carlos Ruiz Massieu and Ms. Rosa
Emilia Salamanca for their very valuable contributions
to today’s discussion. Let me also extend a warm

S/PV. 8511

welcome to Minister Carlos Holmes Trujillo for his
presence at the Security Council.
The signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace by
Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) in 2016
marked the beginning of a very successful transformation
period. It is hard to point to a brighter example of a
success story on the agenda of the Council. However, in
our view, further action is required to maintain lasting
peace. While many positive aspects remain undeniable
and seem irreversible, such as the unprecedented
drop in levels of violence and the successful elections
with the participation of the People’s Alternative
Revolutionary Force political party, some challenges
still persist. We recognize President Duque Márquez’s
right to fulfil his obligations made to those parts of
society that are not satisfied with the peace agreement,
but in doing so he must make sure that the actions taken
will not cast a shadow on the foundation of the fragile
political process.
Poland views Colombia’s transitional justice
system, including the Special Jurisdiction for Peace,
as a cornerstone of the peace process and a model that
could be relevant in other parts of the world. We regret
that, two years after the signing of final agreement, the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace still lacks a statutory law.
We urge the Government, Congress and all entities to
take swift action to reach consensus in order to adopt the
statutory law as soon as possible, in line with the peace
agreement and Colombia’s international obligations.
The Special Jurisdiction for Peace should be given
all the political and practical tools required for its
effective functioning under conditions of independence
and autonomy.
That brings us to highlight the need for the full
political, legal and socioeconomic reintegration
of former FARC-EP members to create trust and
confidence in the peace process. Despite the efforts
of the Government, there is still need for greater
guarantees of protection for human rights defenders
and social leaders. There is a clear role to play for
the National Commission on Security Guarantees to
safeguard the focus of its action plans.
Land ownership remains crucial in maintaining
the reintegration process moving forward. Regrettably,
despite initiating steps to purchase plots in some

19-1083211/22

S/PV.8511

Colombia

regions, no land has been granted to former FARCEP members.
We look forward to the holding of peaceful local
elections in November, and we recognize the work that
needs to be done in order to ensure an undisturbed
process. Last year’s elections were the most peaceful in
the country’s modern history. We therefore believe that
the relevant authorities will use it as an example.
Pointing to the unstable security situation in the
region, caused by the man-made crisis in Venezuela
and migration crisis that it has triggered, we want once
again to extend our thanks to the Colombian authorities
and society for being so generous in keeping their
borders and houses open, despite having to deal with
their own difficulties. There is no clear solution to that
stalemate, but Colombia, with other regional actors, is
playing a very positive and constructive role.
In conclusion, Poland supports the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia and the United
Nations country team. We look forward to continue
working with such a dedicated team.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to warmly thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for his
briefing, as well as for the excellent work that he and
his team carry out in service of Colombia. I also thank
the Co-Director of the Corporación de Investigación
y Acción Social y Económica, Ms. Rosa Emilia
Salamanca, for her and her organization’s commitment.
Allow me also to warmly welcome the presence of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, His
Excellency Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo. His presence
here with us is especially important and appreciated.
Colombia is at a turning point in its history. Two
years after the disarmament and political reintegration
of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of ColombiaPeople’s Army (FARC-EP) began, in the context of a
historic peace process for the country, the continent
and the United Nations, it is essential to successfully
complete the reincorporation process.
The Colombian President has repeatedly
reaffirmed publicly his commitment to implement the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, which is, of course, a key
point. We welcome that commitment, as well as the
political will and ambition to build broad consensus,
bringing together all political trends, including political
12/22

12/04/2019

actors that are sceptical about the 2016 peace agreement.
Success — and dare we say the model — in Colombia
is also a source of expectations from the international
community, which stands firmly at Colombia’s side in
that process. Allow me to mention three aspects that are
of importance to us all.
First, it is essential that transitional justice, at the
heart of the Colombian peace process, be preserved.
As such, the early adoption of the statutory law on the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace will help that institution
fully assert its authority. At this juncture, we call on all
political actors to respect the decisions taken by that
Jurisdiction. As the Special Representative mentioned,
significant work has already been done, with several
cases under review that likely involve more than 800,000
victims. Caught between the resentment of part of the
population and feelings of legal and physical insecurity
among former combatants, the Colombian authorities
face the difficult task of maintaining and strengthening
bonds of trust that unite all actors in the peace process.
The success of the Colombian model depends upon
it. Among the issues that may raise concerns, I would
like to mention the constitutional reform process; it is
essential to reiterate it is not retroactive.
Secondly, economic and social reintegration is the
other key to a successful and lasting peace process.
Progress has been made under the leadership of the
National Reintegration Council to approve more
collective and individual projects. The challenge now
is to accelerate the overall implementation of the
reincorporation process and address the issue of access
to land. The plan of the Office of High Counsellor
Archila is therefore to be commended. Clarifications
are also expected on the future of the regrouping
and reintegration areas, which must be decided on
in conjunction with former FARC-EP members.
As I mentioned earlier, bonds of trust, which are
strengthened by such consultations, must be the central
to all efforts.
We also encourage the Colombian Government to
fully integrate the gender equality dimension, as well
as the role of youth, in the reincorporation process. The
peace process will gain legitimacy if it is representative
of the diversity and vitality of Colombia’s civil society,
which Ms. Salamanca perfectly embodies. The projects
carried out by the Verification Mission to implement
the women and peace and security and the youth and
peace and security agendas also contribute to that end.
19-10832

12/04/2019

Colombia

Finally, and this will be my last point, the fragile
security situation in the former conflict areas must be
an obvious priority. Despite the measures announced
by the Colombian authorities over the past two years,
human rights defenders, particularly women, as well as
former combatants, remain the main targets of criminal
groups. As part of the ongoing efforts of the Colombian
authorities, the deployment of basic State services
appears essential to stabilizing the areas in question.
As the departmental and municipal elections approach
next October, the necessary measures must be taken to
ensure that this democratic exercise is conducted under
the best possible conditions.
I would say to Foreign Minister Trujillo that his
country is taking a new path towards peace and national
reconciliation, which is also a historic chapter in its
history. The courage and ambition that he expresses day
after day is a source of pride for Colombia and a source
of inspiration for the whole world. In that context, we
hope that the challenges that remain to be overcome,
of which I have mentioned three, will be seen in the
near future as great achievements of the Colombian
Government. Whatever the difficulties encountered
on this demanding path, Colombia knows that it can
always count on the fraternal support of France.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
welcome the Colombian Foreign Minister, Mr. Trujillo
García, to today’s meeting.

S/PV. 8511

We have taken note of the recently emerged
divergent views held by certain Colombian parties
on the legislation on the mechanism known as the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace. We hope that the parties
concerned will step up dialogue and consultation to
facilitate the appropriate resolution of this issue.
China commends the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ruiz Massieu, and the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia for
their work. We hope that the Mission will continue to
perform its duties as mandated, help the Colombian
parties enhance communication and build mutual trust
and push them to create synergies to jointly move the
peace process forward.
Together with other members of the Security
Council, China stands ready to make its contribution
to furthering the Colombian peace process and the
early realization of comprehensive peace, stability and
development in Colombia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would also like to welcome
the Colombian Foreign Minister, Mr. Carlos Holmes
Trujillo García. The presence of the Minister is, as
always, and once again, a demonstration of Colombia’s
partnership with the United Nations in support of
durable peace.

At present, the overall situation in Colombia is stable.
The peace process has produced an early harvest. Crop
substitution and rural development have made progress.
At the same time, the full implementation of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace continues to face challenges,
which requires the ongoing tireless efforts by the
Colombian parties and the international community.

Indonesia
welcomes
Colombia’s
continued
commitment clearly set out by President Duque
Márquez to implement the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
As has been said many times in this Chamber, the
agreement represents an opportunity for lasting peace
in Colombia. Indeed, the agreement is also a positive
example for the rest of the world that, through dialogue
and diplomacy, conflicts can be brought to an end. In
the light of that, I would like to address three issues:
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, reintegration and
international support.

Colombia experienced a long civil war. The
implementation of the peace agreement in a
comprehensive manner touches on numerous issues,
including politics, security, development and social
integration. It is therefore a system-wide project. China
hopes that all parties in Colombia will give priority to
the peace process, further broaden consensus, continue
to promote the full implementation of the peace
agreement, strengthen inclusive political dialogue
and accelerate socioeconomic reconstruction so as to
ultimately realize peace and development.

First, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, together
with its objective, is one of the key components of
the peace agreement. It is important that the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace receive the full support and
cooperation of all the parties involved. Its independence
and autonomy, as well as the judgments it arrives at,
also need to be respected fully. We continue to support
the work of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, as it is
playing is critical in promoting access to justice and
national reconciliation. We hope that the statutory law
on the jurisdiction will soon be passed and that swift

19-1083213/22

S/PV.8511

Colombia

action on this democratic exercise between the executive
and Parliament will be taken to ensure that this legal
foundation is put into place as soon as possible, with a
view to protecting the rights of victims and providing
legal security for all the parties concerned.
Secondly, reintegration is key to the successful
implementation of the peace agreement, and we
underscore the need for progress at all levels. It is
essential for us to show former combatants who have
laid down their weapons that it is in their interest
to be on the right side of history. Access to legal
revenue sources and to land is at the heart of effective
reintegration. In that context, as pointed out by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2019/265), Indonesia
is pleased that approximately 94 per cent of the families
concerned have received the financial benefits from the
illegal-crop-substitution programme.

12/04/2019

In conclusion, Colombia has travelled far on its path
to peace. It is crucial that it now stay the course, and that
all parties continue to play their role befittingly. The
unity of the Security Council is of vital importance. We
must collectively ensure that this historic opportunity
will pave the way for an enduring peace in Colombia.
And I must say, Mr. President, that this is not a sad
day today.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes His Excellency Mr. Trujillo
García, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, whose
presence at today’s meeting reflects the commitment
of the Colombian authorities to the peace process.
We congratulate the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ruiz Massieu, and Ms. Rosa
Emilia Salamanca, representative of Colombian civil
society, on their outstanding briefings.

Based on our past experience, we also believe
that reintegration is a long process that requires
patience, but it needs to be done as swiftly as possible,
bringing reassurance, certainty and hope for the
future. Reintegration should not only focus on former
combatants but also receiving communities, which is not
solely the responsibility of the central Government, but
also the provincial and local Governments, community
leaders, civil society and others.

My country takes note with satisfaction of the
encouraging results seen in the implementation of the
Final Agreement for the Termination of Conflict and the
Construction of a Stable and Lasting Peace, signed on
24 November 2016. However, this positive momentum
should not obscure the remaining challenges, as outlined
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/265),
regarding security issues, socioeconomic reintegration
and traditional justice.

We welcome the many projects reported by the
Special Representative geared towards accelerating
the reintegration process. We also appreciate that
those reintegration projects also include women, as
Ms. Salamanca mentioned. We believe that women are
important drivers that ensure reconciliation. This is an
important fact. In our experience, the healing process
not only involves the feeling of security and safety but
also involves concrete reassurances of livelihood and the
belief that there is a brighter future ahead. Nonetheless,
every country and society has specific characteristics
and traditions, and we trust the Colombian Government
knows what is best for its people.

On the issue of security, my delegation remains
concerned at the resurgence of killings of social
leaders, members of the Revolutionary Armed Forces
of Colombia – People’s Army (FARC-EP) and human
rights defenders. These assassinations and other forms
of sociopolitical violence seriously jeopardize the peace
progress, which has offered a ray of hope to millions of
Colombians. My country therefore urges the Colombian
authorities to redouble their efforts to further reduce the
level of violence and ensure better protection for leaders
and FARC-EP members in areas affected by insecurity.
In addition, in view of the upcoming regional and local
elections, my delegation welcomes the reactivation of
the National Commission on Security Guarantees, with
a view to developing a comprehensive plan of measures
aimed at ensuring the protection of all candidates.

Thirdly, we would like to stress international
support. After half a century of conflict, healing the
wounds of war will not be easy. Therefore, support
from a united international community and the
Security Council is an important factor. We believe
that international organizations, including financial
institutions and the private sector, should support
Colombian efforts to consolidate peace. This also an
important factor.
14/22

Regarding socioeconomic reintegration, my
delegation welcomes the measures taken by the
Colombian Government to ensure access to land
ownership for former combatants, which is a key
element of the economic reintegration process. It is
also important to step up the process of approving
19-10832

12/04/2019

Colombia

S/PV. 8511

revenue-generating projects and of disbursing funds
to those that have already been approved. In that
connection, Côte d’Ivoire calls on donors and bilateral
partners to support the Colombian Government in
funding that programme, whose success will have a
positive impact on the peace process. It also urges the
Colombian authorities to take the appropriate measures
to ensure the social reintegration of former combatants
gathered in areas for training and reintegration areas,
which will be functional only until 15 August.

Social reintegration is a central pillar of the peace
process. Former combatants who feel alienated from
society and without economic and social opportunities
could end up taking up arms once again, and all the
efforts made over the years to achieve peace in Colombia
would be in real danger of collapse. While the action
plans are important and very positive, they will have an
impact only insofar as they are actually implemented
on the ground. An absence of tangible results could
lead to mounting tensions within Colombian society.

Regarding transitional justice, my delegation
supports the recommendations contained in the report
of the Secretary-General on the urgent measures to
be taken by all stakeholders in order to swiftly put in
place the statutory law of the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace and ensure the provision of adequate resources
to the Jurisdiction so that it can function efficiently
and autonomously.

Equatorial Guinea is of the view that, given all the
actors and elements that make up the peace process,
it is only normal that many challenges remain on the
path to achieving an effective peace throughout the
Colombian territory. For that reason, it calls on the
international community to continue to support and
closely cooperate with the Government and the people
to promote peace, stability and security there.

To conclude, Côte d’Ivoire commends the
commitment and dedication of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia teams and of the
various United Nations agencies that are working
tirelessly to build peace in Columbia. It reiterates its full
support for the reconciliation process currently under
way and calls on all Colombian parties to work together
to overcome all obstacles and build mutual trust.

Consistent with this approach, we congratulate
President Iván Duque Márquez on his genuine efforts
to ensure the implementation of the final agreement. In
his most recent briefing, on 23 January (see S/PV.8450),
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, Mr. Ruiz Massieu, recognized the progress
made, including the “Peace with Legality” plan drawn
up by the Colombian Government. That is why the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea offers its support to
President Duque and encourages him to reaffirm his
commitment to continuing the peace process within the
framework of a broader Government programme that
focuses on equality, legality and entrepreneurship.

Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): We wish at the outset to welcome His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo and to wish him
an enjoyable stay here in New York.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea expresses its
unwavering and full support for the implementation of
the Final Agreement for the Termination of Conflict
and the Construction of a Stable and Lasting Peace of
24 November 2016, aimed at bringing about a definitive
solution to the conflict and the building of a stable and
lasting peace, as well as for the work of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, focused on
ensuring the reintegration of former combatants of the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia — People’s
Army (FARC-EP), into civilian life, and also ensuring
personal and community security. Equatorial Guinea
also encourages the Government of Colombia to
operationalize its “Peace with Legality” plan,
which is key to the process of reintegrating former
FACR-EP combatants.

The legal aspect is key to the process of the
reconciliation and stabilization of the country. For
that reason, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace must
begin to operate on the basis of an agreed statutory
law, because the failure of any component of the peace
process to function properly could jeopardize the entire
process. The actions of the National Liberation Army
represent a major obstacle to the process, and we call on
the Government and the National Liberation Army to
resume their negotiations and agree as soon as possible
on a renewed ceasefire. The National Liberation Army
must refrain from any acts of violence against the
population and take steps to show its commitment to
a peaceful solution, beginning with the release of all
hostages whom it is holding.

19-1083215/22

S/PV.8511

Colombia

We wish to conclude with words of appreciation for
the noble support work being carried out by the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia to ensure the
reintegration of young people, and we commend it on
its efforts in that respect.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): As per your directive,
Mr. President, I will not thank the briefers, but I will
join my neighbours in welcoming the Foreign Minister
to the Council.
The briefing and details provided by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, led some of us to relive the
difficult past in South Africa and the very similar
processes taking place in Colombia. That is why we
pledge our utmost support to Carlos and his team as
they implement the mandate with which the Council
entrusted them in contributing modestly to the peace
process in Colombia.
Consolidating peace after decades of conflict and
mistrust is not an easy task. We wish to commend
the efforts of the Colombian Government in trying to
address issues such as social security, basic services
and land and rural development, as well as economic
opportunities and legal protection, particularly for
former combatants and members of the Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia — People’s Army
(FARC-EP).
In addition, the visits and engagements by highlevel officials of the Colombian Government, including
by President Iván Duque Márquez, to the territorial
areas for training and reintegration represent a
positive development. We also wish to commend the
efforts of the former combatants in contributing to
the peace process. Initiatives that enhance their skills
and create opportunities for the broader communities
in which they live are positive strides towards
reintegrating into Colombian society and contributing
to the economy. However, there are many challenges to
be addressed moving forward.
South Africa fully supports the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace, which was signed between the Government of
Colombia and the FARC-EP in 2016. We commend the
progress made in its implementation, including on the
demobilization and reintegration processes of former
members of the FARC-EP. We wish to call for the full
implementation of the peace agreement and of the
16/22

12/04/2019

statutory law of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, in
accordance with the provisions of the agreement.
We agree with the Secretary-General that
Colombia’s peace process is at a critical juncture,
and the implementation of the agreement remains
at the heart of the situation in Colombia. We note
President Duque’s decision to undertake a process of
review of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, which
he has indicated could be an opportunity to create a
national consensus regarding transitional justice in
Colombia. It is trusted that this process will not result
in heightened tensions in the country. It is important
to deepen efforts to de-escalate tensions, address the
reintegration processes and allay the concerns of the
former combatants, particularly with regard to legal
and security guarantees. The Special Jurisdiction for
Peace is a vital component of the agreement and any
further delay in its implementation could undermine
the political, socioeconomic and security prospects
of Colombia.
South Africa’s process of reconciliation and
reconstruction was underpinned by the establishment
of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, which
presented an opportunity to facilitate reconciliation
between the perpetrators and the survivors of
such human rights violations. In the words of our
Constitution, the Commission process allows for the
cultivation of
“a need for understanding but not for vengeance,
a need for reparation but not for retaliation, a need
for ubuntu but not for victimisation”.
That process was essential to the long-term
consolidation of hard-won freedom in South Africa. In
that context, we support the statement that was issued
on 11 March by the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia, in which it highlighted the importance
of preserving the gains made in the peace process by
guaranteeing the rights of victims. We should be firm
in creating conditions conducive to the full and free
functioning of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace as part
of the peace agreement. South Africa therefore calls
on all parties to respect the constitutionally mandated
mechanisms and frameworks established to assist the
political and judicial transition.
In its own struggle to overcome decades of
division and mistrust and in seeking a better future for
all, South Africa was significantly supported by the
international community. In that regard, the support
19-10832

12/04/2019

Colombia

for the work of the United Nations through its Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
as well as the relevant United Nations agencies, civil
society and international partners, has been invaluable.
We urge Members and the international partners to
support and encourage the people of Colombia to
preserve and fully implement the peace agreement in
addressing the concerns and rights of victims, access
to justice, reparation, guarantees of non-repetition,
inclusive dialogue and peaceful negotiations to resolve
all outstanding issues in Colombia.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
welcome the presence of His Excellency the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia at this meeting.
We are here today almost three years after the
signing of the Colombian Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
which ended a bloody conflict of more than 50year that resulted in many dead, injured and missing
persons. Since its conclusion and to this very day, the
Government has achieved many successes and national
gains that will undoubtedly have a positive effect on the
overall situation in Colombia. The peace agreement,
however, continues to face many challenges that
require the concerted efforts of the parties to maintain
and build upon those achievements, leading to its full
implementation. I will be brief in focusing on three
major issues.
First, concerning the economic and social
reintegration process, we appreciate the efforts of
the Colombian Government to guarantee the social
and economic reintegration of former members of
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) through collective and
individual plans, initiatives and projects, adopted by
the National Council on Economic and Social Policy.
We look forward to seeing the implementation of the
objectives related to the reintegration process within
the established deadlines and to the acceleration of the
reintegration process through the provision of legal and
security guarantees to former members of the FARCEP, while remaining fully aware of the many challenges
facing the implementation of the peace agreement.
Secondly, with regard to the security situation,
we are concerned about the ongoing killings and
acts of violence and intimidation directed against
social leaders, human rights activists and indigenous

S/PV. 8511

leaders. That requires the National Government and
regional, local and civil society organizations to take
further action. We commend the pact for life, signed
between the Colombian Government and civil society
organizations, which will provide security guarantees
to local communities, human rights defenders and social
leaders. We look forward to the adoption as soon as
possible of the statutory law of the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace, in accordance with the constitutional
framework. It is key to building trust and creating the
necessary political and security conditions to complete
the implementation of the peace agreement in all its
dimensions in order to strengthen the principles of
justice and no impunity.
Thirdly, concerning we commend the ongoing
efforts of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of Mission to strengthen
the peace process by cooperating with national,
local and territorial authorities, as well as civil and
international organizations, in addition to the private
sector. We also commend the Mission’s role in engaging
young people and youth organizations in integrating a
youth perspective into its activities. We have seen many
initiatives and dialogues launched by the United Nations
Mission within the reintegration process. We also
reaffirm the role of women in implementing the peace
process and the national development plan for building
peace and achieving reconciliation in Colombia.
In conclusion, we commend the initiatives taken
by the Government of President Duque to pursue the
implementation of the peace agreement. In the presence
of His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, we renew our full support for the peace
process, which has become a resounding success story
thanks to his efforts and the will and determination of
the friendly Colombian people.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): It is an honour to have Minister
Trujillo García among us once again in the Council.
We also thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu and Ms. Rosa
Emilia Salamanca for their briefings.
Allow me to begin by reiterating the interest and
support of the Dominican Republic for the peace process
in Colombia and to commend the resolve and sacrifice
of the Colombian people in that process. Since the
signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, Colombia

19-1083217/22

S/PV.8511

Colombia

has been an example for peace. Two years after the
signing of that historic agreement, Colombians have
put behind them more than half a century of violence,
held peaceful and inclusive elections, and established
transitional justice institutions.
We commend the efforts of the Colombian
Government to advance the process of reintegrating
former combatants who have laid down their weapons.
We want to acknowledge the progress and challenges
in the period covered, especially with regard to the
reactivation of institutional mechanisms that seek to
guarantee security across the Colombian territory.
However, we understand that there is a need for the
speedier implementation of some provisions governing
the reintegration of ex-combatants. As things stand
now, their implementation is at less than 20 per cent.
In that connection, the implementation of genderrelated provisions with regard to reintegration and
the guarantee of security for women, as established
in the peace agreement, is critical. To that end, there
is a need for the financial and technical resources
required in the national development plan and the
prompt implementation of gender-related actions in the
national reintegration policy, including those aimed at
the economic reintegration of women ex-combatants.
By the same token, it is crucial that protection be
provided for women leaders and defenders of human
rights who face attacks and threats. In that regard, we
call on the Government of Colombia to accelerate the
implementation of the comprehensive programme for the
security of women leaders and human rights defenders.
We invite the authorities to consider that
the immediate economic sacrifice necessary for
reintegration, while not insignificant, will, in the
medium and long terms, have repercussions on the
economic prosperity and social cohesion of Colombian
society. We therefore encourage the consideration
of proposals and alternative solutions that will be
put forward in consultations with the ex-combatants
living within the 24 territorial areas for training and
reintegration. Those areas and the monthly food and
health allowances for ex-combatants are expected
to remain in place until summer. We trust that the
decisions taken on those measures for the period after
August will be based on the positive effects that they
have had and the challenges ahead. It is essential that
projects for the reintegration of ex-combatants proposed
in the framework of the peace agreement be assessed so
that we can determine the extent and scale of progress.
18/22

12/04/2019

It is also important that any process of inclusion take
into account the access of ex-combatants to land and
alternative income sources.
We understand that the political, legal and
socioeconomic integration of former members of
the Fuerza Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) is necessary. We trust
that issues related to land ownership will be dealt with
appropriately, since that is at the heart of effective
reintegration. During the reporting period, 12 former
FARC-EP members were assassinated, which brings
the total number of assassinations of that group to 99
since the signing of the final peace agreement. It is the
State’s responsibility to identify those responsible and
bring them to justice.
The same applies to the threats against and killings
of social leaders and human rights defenders. That
situation bears noting and demands close attention.
We encourage the State to address the issue through
its presence in the most affected area and to maintain
ongoing dialogue with civil society through the
National Commission on Security Guarantees. Work on
that issue is also key to ensuring that peaceful and free
elections at the local level are held in October and that
they are free of any violence.
It is extremely important to bear in mind the
gender provisions contained in the peace agreement,
in particular the issue of women’s reintegration and
security guarantees. We share the concerns expressed
by the international verification component concerning
the gender focus established in the peace agreement,
and we welcome the commitment of the Vice-President
of Colombia to looking into that report.
We also commend the adoption by the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia of a strategy
to implement resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018),
with a focus on the role of young people in reintegration
and ensuring security. It is a formal recognition of the
preponderant role that young people play in promoting
peace. That strategy should serve as an inspiration to
other missions in their efforts to put an end to conflict
and build peace.
We encourage all parties to support the important
work of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace to promote
access to justice and national reconciliation in Colombia,
which is also an expression of the legal guarantees
granted to those who have laid down their arms. We
also emphasize the need to preserve the independence
19-10832

12/04/2019

Colombia

and autonomy of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and
other transitional justice mechanisms, as well as to
maintain the legal security of those involved and avoid
the retroactive application of certain provisions to the
detriment of those who legitimately trusted in the State.
Finally, we call on Colombian society to avoid
polarization in public discussion of the implementation
of the peace agreements, to refrain from bombastic and
aggressive rhetoric, to reject the expressions of hatred
and divisiveness of a few and to embrace forgiveness,
reconciliation and the rule of law. We commend the
people and Government of Colombia for the example
they have set in the process that we are happy to
support today.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.
Speaking last in a discussion is an advantage
because one can listen to everyone who has spoken.
My impression is that, with regard to Colombia, there
is unity in the Council. There is not only unity with
regard to the full support to the peace implementation
process, but there is also unanimity with regard to the
concerns that we have.
I would like to start with a quote from Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ruiz Massieu,
who said at some point that Colombia remains a “source
of inspiration” for all those working on the settlement
of other conflicts. That remains true, and we would
like to commend the Government of Colombia for what
it has been doing under very difficult circumstances,
with 1.3 or 1.4 million refugees from Venezuela.
Germany will continue to support Colombia in
building an inclusive society. We will do that bilaterally,
multilaterally and with the multi-partner trust fund, as
well as by providing funds to the Peacebuilding Fund.
I can be brief in my comments because we
support the report of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and his recommendations relating
to the consolidation of the peace process, concerning
which we add our voice to those around the table.
Just before I took the floor, the representative of the
Dominican Republic said how important it was that
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace be implemented, that
the statutory law be adopted and that there be legal
certainty and no retroactivity in applying the laws.
With regard to the security situation, I also join
my voice with those who have said how important it

S/PV. 8511

is that State institutions be present throughout the
whole country so that there is safety and security for
all representatives of civil society, social workers,
community leaders, indigenous leaders and human
rights defenders. In addition, with regard to the
reintegration of the former members of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo, I would like to add my voice to those who have
said how important that is.
I would like to make one special point. Following
on from what the Indonesian Ambassador and others
have said, the peace agreement is exemplary with
regard to its gender provisions. I would like to reiterate
what Ms. Salamanca said, the effect that investing in
women yields peace dividends. I would also like to add
to it. Mr. Singer Weisinger just said that investing in
young people also means investing in peace.
With regard to the gender provisions, there are
still a number of challenges, such as the integration of
former female combatants, barriers to the participation
of women in the political process and security risks for
women human rights advocates. Women social leaders
also face many security challenges. Another very
important point, which Ms. Salamanca addressed is
that of sexual violence in conflict and accountability.
Reparations are therefore very important.
As I said, we have made a great deal of progress. I
have one question for Ms. Salamanca. I wonder if she
would have concrete measures — perhaps, low-hanging
fruit — that the Government could do to help women.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.
Mr. Trujillo García (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s briefing. I also thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Colombia, for his briefing. I warmly welcome Rosa
Emilia Salamanca and thank her for the remarks she
shared with us today.
Similarly, I would like to thank the members of the
Security Council for their ongoing readiness to attend
informal meetings and hear thoughts regarding the
situation in my country, which are useful because they
help foster a greater understanding of the challenges
facing Colombia and the measures being taken. I thank

19-1083219/22

S/PV.8511

Colombia

them for giving of their time to hear me explain the
overarching challenges we face, which of course
must be considered holistically when analysing the
commitment of President Duque to the implementation
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
We appreciate the fact that members heard that, for
example, with respect to illicit crops, the Government
faces the following challenge. In 2012, the area under
illicit crop cultivation stood at 102,000 hectares. In
2010, it was 61,000 hectares. The following year, when
the Administration of the former President began, the
number stood at 63,000. In 2017, the year immediately
prior to the start of President Duque’s Administration,
the area under illicit crops had reached 171,000 hectares.
In the months after President Duque assumed power,
the number of hectares of illicit crops had reached the
highest ever recorded in Colombia’s history at 200,000,
which, obviously, required major efforts on the part
of Colombia.
I thank members for listening to the details of a
major challenge for my country — the unprecedented
regional migration crisis, which also has global
implications. Today, we are addressing it with solidarity
and human sentiment. We are deeply grateful to host
1.3 million Venezuelan brothers and sisters.
I would like to reiterate the commitment of
President Iván Duque to implementing the agreement
signed by the previous Government and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército
del Pueblo (FARC-EP). Achieving the objectives
of the pact for Colombia — a pact for equity and
a road map proposed by President Duque for his
Government — is closely linked to the stabilization
of the territories and the consolidation of peaceful
coexistence. The implementation of the agreement
signed in 2016 with the FARC-EP guerrillas is part of
the agenda that the national Government has established
to move in that direction. The “Peace with legality”
plan, which the Secretary-General mentions positively
in his report (S/2019/265), also points to that.
The implementation of the agreement is a
commitment that the Government of President Iván
Duque has assumed with unquestionable resolve. To
honour that commitment, various measures have been
adopted and concrete actions are being taken, many of
which are acknowledged in the report before us today.
However, the Secretary-General also states that the
20/22

12/04/2019

peace process in Colombia is at a critical juncture. We
nevertheless consider this juncture to be an opportunity
and view it with optimism, although we are aware that
some of the most difficult tasks in consolidating peace
still lie ahead. Our optimism arises from the firmness of
our commitment, our permanent willingness to engage
in dialogue with all actors involved, our conviction
that consensus can be built amid differences and, in
particular, from trust in our institutions.
The Government of Colombia recognizes and
values the work carried out by the United Nations
Verification Mission, whose mandate includes two
crucial aspects of the implementation of the agreement:
first, the reintegration of the former members of the
FARC-EP into civilian life and, secondly, the provision
of security guarantees for those who participate in
peacebuilding, including human rights defenders and
leaders of social or political movements. In that regard,
allow me to make a few observations.
In addition to the progress made in the political
reintegration of the FARC-EP, whose political party
not only occupies seats in Congress, participates in the
process of developing our laws and will also take part
in regional and local elections next October, progress
has also been made in the area of economic and
social reintegration. The Secretary-General expresses
valid concerns about the need to move forward more
efficiently in various processes, especially in the
provision of goods and public services in the various
territories. In that regard, a rigorous process of planning
and budgeting has been put forward, which has made it
possible to align and focus institutional management
around a single road map that will undoubtedly have a
greater impact in less time. We will increase our efforts
to offer demobilized combatants the conditions that
will allow them to carry out their plans for the future,
contribute to the development of their communities and
remain on the right side of the law.
An important milestone in that direction was the
completion and signing, during the reporting period,
of 14 of the 16 territorial development programmes,
thereby completing all programmes included in the
provisions of the final agreement. Such programmes
will benefit 6.6 million Colombians in the 170
municipalities that were most affected by violence and
poverty in the past. Progress has also been made in
approving productive projects for the demobilized, to
the tune of $6.2 million; registering 12,743 people in
our social security and health system and 9,946 people
19-10832

12/04/2019

Colombia

to receive pensions and providing 1,053 people with
jobs in the public and private sectors and economic
support that will benefit 12,750 people, for a total of
approximately $58.5 million. Those are some of the
many efforts undertaken.
Today, 3,537 former members of the FARC-EP and
7,074 families are settled in the territorial areas for
training and reintegration, which were conceived as focal
points to facilitate the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process. As envisaged in the regulations
issued in 2017, the legal validity of that framework
will come to an end in August. However, that should
not generate uncertainty. Although those spaces were
always intended to be temporary, the commitment of
the national Government to offering stable conditions
and certainties to the former members of the FARC is
not provisional. That has been expressed by President
Iván Duque, in direct dialogue with them and their
families, in the three visits he has made to the areas
of Pondores, San José de Oriente and La Fila, where
he learned first-hand the concerns and expectations of
the former members of the FARC-EP and reiterated the
Government’s willingness to work, together and hand
in hand with them, to build opportunities for progress
in accordance with the law.
The culmination of the legal framework of the
territorial areas will be addressed through a strategy
that entails, among other provisions, their incorporation
into land-use management. Where that is not possible,
alternatives for the relocation of demobilized
individuals will be identified, and stability, legal and
physical security, the provision of goods and services,
and conditions for productive initiatives and job
creation will continue to be provided.
The Government of Colombia agrees with the
Secretary-General regarding the magnitude of the
challenges we face in guaranteeing the physical security
of individuals involved in the reintegration process,
social leaders and communities in certain municipalities
of the country. Containing diverse manifestations of
violence is one of the main challenges faced by societies
going through a process of stabilization and that, in
our case, originate in the activity of organized armed
groups linked to criminal economies. It is significant
that, between 2013 and 2018, the number of cultivated
hectares of coca surpassed all historical records,
rising from about 60,000 to 200,000, according to the
latest estimates. Furthermore, we must not forget that

S/PV. 8511

drug trafficking has fuelled the bloodiest violence in
Colombia for more than 40 years.
Over the past eight months, President Duque has
adopted new policies on security and the fight against
the world drug problem, and has adjusted the existing
institutional architecture and protection mechanisms,
improving coordination among authorities and the
capacity for prevention and appropriate response. In
fact, the verified number of homicides of human rights
defenders fell from nine in August 2018 to five in
January 2019, and to 1 in February, according to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights in Colombia. According to the same
source, of the 265 cases reported between January 2016
and March 2019, the Public Prosecutor’s Office has
identified the authors of 151 homicides, representing
57 per cent of perpetrators. The fight against impunity
has been accompanied by the activation of various
agencies, including the National Commission on
Security Guarantees, under the leadership of President
Duque, at the end of January. Our commitment to
legality and the defence of life is unwavering. We will
therefore continue working tirelessly until we manage
to definitively overcome violence and achieve the full
realization of the rule of law throughout the territory.
I wish to turn now to two additional issues that are
addressed in the Secretary-General’s report. As I have
noted previously, on 11 March President Duque decided
to object to 6 of the 159 articles that make up the draft
procedural statutory law of the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace. He did so in order to provide the Jurisdiction
with a clearer and more coherent legal framework
that will allow it to respond to the aspiration of all
Colombians to living in peace with legality and without
impunity, and to best serve the rights of the victims and
honour Colombia’s obligations under international law.
In accordance with to our institutional arrangement,
the objections are being handled in the Congress of the
Republic, where last Monday the plenary of the House
of Representatives voted against adoption. The decision
of the Senate is pending. The Government will respect
the decision adopted by the Legislature and proceed in
accordance with the national Constitution.
Finally, we have read carefully the observations
of the Secretary-General on the gender dimension in
the implementation of the final agreement. For the
Government of President Duque, women’s effective
exercise of their rights and their active participation in
all areas of national life is a priority issue. Therefore,

19-1083221/22

S/PV.8511

Colombia

the national development plan that has been under
discussion since February in the Congress includes a
pact for women’s equality. The pact imposes mandates
to strengthen the institutional framework on gender
and to move forward with concrete actions towards
the empowerment of women. First and foremost,
it establishes measures in favour of rural women
and peacebuilding.
Dialogue with women and their organizations
has been a continuous practice of the President and
his Government in all areas where women are actors,
including the implementation of the agreement. That
is why I want to welcome the presence of Ms. Rosa
Salamanca and, through her, express our gratitude
for the fundamental contribution that the women of
Colombia make to the building of a better country and
a more promising future for all.
The magnitude of the task that lies before us should
not make us underestimate the relevance and meaning
of our achievements. We do not, however, deem any
of those satisfactory or sufficient. We will continue
working to build peace with legality for all Colombians.
In that regard, the observations of the Verification
Mission and the members of the Security Council will
always be welcome and constitute an essential guide in
the search for coexistence among Colombians.
Accordingly, on behalf of the Government of
Colombia, I would like to thank the United Nations for
its support, through the Verification Mission headed by
Carlos Ruiz Massieu, and to recognize its constructive
contributions. I would also like to extend an invitation to
the Security Council to visit our country soon so that its
members can see the titanic effort we have undertaken.
The President: I thank Mr. Trujillo García for
his invitation.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ruiz Massieu to make
some additional comments.
Mr. Ruiz Massieu: I have essentially said what
I needed to say. There were no questions directed at
me. Again, I appreciate the opportunity to address
the Council, and I thank Council members for the
comments directed at the Mission’s work. We are at the

22/22

12/04/2019

disposal of the Council for any further clarification in
the future.
The President: I now give the floor
Ms. Salamanca to make additional comments.

to

Ms. Salamanca (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Council for the questions. I should also like to thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia for
his statement.
I take this opportunity to express gratitude for
the interest shown in the issue of gender and to kindly
call on the Government to make progress in the
specific matters related to this topic. As set out in the
development plan, there is a pact for gender equity. We
kindly ask Member States to ensure that the plan be
given sufficient resources and institutional capacity with
robust institutions that will enable such a programme to
truly have an impact. We believe that the resources are
still lacking and that they therefore need to be allocated
in order to achieve a cross-cutting impact.
I also believe it is important to say that within the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace, we are convinced that
the international benchmarks for sexual violence should
be respected. Finally, we would like to emphasize
that there should be a recommendation to implement
such a programme of guarantees for women leaders
in peacebuilding.
I agree that the agreement is not an easy path.
It is complex and challenging but it also enables
the promotion and strengthening of the political
social, cultural changes required for the future of the
country. This is a path towards coexistence and future
reconciliation. In leveraging it we will strengthen
democracy, promote well-being and prevent violence
and suffering. In such a task we as women will remain
committed to ethical standards so as to achieve a
peaceful country.
The President: I thank Ms. Salamanca for the
clarifications she has provided.
I now invite members to consultations to continue
our discussions on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

19-10832
