S/PV.8452

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8452nd meeting

Saturday, 26 January 2019, 9 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Vargas Maldonado/Mr. Singer Weisinger. . . . . . . . . . .

(Dominican Republic)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Duncan
Mr. Pompeo/Mr. Abrams

Agenda
The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-02148 (E)
*1902148*

S/PV.8452

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

The meeting was called to order at 9.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the Russian Federation has asked for
the floor.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation cannot support
the attempt of our American colleagues to conduct a
discussion of the situation in Venezuela. Generally
speaking, it is a gross abuse of the prerogatives of one
member of the Security Council — more importantly,
a permanent member — to introduce issues formulated
in this way to our agenda.
The internal situation in that Latin American
country is not an item on the agenda of the Council. We
see no external threats arising from what is taking place
in Venezuela. Venezuela does not represent a threat to
peace and security. If anything does represent a threat
to peace, it is the shameless and aggressive actions of
the United States and its allies aimed at ousting the
legitimately elected President of Venezuela.
Essentially, what we are seeing is an unceremonious
attempt by Washington, D.C., to engineer a coup
d’état in that country, in breach of all norms of
international law. This situation, concerning which
we will undoubtedly hear the views of the people of
Venezuela and Latin American States, and which the
Council should consider to be a threat to Venezuela,
leads us to request a procedural vote on the agenda
before us. We do not agree to discuss the item entitled
“Situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela”,
all the more so as there is no such item on the agenda
of the Security Council. In our view, it would be more
appropriate to conduct a discussion on the agenda item
“Threats to international peace and security”, in the
light of this violation of Article 2, paragraph 4, of the
Charter of the United Nations. We call on all who share
our point of view to support us.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Secretary
of State of the United States of America has asked for
the floor.
Mr. Pompeo (United States of America): The focus
of the Security Council is to safeguard international
peace and security. The former Maduro regime
oppressed its people for years, forcing millions of
Venezuelans to flee the country merely to gain very
2/45

26/01/2019

basic access to food and water. That has overwhelmed
the capacity of regional countries to adequately address
the urgent humanitarian needs. Former President
Maduro bears full responsibility for that tragedy,
allowing Venezuelans to languish without food and
humanitarian assistance.
On 10 January, the Organization of American
States (OAS) passed a resolution that refused to
recognize the illegitimate Maduro regime and called
for further attention to address the suffering of the
Venezuelan people. Last week, we all received a letter
under Article 54 of the Charter of the United Nations
from OAS Secretary General Luis Almagro Lemes,
which specifically described the destabilizing impact
of this crisis on the region. And yet, despite this tragedy
and despite the calls from regional bodies for it to be
given more attention, the United Nations has yet to hold
a formal meeting on this subject.
We now have a new leader, Juan Guaidó, in
Venezuela, who has promised to bring elections and
constitutional order back to Venezuela and security
back to the region. We cannot delay this critical
conversation, which has the world’s attention. For the
sake of Venezuela and the region, we must support the
Venezuelan people and do so right now.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In view of the
request and the comments made by members of the
Security Council, I intend to put the provisional agenda
to the vote.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
provisional agenda for today’s meeting. I shall put the
provisional agenda to the vote now.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, Dominican Republic, France, Germany,
Kuwait, Peru, Poland, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
Against:
China, Equatorial Guinea, Russian Federation,
South Africa
Abstaining:
Côte d’Ivoire, Indonesia
The President (spoke in Spanish): The provisional
agenda received 9 votes in favour, 4 votes against and
2 abstentions.
19-02148

26/01/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

The provisional agenda has been adopted.
The situation in the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Barbados, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Dominica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Honduras,
Mexico, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Suriname, Uruguay and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: The situation in Venezuela is cause
for serious concern. The protracted crisis in the country
has had a grave impact on the population, with high
levels of political polarization, growing humanitarian
needs and serious human rights concerns. The economic
situation in the country has become dire. Repeated
efforts to bring the Government and the opposition to the
negotiating table have not led to concrete agreements.
The Secretary-General has consistently stated the need
for a credible and inclusive political process that has the
interests of the Venezuelan people at heart.
The situation has both an economic and a political
dimension. The population has been affected in a
systemic way. Nearly all 30 million Venezuelans have
been affected by hyperinflation and the collapse of real
salaries; shortages of food, medicine and basic supplies;
the deterioration of health and education services;
and the deterioration of basic infrastructure, such as
water, electricity, transport and urban services. Drastic
reductions in production capacities in the agricultural,
pharmaceutical and other sectors have aggravated the
supply situation.
The drop in oil prices recorded in recent years
continued in 2018, with a decrease of approximately half
a million barrels per day from 2017 and a consequent
fall in revenues. The International Monetary Fund
reported that the inflation rate hit 1.37 million per cent

S/PV. 8452

last year and has projected a fall in real gross domestic
product of negative 18 per cent in 2019. According to
the Food and Agriculture Organization, between 2015
and 2017 there were 3.7 million undernourished people
in the country. Infant mortality rates have doubled in
recent years. According to United Nations estimates,
over 3 million Venezuelans are now living abroad,
including approximately 2.3 million who have left
the country since 2015, going mostly to other South
American countries.
In the parliamentary elections of December 2015,
the opposition won a large majority of seats in the
National Assembly. Subsequently, the Supreme Court
ruled that the Assembly was in contempt and that all
of its actions were null and void. In 2017, a National
Constituent Assembly was established through elections
in which the opposition parties did not participate. The
National Constituent Assembly took over key functions
of the legislative branch and undertook a process of
constitutional reform that remains inconclusive and is
not recognized by the opposition parties.
Attempts to bring about political dialogue started
as early as May 2016, through an initiative facilitated
by three former Presidents from the Dominican
Republic, Panama and Spain, under the auspices of
the Union of South American Nations. Despite some
initial progress, no concrete agreements were reached
through that initiative, which was suspended by the
beginning of 2017. By mid-2017, there were efforts to
resume dialogue, and formal talks began in September
2017, hosted by the Dominican Republic and with
international accompaniment. The talks ended in
February 2018, without agreements having been
reached. One of the major areas of disagreement was
the electoral calendar and guarantees to ensure free,
transparent and credible elections. Subsequently, the
Government went ahead with presidential elections
in May 2018. President Nicolás Maduro Moros was
declared the winner over two other candidates. Most
of the opposition did not participate in the elections or
recognize the results.
On 10 January, Nicolás Maduro was sworn in as
President for a second six-year term. On 23 January,
large-scale opposition protests culminated with Juan
Guaidó, President of the opposition-led National
Assembly, announcing that he did not recognize
President Maduro or his Government. Mr. Guaidó
proclaimed himself interim President, pledging to form
a transitional Government and call for elections.

19-021483/45

S/PV.8452

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

While the protests were largely peaceful, there
were incidents of violence. The Secretary-General has
expressed strong concern over reports of casualties
among demonstrators and has called for the transparent
and independent investigation of these incidents.
According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (UNHCR), credible
local sources have reported that at least 20 people have
died in the unrest. Many more have reportedly been
injured and detained in violent incidents.
The High Commissioner stated yesterday that any
violent incident resulting in death or injury should be
subject to an independent and impartial investigation
to find out whether there was excessive use of force
by the authorities or if crimes had been committed
by members of armed groups — pro-Government or
otherwise. She said that she was extremely concerned
that the situation in Venezuela could rapidly spiral
out of control, with catastrophic consequences. The
High Commissioner also stressed that it is of utmost
importance to uphold the right to peaceful assembly
and to refrain from excessive, disproportionate and
indiscriminate use of force.
In a statement on 24 January, the Secretary-General
emphasized the urgent need for all relevant actors to
commit to inclusive and credible political dialogue
to address the protracted crisis in the country, with
full respect for the rule of law and human rights. He
has offered his good offices to help resolve the crisis.
The main concern is the well-being of the Venezuelan
people and their ability to enjoy their full rights.
The United Nations has been providing assistance,
particularly in the areas of health and nutrition, and
the Secretary-General had asked the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to establish
a mechanism to support Venezuelans leaving the
country. The IOM and UNHCR appointed Mr. Eduardo
Stein, former Vice President of Guatemala, as their
joint representative to work with regional Governments
to ensure that support to these individuals is in place.
As the Secretary-General has stated, at this
crucial moment it is important that all actors exercise
maximum restraint to avoid an escalation of violence
and confrontation. There are divergent visions of what
the future should hold for Venezuela, but we must all be
guided by the pursuit of the well-being of the Venezuelan
people and work together so that their needs are fully
4/45

26/01/2019

met. We must do all we can to prevent the worsening of
tensions and we must try to help bring about a political
solution that will allow the country’s citizens to enjoy
peace, prosperity and all their human rights.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
I call on the Secretary of State of the United States
of America.
Mr. Pompeo (United States of America): On behalf
of President Trump and the American people, I first want
to thank Foreign Minister Miguel Vargas Maldonado
of the Dominican Republic, the current President of
the Security Council, for scheduling this meeting. My
former colleague, Ambassador Haley, lobbied for a year
to get the Council to address Venezuela, but her pleas
fell on deaf ears. This meeting is long overdue and
Council members all know why it is overdue.
Take Carlos Aquino, a 37-year-old construction
worker weeping over the tiny coffin of his deceased
infant son, who died of starvation. Such scenes of
misery are now the norm in Nicolás Maduro Moros’s
Venezuela, where millions of children are suffering
from malnutrition and starvation thanks to a socialist
experiment that caused the economy to collapse. This
human misery is not a secret. Stories like this are well
documented by our press corps. We can read about
men like Carlos every day. People like him are why the
United States called for this meeting.
We are here because Maduro has reduced ordinary
Venezuelans, who once lived in prosperity, to rooting
through dumpsters to find something to eat. We are
here because scores of Venezuelan women — some of
them teenagers — have fled Maduro’s madness to other
countries and, in desperation, turned to prostitution
to survive. We are here because of Maria Vielma,
a school psychologist who said, through tears, “We
have a Government that is dedicated to destroying,
not constructing”. Another man — a farmer named
Vladimir Sequera, who never got more than a sixth
grade education — hoped that his stepdaughter Gabriela
could fulfil her dreams of being a lawyer. She now
says that their whole future has been taken away. That
future — for her and for all Venezuelans — did not
magically disappear on its own. The Maduro regime’s
19-02148

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

26/01/2019

failed policies,
that future.

oppression

and

corruption

stole

The United States is helping to recover a brighter
future for Venezuela. We are here to urge all nations to
support the democratic aspirations of the Venezuelan
people as they try to free themselves from former
President Maduro’s illegitimate mafia State. The
humanitarian situation demands action now; it demands
action today. Today, 9 out of 10 citizens live in poverty.
Millions lack access to drinking water and food. Three
out of four hospitals have been abandoned. Three
million Venezuelans have been forced to flee their
homeland, thereby flooding the region and threatening
international peace and security. Maduro’s prisons are
full of political prisoners, unjustly behind bars, and
the graveyards hold dissidents and protesters who have
been killed by that regime.
I want to talk to the Council about just one of
them — a member of the City Council of Caracas named
Fernando Albán Salazar. Just four months ago, he came
here to this city to meet with the world’s representatives,
who gather here every year during the general debate
of the General Assembly. He came here to speak about
the failures of the Maduro regime and about his hopes
for a more democratic and more prosperous future for
his country. After that, he went home to the country
that he loved. Maduro’s secret police arrested him at the
airport as soon as he landed. He died in their custody
three days later and the pathetic explanations for this
death have convinced absolutely no one.
The time is now to support the Venezuelan people,
recognize the new democratic Government led by
interim President Guaidó and end this nightmare.
There are no excuses. The United States stands with
the Venezuelan people. So far, many other nations have
chosen to do the same and they, too, have recognized
the legitimate Government of interim President
Guaidó. The United States stands proudly with him as
we stand together in support of Venezuela. He knew the
Venezuelan people did not have a moment to spare.
Now it is time for every other nation to pick a side.
There can be no more delays and no more games. Either
a nation stands with the forces of freedom or it is in
league with Maduro and his mayhem. Some countries
have publicly taken former President Maduro’s side;
China, Russia, Syria and Iran are just four of them. Just
this morning, we tried to find a way for the Council
to speak with one voice in support of the Venezuelan

S/PV. 8452

people and the democratic ideals through a presidential
statement of the Council. But our Russian and Chinese
colleagues refused to let this move forward. It is not
a surprise that those who rule without democracy in
their own countries are trying to prop up Maduro while
he is in dire straits. Nor are these countries supporting
international norms, as they cynically claim. China
and Russia are propping up a failed regime in the
hopes of recovering billions of dollars in ill-considered
investments and assistance made over the years. This
money was never intended to help the Venezuelan
people; it lined the pockets of the Maduro regime, its
cronies and its benefactors.
But no regime has done more to sustain the
nightmarish condition of the Venezuelan people than
the regime in Havana. For years, Cuban security
and intelligence thugs, invited into Venezuela by
Maduro himself and those around him, have sustained
this illegitimate rule. They have trained Maduro’s
security and intelligence henchmen in Cuba’s own
worst practices. Cuba’s Ministry of the Interior even
provides former President Maduro’s personal security.
Members of this body often use their microphones here
to condemn foreign interference in internal affairs. Let
us be crystal clear. The foreign Power that is meddling
in Venezuela today is Cuba. Cuba has directly made
matters worse. The United States and its partners are
the true friends of the Venezuelan people.
On Wednesday, the Venezuelan people chose to
take their country back on the anniversary of the day
that the dictator Marco Pérez Jiménez was forced out
of power back in 1958. We call for Venezuelans to now
work together to peacefully restore the constitutional
Government and return the country to a secure,
democratic and prosperous path. As we read reports
of peaceful Venezuelan protesters being killed or
wounded, we also repeat our insistence that Venezuelan
security services show restraint.
I want to be 100 per cent clear. President Trump
and I fully expect that our diplomats will continue to
receive the protections provided for under the Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations. Venezuela
must not test the United States resolve to protect its
own people.
We hope that the international community will
support the people of Venezuela and the transitional
Government led by Juan Guaidó. On 23 January, Guaidó
declared himself interim President of Venezuela, in

19-021485/45

S/PV.8452

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

accordance with Venezuela’s own Constitution. He
made that declaration with the full support of the
National Assembly and the Venezuelan people. Our
nations must stand up for the rule of law and support
the leader whom the Venezuelan people have affirmed
as their legitimate interim President. It is our hope that
free and fair elections happen as soon as possible.
Back in 1961, President Kennedy spoke in Caracas.
He declared, “We will be partners in building a better
life for our people”. America’s ambition has not changed
since that day. We stand with the Venezuelan people
as they seek to build a better life for themselves. We
cannot ignore the suffering or tyranny taking place in
that proud nation, and neither should other countries
that care about freedom and prosperity. Today, we call
on all members of the Security Council to support
Venezuela’s democratic transition and interim President
Guaidó’s role in it.
Mr. Duncan (United Kingdom): There are probably
only a few moments in history when a country’s rate of
inflation has had to be measured in millions of per cent.
But in the case of Venezuela, this is such a moment.
Beneath that stark statistic rests a scene of total
economic collapse and, with it, a comprehensive picture
of human misery and degradation from which only the
corrupt Venezuelan elite are able to escape. People are
starving, children are malnourished, essential items are
absent from the bare shelves of bankrupt stores and,
from that wretchedness, millions have fled to seek
refuge in neighbouring countries, where they have been
rescued by an outpouring of human generosity.
That inexcusable and wholly avoidable wasteland
is entirely the creation of one man and his cronies.
The ranting socialism of Nicolás Maduro Moros has
destroyed an entire country and, despite his selfcongratulatory moral posturing, his enduring legacy
will be to have made the poor not just poorer, but also
destitute. It is our concern for the plight of Venezuela
and the country’s people that motivates us here today,
not the sentiments of anything that can possibly be
described as “colonial”. How, indeed, can any selfrespecting Government possibly justify supporting the
poisonous regime of the nation-destroying Mr. Maduro?
But, in addition to holding the opinion we do
because of our concern for the people of Venezuela,
the United Nations and we, the Security Council, are
also here to resolve the world’s worst sins. To do so,
we must all uphold the rule of law, which we firmly
6/45

26/01/2019

believe should govern the affairs of all. That rule of
law has collapsed in Venezuela. Worse, it has been
continuously eroded, undermined and eradicated by the
dictatorial abuses of Nicolás Maduro.
Hand in hand with the economic devastation
caused by that man has come the parallel removal of
liberty, justice and freedom. We have seen the theft
from the Venezuelan people of its democracy. Maduro
has attempted to delegitimize the National Assembly,
he has created the artificial and illegitimate Constituent
Assembly, and he has ruthlessly put an end to free and
fair elections by stuffing ballot boxes and corrupting
democratic decision. The political opposition has
been suppressed and intimidated, its leaders have
fled or been imprisoned, and we will never forget that
opposition activist Fernando Albán Salazar, mentioned
just now by Secretary Pompeo, was detained and
then found dead beneath the windows of the National
Intelligence Service facility. The world can now see
that the presidency of Nicolás Maduro no longer rests
on democratic foundations. The presidency of Nicolás
Maduro is not legitimate.
We, the United Kingdom, unreservedly praise
and support the extraordinary courage of Juan Guaidó
in his stand against Maduro’s fraud, corruption and
undemocratic status. We applaud Juan Guaidó’s
decision to assert the legitimate authority of the
National Assembly. It is therefore right that we should
now respond robustly to the courageous steps taken by
the Venezuelan people and the political opposition by
bringing this critical issue here to the Security Council.
Council members must recognize their responsibility
to ensure that the United Nations uses its leadership to
help achieve positive change in Venezuela. Our efforts
must now focus on finding a way out of the crisis that
has devastated the country.
Let me make our position clear. The United
Kingdom stands with the European Union in
demanding urgent, free and fair elections at the earliest
opportunity and in calling for a legitimate Government
to be established. We stand with the Organization of
American States and the Lima Group, whose members
last September referred the Venezuelan Government
to the International Criminal Court (ICC) for crimes
against humanity. Citing over 8,000 extrajudicial
executions, 12,000 arbitrary arrests and the detention
of 13,000 political prisoners, they made history by
making it the first ever case in which an entire State
has been referred to the ICC.
19-02148

26/01/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

We stand shoulder to shoulder with the United States
in saying that the National Assembly and its President,
Juan Guaidó, are best placed to lead Venezuela to
the restoration of its democracy, its economy and its
freedom. Therefore, we believe that Juan Guaidó is
the right man to take Venezuela forward and we will
recognize him as constitutional interim President if
new elections are not announced within eight days.
Today, we should all stand together against the
tyranny of Nicolás Maduro and in support of legitimate
democratic forces in Venezuela. Venezuela can and
must recover from the depths of its current despair. To
do so, it needs an end to tyranny, an end to corruption
and an urgent return to freedom, democracy and the
rule of law. The Security Council must make its view
clear and we must urgently help to pave the way to a
brighter future for the Venezuela that Maduro has so
culpably ruined.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
important information provided by Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo. We particularly welcome the presence of the
high-ranking officials who are with us this morning.
It is important that the Security Council discuss the
situation in Venezuela, in accordance with Article 34
of the Charter of the United Nations, which authorizes
it to address any situation that is likely to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security, as
well as our commitment to the preventive diplomacy
efforts that the Council must undertake.
Peru notes with alarm that the rupture of
constitutional order in Venezuela has given way to a
serious political, economic and humanitarian crisis,
which represents a threat to regional peace and security.
The policy of repression instituted by the illegitimate
regime of Nicolás Maduro Moros against his own people
fuels the prospects of renewed escalations of violence,
the consequences of which the Council must prevent
and address, in line with its great responsibilities.
Reality for the Venezuelan people, which some
countries seek to qualify as an internal matter, is
reflected in a massive and historic exodus of around
3.3 million people resulting from the anti-democratic,
oppressive and dictatorial acts and policies of the
Maduro regime. Conservative projections point to an
increase of 2 million in this figure in the short term in
the light of the escalation of violence and the ongoing
humanitarian crisis in the country. We note that the

S/PV. 8452

pace and complexity of that phenomenon are creating
a situation of crisis and regional tension, which some
countries must urgently address in order to meet the
most basic needs of the diaspora. Peru alone has to
date received some 700,000 Venezuelan refugees and
migrants, whom we have welcomed and supported.
The humanitarian crisis and political repression in
Venezuela are not recent. The General Secretariat of the
Organization of American States, the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
have determined that there is evidence pointing to the
systematic and strategic use of murder, incarceration,
torture, rape and other forms of sexual violence in
order to terrorize the Venezuelan people and crush the
opposition to the regime. Before the commission of
those serious crimes, in September Peru, together with
Argentina, Canada, Chile, Colombia and Paraguay,
under Article 14 of the Rome Statute, asked the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court to initiate
an investigation into the crimes against humanity
committed by the Maduro regime in Venezuela since
12 February 2014.
The political and security crisis has continued to
deteriorate since the illegitimate inauguration of Nicolás
Maduro, which was based on an electoral process that
did not meet international minimum standards in terms
of participation, justice, transparency and international
observation to be considered democratic, free, fair and
credible. For that reason, the Lima Group, a mechanism
made up of States in the region whose objective is to
seek a peaceful solution to the situation in Venezuela,
did not recognize the legitimacy of the 20 May 2018
electoral process.
The illegitimacy of the regime is also the result of
a continuous process of the dismantling of democracy
and fundamental freedoms, accompanied by the
regime’s systematic and proven lack of commitment to
the promotion of peaceful solutions through dialogue
with the opposition. We must condemn the fact that the
response of the dictatorial regime of Nicolás Maduro
to the demonstrations of the Venezuelan people in this
crisis has been the disproportionate use of violence,
political persecution and repression. We therefore
reiterate our call for an immediate end to the violence
and for the release of all political prisoners in Venezuela.
In that regard, the High Commissioner for Human
Rights stated that there 180 popular demonstrations

19-021487/45

S/PV.8452

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

were held this week, leading to the loss of human lives
and large-scale arrests by security forces and proGovernment armed groups. We demand an independent
investigation to bring those responsible to justice. In
that regard, we highlight the resolution adopted by the
Permanent Council of the Organization of American
States, dated 10 January, in which it resolved not to
recognize the new regime of Nicolás Maduro and in
which its member States are urged to adopt measures
that contribute to the prompt restoration of the
democratic order. That regional position coincides with
the declaration issued on 4 January by the Lima Group,
in which Nicolás Maduro was urged to provisionally
transfer the executive power to the National Assembly
until new elections could be held in Venezuela.
Peru, as well as other countries of Latin America
and other regions, has recognized the President of the
National Assembly, Juan Guaidó, as interim President
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in strict
adherence to the provisions of the Constitution of
that country. Likewise, we affirm the constitutional
authority of the National Assembly of Venezuela,
the sole democratically elected body, and strongly
support the actions it has undertaken, including the
authorization of international humanitarian aid.
Peru is of the view that a democratic transition
process must be initiated immediately under the
leadership of President Guaidó. That is the only way
for Venezuela to overcome this severe crisis. That
requires the holding of new, credible and transparent
democratic elections that are protected by the rule
of law, that respect the constitutional guarantees and
fundamental rights of all Venezuelans, and that allow
for unrestricted participation, under observation and
consistent with international standards.
Finally, I reaffirm our commitment to and
solidarity with the brotherly Venezuelan people and
reiterate our willingness to contribute to the restoration
of democracy in that country.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We want to thank you,
Sir, for convening today’s meeting on the situation in
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. We also want
to welcome the ministers present here in the Council
today, as well as the briefing by Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo.
In any country, like all the countries represented
around this big table, political parties choose the
provisions by which to conduct elections. Venezuela
is no different, and it held its presidential elections on
8/45

26/01/2019

20 May 2018 on the basis of its national laws governing
such elections. Those elections also took place in
accordance with the agreement of electoral guarantees
that was signed by all political parties shortly before
the elections. The elections were further overseen
by Venezuela’s National Electoral Council, as in any
other country, whether developed or developing. It was
on that basis that South Africa’s President, Mr. Cyril
Ramaphosa, congratulated President Maduro following
his inauguration for a second term as President of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
A founding principle of South Africa’s
constitutional democracy, which we hold very dear,
is respect for the rule of law. We are therefore deeply
concerned by what is a clear attempt, in Venezuela,
to circumvent the constitutional legal mechanisms of
the country that govern its elections. Any grievances
or disputes should be resolved in a peaceful manner
through the proper mechanisms and processes provided
for in the Constitution of Venezuela and its electoral
laws, without external influence. That is standard
practice everywhere, in every country, and indeed the
best practice in all democracies that subscribe to the
rule of law.
South Africa echoes the statement made by the
Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, in Davos on
24 January, where he urged a de-escalation of tensions
to prevent further violence. We further support the
Secretary-General’s call referring to
“the urgent need for all relevant actors to commit to
inclusive and credible political dialogue to address
the protracted crisis in the country, with full respect
for the rule of law and human rights”.
South Africa therefore calls on all parties to
participate in a national dialogue process to ensure
unity and reconciliation and for the furtherance of a
political solution to the situation in the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela. We would like to reiterate
that any further action by or grievance of either party
should be resolved through the due legal processes of
the country.
We are also concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Venezuela and the resultant migration that
has taken place. We call on the entire international
community, as well as the relevant United Nations
agencies and bodies, to work with the Venezuelan
Government and its neighbours in order to assist those
in need.
19-02148

26/01/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

S/PV. 8452

I wish to stress that South Africa is firmly against any
attempts aimed at undue or unconstitutional changes of
Government in Venezuela. The Security Council should
never be an instrument that validates unconstitutional
changes of any Government — anywhere, at any time.
Instead, the Council should promote avenues that
create environments conducive to inclusive dialogue
and cooperation, which would ease the challenges and
hardships faced by the Venezuelan people.

serve as firefighters to put out that fire, facilitating an
inclusive and peaceful intra-Venezuelan dialogue as a
way of finding a solution to the prevailing situation,
given that neither external interference nor violent and
extreme positions would facilitate such a solution, but
rather would aggravate the situation. We must give
Venezuelans the space to engage in dialogue and find a
solution. The call of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
for internal dialogue is based on the following realities.

Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, for the overview that she has just provided
on the current situation in the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.

In the context of recent developments in the Middle
East and Africa, specifically in Libya, we are today
experiencing the spillover of a situation generated
by foreign intervention as a result of an appeal and
the ill-intended implementation in 2011 of a Security
Council resolution based on the right to protect. Let us
compile the statistics and establish the figures on the
current suffering and the number of human lives that
have been and continue to be lost, not only in Libya,
but the entire subregion of Western and even Central
Africa, due to terrorist activity, organized crime and
the creation of numerous armed groups as a result of
that external interference, which focused solely on
regime change without regard for what would happen
later in the country.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea has been
closely monitoring developments in Venezuela, and in
particular the trends reported by the media during the
past week, which are of concern to us given that they
may reach a level that would cause further suffering
to the population. Our delegation underscores the
urgent need for all interested parties to refrain from
carrying out acts of violence and provocation, and calls
on the Government, the opposition political parties,
civil society and the people of Venezuela to summon
the courage, wisdom and good sense to overcome the
situation and find a reliable solution in the interest of
peace and security, with due respect for human rights
and the freedoms of its citizens. Such a solution, in
addition to being peaceful and democratic, should be
based on the framework of the Venezuelan Constitution.
Equatorial Guinea believes that the situation in
Venezuela is an internal matter and that it does not
pose a threat to international peace and security. We
therefore urge the Security Council and the international
community to be sufficiently cautious and to take into
account recent experiences in the Middle East and
Africa in order to avoid a spillover of the situation in
the country. The main role of the United Nations and
the international community in this situation should be
focused on supporting the country’s efforts in promoting
a frank and inclusive intra-Venezuelan dialogue that
allows the parties to negotiate the differences that tend
to undermine Venezuela’s fate.
In other words, the neighbouring countries and those
of the region and the wider international community
must not pour fuel on the current fire in Venezuela,
turning it into a large-scale conflagration, but rather

Respect for the rule of law is rightly considered a
dogma of the Security Council and the United Nations. In
Venezuela, all judicial bodies recognize and resolutely
support the current Government in power, which is why
the international community must also support that
position in respect of the rule of law. Last but not least,
the kind of change of Government being considered
by some with respect to the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela would set a very dangerous precedent that
could have disastrous consequences in many countries
following the holding of electoral cycles.
For all of these reasons, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea recognizes, respects and adheres to the
constitutional order of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and expects the parties to resolve their
differences through dialogue, while refraining, as
we stated earlier, from carrying out violent actions
that could contribute to further exacerbating the
vulnerability of the prevailing situation.
That is why, in recognition of the principle of
subsidiarity, we ask that the actions of organizations and
stakeholders in the region be in line with international
law and the principles and purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations. In that regard, we call on the Secretary-

19-021489/45

S/PV.8452

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

General, Mr. António Guterres, to use his expertise and
diplomatic experience to discharge his good offices as a
facilitator and mediator amid this crisis.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing on the tragic situation of the
Venezuelan people.
Indeed, for nearly three years, Venezuela has
been plunged into an unprecedented crisis — with a
depleted economy, a population deprived of basic
necessities and the tyrannical and brutal repression
of opponents and peaceful protesters, as well as the
exodus of more than 3 million Venezuelans, both
migrants and refugees, eager to flee a situation that is,
quite frankly, chaotic. The problem goes beyond the
borders of Venezuela itself and is a destabilizing factor
for regional security. It is therefore perfectly legitimate
for the Security Council to address this issue as part of
its role in conflict prevention. In that context, I would
like to emphasize two priorities in moving towards a
resolution of the crisis.
The first priority is nothing less than respect for the
will of the people. In that regard, France applauds the
bravery of the hundreds of thousands of demonstrators
who have been taking to the streets of Venezuela since
23 January. As said by the President of the Republic,
Emmanuel Macron, democracy must be restored in
Venezuela. Nicolás Maduro, who seeks to undertake a
second term on the basis of a mockery of an election,
must immediately announce the organization of new
presidential elections. They must be democratic — that
is to say, free and transparent — and in accordance
with the Venezuelan constitutional order and under
international observation. France has campaigned
tirelessly for a negotiated political solution to the crisis,
and the European Union has repeatedly offered its help
to achieve that goal. Nicolás Maduro must understand
that he must now seize this last opportunity.
If such elections are not announced in a timely
manner, the European Union, in accordance with the
declaration that has just been adopted by its 28 members
in Brussels, will take new measures, concerning in
particular recognizing the Venezuelan authorities
in accordance with article 233 of the Venezuelan
Constitution. As President Macron announced this
morning, France is therefore ready to recognize
Juan Guaidó, within 8 days, as interim President of
Venezuela in order to initiate a political process.
10/45

26/01/2019

Furthermore, France urges the Venezuelan
authorities to respect the rights of the National Assembly,
the only democratically elected institution, especially
the principle of the immunity of its members, and to
cease all acts of repression against the population.
Apart from its institutions, the men and women who
are politically engaged in the defence of human rights
and Venezuelan democracy must be able to pursue
their activities without fear of threats or reprisals. The
excessive use of force is simply unacceptable, especially
against democratically elected representatives, civil
society representatives and peaceful protesters. The
Venezuelan people have the right to make their voices
heard. In that respect, France recalls its commitment to
the freedom of the press and the protection of journalists,
who must be able to exercise their profession freely.
The second, and equally urgent, priority is to put an
end to the humanitarian crisis. Millions of Venezuelans
have had to leave their country in the absence of a
State capable of providing basic services, including
medical care and basic necessities. The solidarity of
the countries of the region — in particular Colombia,
Ecuador, Peru and Brazil — in the face of this human
tragedy is to be welcomed. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
International Organization for Migration, which have
appointed a joint special representative, are also doing
an outstanding job. France, in its national capacity,
and the European Union are also contributing to this
humanitarian effort to mitigate the suffering of the
Venezuelan people.
As the situation continues to deteriorate, France
urges the Venezuelan authorities to allow and facilitate
the work of international humanitarian actors and
non-governmental organizations that seek to provide
humanitarian assistance to the most vulnerable men
and women in society, in particular children, people
with disabilities and the elderly. As a staunch proponent
of freedom, equality and fraternity in accordance
with its national motto, France stands alongside the
Venezuelan people and hails the courage of all those
who stand ready to defend the freedom and democratic
institutions of their country.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to welcome the participation
of the Ministers present at today’s meeting. We
listened carefully to the briefing by Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
19-02148

26/01/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Peacebuilding Affairs, and we appreciate her valuable
information regarding the recent developments in the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
We took note of the two letters addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the Secretary
General of the Organization of American States (OAS)
and the Chargé d’affaires of the United States delegation
regarding the decisions taken by the OAS on the current
crisis in Venezuela.
We have committed ourselves to fully implementing
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations in
order to maintain international peace and security. We
must therefore work together to address the challenges
and crises facing our world today. Chapter VI, Article
34, of the Charter states:
“The Security Council may investigate any
dispute, or any situation which might lead to
international friction or give rise to a dispute, in
order to determine whether the continuance of
the dispute or situation is likely to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security.”
That is why the Security Council has a fundamental
role to play in implementing preventive diplomacy in
order to prevent conflicts and address crises at an early
stage, should there be any early signs of a situation
leading to a threat to international peace and security.
That would be in accordance with the mandate given
to the Council based on Chapter VI, Article 34, of
the Charter.
Since joining the Council, the State of Kuwait
has sought to implement all our priorities based on
the fundamental principles of international law while
promoting the role of preventive diplomacy and
stepping up our efforts to prevent conflicts and settle
them peacefully. We strongly believe that preventive
diplomacy is one of the main pillars at our disposal
when dealing with unrest and crises at an early stage in
order to avoid significant economic and political losses,
as well as losses of human life and property.
It is with concern in mind that we are following
the recent developments in the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and regret recent reports regarding many
casualties among civilians during demonstrations in
Venezuelan cities. The State of Kuwait stresses the
need to respect the freedom of expression and peaceful
demonstration as guaranteed by international law,
including the International Covenant on Civil and

S/PV. 8452

Political Rights, which was adopted by the General
Assembly in 1966. Inter alia, the Covenant guarantees
the rights to the freedom of expression and the freedom
of peaceful assembly according to national laws.
The current political crisis in Venezuela requires
all the relevant stakeholders to prioritize national
interests over personal or partisan ones. They must
commit to an inclusive political dialogue to resolve
the current crisis. We call on all the relevant parties to
exercise self-restraint, reduce tensions, reject violence
and make every effort to prevent any further human
losses. In that context, we support the statement issued
by the Secretary-General on 24 January.
We belong to a region where over the past two years
certain countries, such as Syria and Libya, have seen
demonstrations and protests that started peacefully but,
unfortunately, became violent, leading to grave losses
in human lives and the destruction of infrastructure.
Some of them have even led to the tragedies that we
are witnessing today, including the suffering from their
repercussions, which affect the security and stability
of the region and the world. We must therefore step up
our efforts to prevent such events from reoccurring,
whether in our region or in any other part of the world.
Before concluding I would like to stress the
importance of the Security Council addressing
such situations by utilizing the well-established and
recognized principles of relations among nations,
which are built on those of the Charter of the United
Nations that call on nations to respect the sovereignty of
States, not interfere in their internal affairs and respect
the competencies of various United Nations organs
mandated by the Charter. Those are the principles
that govern relations among nations, and they should
be the principles on which we rely when addressing
such situations.
We hope that Venezuela will be able to peacefully
overcome this crisis, while ensuring security, stability
and prosperity for its people.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for
her briefing.
We have no doubt that today’s meeting was called
for by the United States delegation for the sole purpose
of continuing to destabilize the situation in Venezuela
by imposing its own approaches and methods to resolve
the problems that the country has recently been facing.

19-0214811/45

S/PV.8452

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

This meeting, which we all have to attend, is another
element of the United States strategy to carry out regime
change in Venezuela. We regret that the United States
is drawing the Security Council into its unscrupulous
games. However, since we are all gathered here, we
would like to share with the Council our principled
views on what is taking place.
Let us speak frankly. The topic of today’s meeting
is not the situation in Venezuela, as the organizers
would like Council members — who are, incidentally,
clearly divided on this issue — to think. Unfortunately,
today we are considering the most typical case of what
is called a “threat to international peace and security”,
one that has been created by the threat or use of force
against the political independence of a State. The
authors of the Charter of the United Nations, among
which, I must note, the United States prominently
figured, included a warning in the Charter — in Article
2, paragraph 4 — in an attempt to save the world from
such events. However, it seems that Washington has not
opened that treaty for quite a long time.
Such flagrant United States interference in the
internal affairs of another State is nothing new. The
Americans have not changed, and apparently do not
intend to change, their attitude to Latin America as an
area of exclusive interest to them — a backyard of sorts,
in which they can do anything they want, without taking
into the account the interests of its inhabitants. This
is a reincarnation of the so-called Monroe Doctrine,
on which President Trump spoke openly during his
statement at the high-level segment of the seventy-third
session of the General Assembly (see A/73/PV.6). Back
in 1913, President Woodrow Wilson spoke about how
the United States intended to teach the South American
republics to elect good people. Today that lesson is
being taught to Venezuela, which recently dared to
pursue an independent policy that does not coincide
with the economic and political interests of the warden
that watches over the western hemisphere.
I would like to quote the words of another American
President, which were spoken in Congress on the eve
of the creation of the United Nations, of which he was
one of the founding fathers. He considered the United
Nations as his main political project and truly believed
that its creation was capable of saving humankind from
wars and conflicts. That President was Franklin Delano
Roosevelt, who said:
12/45

26/01/2019

“The Yalta Conference ought to spell the end of the
system of unilateral action, the exclusive alliances,
the spheres of influence, the balances of power,
and all the other expedients that have been tried for
centuries — and have always failed.”
Unfortunately, the real policy of the United States in
the western hemisphere — and not only there — is in
striking contrast to those noble and just ideals. Regime
change is a favourite geopolitical game of the
United States.
Washington’s attempts to undermine Nicaragua are
no secret. The fact of open United States interference
in the internal affairs of that State was confirmed by
the 1986 decision of the International Court of Justice
at The Hague in the case regarding the Iran-Contra
affair. At the time, the United States tried to finance
Nicaraguan rebels. Cubans still remember the Bay of
Pigs invasion, and Chileans will never forget the role
of the United States in overthrowing Salvador Allende.
Before our eyes, the attempts by the United States to
impose its will on other nations is being supplemented
with a new chapter. That is just a brief glimpse into
what Washington has done in Latin America alone. The
nations of Africa, Asia, the Middle East, the Pacific
region and aEurope have quite a bit to add to that list.
Against that backdrop, inventing so-called evidence of
interference in United States elections out of thin air
and accusing other countries of malicious policies is
not only absurd, but also laughable.
The Venezuelan people once again supported
the candidacy of Nicolás Maduro as President of the
State by giving him almost 68 per cent of the vote
on 20 May. Anticipating that scenario, from the start
Washington did everything it could to discredit the vote
and cast a shadow over the re-elected authorities of the
country. In particular, there is enough evidence that a
number of opposition candidates were subjected to the
most severe pressure, which forced them to withdraw
their candidatures and refrain from competing in
the elections.
Ultimately, using the opposition’s partial boycott
as a pretext, the United States and several of its
allies set about implementing a plan to overthrow the
legitimate authorities of the country. As we know from
the American press, prominent members of the United
States Congress actively participated in that venture.
The attempt to overthrow the Government immediately
after the election was unsuccessful. Washington
19-02148

26/01/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

therefore tried to destabilize the situation step by
step, including through the Organization of American
States (OAS) and a number of Venezuela’s neighbours.
However, as is well known, the United States did not
succeed in pushing through an anti-Venezuela draft
resolution at the OAS Permanent Council on 24 January.
There is not enough support within the Organization
for those plans, which is quite a telling sign.
We are now witnessing the culmination of
those efforts, which were timed to coincide with the
inauguration of the legitimately elected President.
Extremist opponents of the legitimate Government,
having failed to defeat Maduro, including by physically
eliminating him, chose the most confrontational scenario.
On 23 January, the President of the National Assembly
proclaimed himself interim President of Venezuela.
The United States and a number of other countries
immediately recognized him, thereby confirming that
they had either abetted or were directly involved in the
creation of an artificial parallel Government, which now
threatens to seriously destabilize the situation in the
country. National Security Advisor John Bolton made
a Bolshevik-style statement on the expropriation of all
Venezuelan property in the United States, while allies
from the opposition were promised financial support.
We strongly condemn those who are pushing
Venezuelan society towards the precipice of a bloody
feud. The United States is painting us a picture of
confrontation between the Maduro regime and the
people of Venezuela. That picture is far from the reality.
In spite of everything, the leader of Venezuela clearly
enjoys broad support among the population. Incidentally,
according to sociological studies conducted in October
2018 by an organization close to the opposition, the
National Assembly, the leader of which Washington is
currently positioning as the so-called President, is not
supported by approximately 70 per cent of the people
of Venezuela.
Again on the matter of the elections and being
informed, the representative of the United Kingdom
spoke about stuffed ballot boxes in Venezuela,
suggesting that the elections were rigged. I would recall
that there are no ballot boxes in Venezuela; it uses an
electronic system of voting.
In support of Venezuela, we are first and foremost
against gross violations of international law, in
particular those provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations that clearly condemn any interference in the

S/PV. 8452

internal affairs of independent States. Furthermore, the
American leaders are making making obvious hints
regarding the use force when they talk about all options
being on the table. Taking advantage of the presence of
the Secretary of State of the United States of America,
I want to ask Mr. Pompeo directly if that means that
the United States is ready to use military force against
a sovereign State under a bogus pretext? We need
to hear a clear answer here in the Chamber: Does
Washington intend to once again violate the Charter of
the United Nations?
Secretary of State Pompeo claims that only China,
Russia, Cuba, Syria and Iran are supporting Maduro.
However, if the Secretary of State were to spend a
little more time in the Chamber, he would hear firsthand the true stance of the overwhelming majority
of a sovereignty State and the policy of overthrowing
unwanted regimes. The countries mentioned are
not in support of the Maduro regime; instead, they
support international law, and I think the Secretary of
State already had a chance to hear that. In the context
of the notion of a rules-based order, which has been
promoted by our Western colleagues, perhaps the act
of overthrowing unwant regimes is welcome to them.
However, international law quite clearly classifies
such actions as a violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular in Article 2, paragraph 4. We
consider such behaviour unacceptable. It undermines
the principles of the Charter and the basic norms of
international conduct.
We would also like to address our Latin American
partners. Do they understand that if they condone such
actions, tomorrow any other Latin American country
could find itself in the place of Venezuela? The illegality
of what is taking place in Venezuela is flagrant, and
the leadership of the Organization of American States
supports this and, following Washington, rubberstamps threats against an independent State.
We are convinced that resolving the Venezuelan
crisis requires taking several obvious and simple
steps. First, there needs to be an end to all external
interference and to the propping up of the leaders of
the opposition. Secondly, every effort should be made
to launch an inter-Venezuelan dialogue and facilitate
reconciliation. In that regard, Venezuela’s neighbours
can — and should — play a determining role. We know
that similar initiatives are already being put forward.
Thirdly, we should refrain from discriminatory
economic measures against Venezuela. It is no secret

19-0214813/45

S/PV.8452

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

that, to a great extent, the current economic crisis was
provoked by those countries that cry out most about the
suffering of the Venezuelan people.
I would like to correct something that Secretary
of State Pompeo said. We did not block the draft
presidential statement proposed by the United States.
We made certain constructive amendments that we
were sure would be wholeheartedly supported by the
majority of the members of the Security Council.
Some members have already voiced their support. As
such, the ball now is in the hands of the American
delegation. It is up to them. However, we are not
sure that this kind of statement, which is based on a
carefully weighed assessment of the Secretary-General
and which reaffirms the sovereignty of Venezuela, the
inadmissibility of interference in its internal affairs
and respect for its Constitution is something that the
delegation of the United States is striving for. We believe
that it is now more important than everto ease up on
the rhetoric and refrain from threats and ultimatums,
as well as to contribute to beginning a dialogue within
a legal framework and ensure the stabilization of the
situation in Venezuela. We are ready to contribute to
that end. We call on everyone to do so as well.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Germany very much
appreciates the fact that this item is on the agenda
today. With respect to what my Russian colleague said
at the beginning of this meeting — that this item was
put on the agenda by the United States — I want to
remind him that this item was put on the agenda by the
South American countries in the Council — Peru and
the Dominican Republic — and the United States. It
is therefore not only the concern of the United States.
Rather, it is clearly also the concern of the countries in
the region.
Moreover, with regard to the question of whether
this issue is a threat to international peace and security,
the Russian representative probably heard the statement
by the Ambassador of Kuwait. Although far from the
region, he clearly said that preventive diplomacy is
something that we have to put on the agenda of the
Security Council. That was also said by our colleagues
from Peru and France. There is a potential threat to
international peace and security, and it is right, with
regard to conflict prevention, that the Security Council
deal with this issue.
In the statement made by the representative of
Russia, I did not hear anything about the South American
14/45

26/01/2019

countries that are suffering right now. We have heard
the figures, and I would like also to thank Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing. We have heard the figures
about the impact of the crisis on the region. More than
3 million Venezuelans have fled their country. Peru is
taking care of 700,000 refugees. We have the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia here, who will say later
on what the situation means for his country. The same
holds true for Brazil. I think we should really commend
those countries for what they are doing: hosting the
people who have fled their country because the living
circumstances are what they are in Venezuela.
Germany stands in solidarity with Venezuela’s
neighbours. They bear the burden of receiving the
displaced population in dire need of shelter and
humanitarian assistance. Germany commends their
tireless efforts and commitment to providing a safe
haven for those who seek refuge from the catastrophic
humanitarian conditions and the lack of food and health
services in Venezuela.
Let me recall what led to this massive movement
of refugees: it is the severe violation of international
law, international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. Democratic principles, human rights
and fundamental freedoms continue to be violated. This
is a situation where women and children in particular
are most affected.
The Russian representative mentioned Roosevelt.
Let me come back to Eleanor Roosevelt. She inspired
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Article 25,
paragraph 1, of the Declaration states:
“Everyone has the right to a standard of living
adequate for the health and well-being of himself
and of his family, including food, clothing, housing
and medical care and necessary social services.”
Sadly, at this moment we have to say that does not hold
true for the people of Venezuela, where a box of pills
costs more than the monthly minimum wage, and baby
formula costs more than two months’ salary. Protesting
against such an impossible situation can land a person
in jail in Venezuela.
We also heard the reports coming out of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights about the detentions that have taken place
during the past few days, as well as about the deaths
of more than 20 people. Let me repeat what the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and former President
19-02148

26/01/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

of Chile, Ms. Michelle Bachelet, said yesterday. She
urged the Venezuelan authorities to exercise restraint
and respect everyone’s fundamental rights to peaceful
assembly and the freedom of expression, issuing
a reminder that excessive and disproportionate or
indiscriminate use of force is clearly and unequivocally
prohibited under international law. I would also like
to support what Ms. Bachelet demanded, and what
Ms. DiCarlo said at the beginning of this meeting,
which is that the violent deaths that have occurred over
the past days must be the subject of independent and
impartial investigations. Given the massive violations
of human rights and the threats to international peace
and security, it is right that the Council discusses this.
What needs to be done? We call on all stakeholders
to respect the Venezuelan Constitution and the National
Assembly. That is the only democratically elected
institution, the constitutional powers of which must
be respected. On President Maduro and his election:
he was not freely elected. To quote the Organization
of American States (OAS), “we do not recognize
Mr. Maduro as the legitimate President of Venezuela.”
The OAS also called the Maduro election day an
“infamous day for democracy in the Americas”. A
further quotation from the OAS stated that “there can
be no democracy without elections, but Maduro showed
that elections can be held without democracy.”
In conclusion, we urge all parties to refrain from
the use of force. We call for the organization of free
and fair elections, with international observers and all
candidates allowed to run for office. Until then, there is
only one credible and legitimate institution, that is, the
National Assembly, which was democratically elected.
That is why Germany supports the President of the
National Assembly, Juan Guaidó, as the representative
of that institution, and his call for new elections in
order to re-establish constitutional order in Venezuela.
Germany, along with the United Kingdom and
France, expects the holding of free, transparent and
credible elections. If such a step is not announced
within eight days, then we are ready to recognize Juan
Guaidó as interim President. Germany will not leave
the Venezuelan people alone.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I wish to
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for
her briefing to the Security Council. I also welcome the
Ministers present in the Chamber today.

S/PV. 8452

Poland supported the request made by the United
States and other countries for today’s briefing because
we believe that the scale of Venezuelan migration
and the humanitarian crisis — both resulting from
the oppressive regime of Nicolás Maduro — have an
undeniable impact and tremendous consequences on
the situation in neighbouring Latin American countries.
That situation de facto poses a threat to the stability
and security of the region. We remain in solidarity with
those affected.
Poland aligns itself with the common European
Union approach to the recent events in Venezuela.
We consider the National Assembly to be the only
legitimate power that has a democratic mandate in
Venezuela, won in free and fair elections, in line with
the Venezuelan Constitution. We also recognize its
constitutional prerogatives, its members and its leaders.
We repeat the call that civil rights freedoms and the
safety of all National Assembly members, including
its President, need to be observed and respected.
We fully support the democratic aspirations of the
Venezuelan people, expressed during the most recent
mass demonstrations.
Furthermore, we recognize Juan Guaidó as the
legitimate, democratic voice and leader that may
initiate the transition process in Venezuela. We join
him in calling for the urgent holding of free, transparent
and credible presidential elections, in accordance with
international, democratic standards and the Venezuelan
constitutional order. Finally, it should be heard by
the Venezuelan authorities that, in the absence of an
announcement on the organization of fresh elections
with the necessary guarantees over the coming days,
Poland will take further action, including on the issue
of recognition of the country’s leadership, in line with
article 233 of the Venezuelan Constitution.
There are certain challenges ahead. The main
objective is to guarantee — together with the relevant
regional organizations, their member States and
the support of the European Union — the peaceful
character of the transition process taking place in
Venezuela. We call for respect for democracy, the rule
of law and fundamental rights and freedoms, including
the freedom of assembly and expression, and above all
for parties to refrain from violence. We condemn the
indiscriminate use of force, which has already led to
an increasing death toll, injuries, arbitrary detentions
and other forms of repression. Furthermore, we call

19-0214815/45

S/PV.8452

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

for the immediate release of all political prisoners and
detainees. There have been at least 26 people killed and
more than 340 detained in recent days. That situation
is unacceptable.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that the
demands of civil society cannot be left unanswered.
People have amassed and called for democracy; their
voices should not be ignored.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.
We have been closely following the situation in
Venezuela. We call on all the relevant parties in the
country to be rational and calm, taking into account
the fundamental interests of the country and its
people in seeking a political solution to the issues
through peaceful dialogue, within the framework
of the Venezuelan Constitution. China supports the
efforts made by the Venezuelan Government to uphold
national sovereignty, independence and stability.
China maintains that all countries should abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, especially the norms governing international
relations and the principles of international law, such
as non-interference in the internal affairs of States,
mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity
and refraining from the threat of the use of force.
China always upholds the principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of other
States, and therefore opposes foreign interference
in Venezuela’s domestic affairs. The situation in
Venezuela is a domestic matter. It does not constitute a
threat to international peace and security and is not on
the agenda of the Security Council. China is opposed
to adding the situation in Venezuela to the Council’s
agenda. Venezuelan affairs must be handled and dealt
with by the Venezuelans themselves. We call on all the
relevant parties to respect the will of the Venezuelan
people. Maintaining stability and development in
Venezuela serves the interests of all parties. We hope
that all parties can contribute more to the stability of
Venezuela and that the international community can
together create favourable conditions to that end.
The representative of the United States just made
unreasonable accusations against the position held
by China. China is firmly opposed to such accusations. It
is well-known that China has always been committed to
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
16/45

26/01/2019

Nations and respect for the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of all countries. China
does not interfere in the internal affairs of other
countries. We hope the country that accuses others of
doing so will practice what it preaches.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would like
to welcome the Ministers present with us today in the
Chamber. I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her briefing.
Indonesia abstained in the voting based on the
following considerations.
First, we believe that today’s briefing should be
considered under a different agenda item, namely,
the agenda item “Cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security”.
Secondly, Indonesia has always been consistent
in upholding and respecting the principles of
non-interference, sovereignty and the territorial
integrity of all countries, including Venezuela. But at
the same time, we are also cognizant of the fact that
the humanitarian situation in Venezuela is of concern
and requires proper attention. The fact that millions of
Venezuelans are seeking refuge across the border shows
that Venezuela is facing serious conditions. According
to data provided by United Nations agencies, more
than 3 million Venezuelans have left the country. This
situation should not be left unattended. The safety and
prosperity of the people of Venezuela are at stake and
should be prioritized.
Indonesia hopes that today’s meeting of the Security
Council could make it its main priority calling on all
parties to exercise maximum restraint in order to avoid
the escalation of tensions and further exacerbation
of the situation. The Council must also encourage
the promotion of a political solution involving all the
relevant stakeholders to conduct a national dialogue
through a credible, transparent and democratic process.
The inclusion of Venezuela on the Security Council’s
agenda must reflect a commitment to supporting
the realization of sustained peace and stability in
the country.
It is high time for the Council to play its pivotal
role in bridging differences. With this approach, we
would find solutions to problems without creating new
ones or further complexities and without contradicting
19-02148

26/01/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): When 3 million people flee their country
because of its economic and political collapse, the
threat to the stability of the region becomes evident.
For Belgium, it is clear that the Security Council has
a responsibility to address the situation in Venezuela,
which constitutes a threat to international peace and
security. In order to prevent further deterioration of the
situation, we call on all members of the Council to work
together to promote a peaceful resolution of the crisis.
I also wish to commend the countries of the region for
showing great solidarity and generosity towards those
Venezuelans seeking refuge in their countries. Belgium
expresses its support for those countries, as well as for
Mr. Eduardo Stein, Joint Special Representative of the
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the International Organization for
Migration, in their work to help Venezuelan refugees.
As the situation on the ground is most unstable, I
would like to echo the statement issued today by the
European Union to make four main points: first, to
call for restraint and the de-escalation of the situation;
secondly, to stress the need to restore constitutional
order in Venezuela and begin a process of reconciliation;
thirdly, to emphasize the importance of listening to the
Venezuelan people themselves; and, fourthly, respect
for their fundamental rights.
First of all, I would like to urge those who bear
influence over these events to exercise restraint.
Mass protests in Venezuela over the past few days
have been the subject of indiscriminate violence by
the authorities, resulting in the tragic deaths of many
people and leaving many injured. Belgium extends its
sincere condolences to the families of those deceased.
We strongly condemn the excessive use of force by the
security forces and, like Ms. Bachelet, we call for an
independent investigation to be conducted.
Secondly, Belgium calls for the restoration of the
constitutional order. The presidential elections that took
place in May were neither free and fair nor credible,
thereby depriving Nicolás Maduro’s Government of
democratic legitimacy. Venezuela urgently needs a
Government that truly represents the will of the people
and can initiate a process of reconciliation. Belgium
recognizes and fully supports the National Assembly as
a democratically elected institution. We implore that its

S/PV. 8452

powers be restored and respected. Furthermore, I call
on the authorities to guarantee the civil rights, liberty
and security of all members of the National Assembly,
including its President, Juan Guaidó, while respecting
their immunity as enshrined in the Constitution.
Thirdly, we must listen to the people of Venezuela.
The citizens of this country have bravely made their
voices heard on many occasions in recent years. Some
have paid with their lives. When they voted for change,
their voices were not heard. Today they are in the streets
of Caracas to claim the right to choose their future.
Belgium reiterates its deep conviction that a peaceful
and inclusive democratic solution is the only sustainable
way out of the current political stalemate and the serious
social crisis it has caused. Alongside the European
Union, we call for the urgent holding of free, credible
and transparent presidential elections with full respect
for the Constitution and in accordance with democratic
standards. If the organization of new elections with the
necessary guarantees is not announced within the next
eight days, we will take additional measures, including
recognizing the constitutional role of the President of
the National Assembly, Juan Guaidó, in line with article
233 of the Constitution.
Fourthly, the fundamental rights of the Venezuelan
people must be respected. The detention of demonstrators
and acts of violence against them are a source of serious
concern. Belgium calls on the authorities to put an end
to the arbitrary detention of demonstrators and political
opponents and to ensure respect for the fundamental
rights of detainees. The freedom of the press must be
guaranteed. In the same vein, we call on the authorities
to take concrete measures to mitigate the impact of the
crisis and facilitate access to humanitarian aid in order
to meet the most urgent needs of the population.
In conclusion, we call for a non-violent and
democratic solution to the crisis to be found. We
recall that this crisis can be resolved only through
dialogue and that dialogue alone can lead to a process
of reconciliation.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her comprehensive briefing and welcomes
the Ministers who are attending this meeting.
My delegation is concerned about the latest
developments in the political and institutional crisis
that has shaken Venezuela in recent years. While
compounded by economic difficulties, the situation

19-0214817/45

S/PV.8452

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

has provoked a humanitarian crisis and an exodus of
Venezuelans to neighbouring countries.
In the light of that situation, my country calls on
the international community to mobilize efforts by
implementing all the mechanisms provided for by
the Charter of the United Nations, with a view to the
peaceful settlement of the crisis, thereby alleviating the
suffering of the Venezuelan people, who aspire to better
living conditions. In that regard, my delegation urges all
stakeholders to exercise restraint and resolutely engage
on the path towards dialogue and consultation in order
to resolve their differences. We also call on them to
use all legal and peaceful means to find appropriate
solutions to the institutional and political conflict,
which has entered a critical phase in recent days.
My country also calls on actors in the region to
support all peaceful initiatives that can contribute to
the resolution of the crisis. Venezuela’s stability is
essential for both its inhabitants and the region as a
whole. In that context, the United Nations must play a
leading role in supporting the efforts of the subregion,
within the framework of preventive diplomacy.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its consistent
position that only a path of dialogue and spirit of
compromise allows for the lasting settlement of any
dispute. We therefore again urge all stakeholders in the
Venezuelan conflict to overcome their differences and
engage in frank negotiations to end the crisis.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Dominican Republic.
I thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing and
the information she shared with the Security Council
on the issue of Venezuela.
The Dominican Republic has very closely
followed the development of events in Venezuela — a
country with which we have lasting historic ties. Juan
Pablo Duarte, our founding father, lived and died in
Venezuela. Countless Dominicans found political
asylum in Venezuela. And the country hosted thousands
of migrants at the height of its oil boom. Those are facts
that have left the Dominican Republic with an eternal
debt of gratitude to the Venezuelan people. For those
and many other reasons, we have a special bond with
that South American country, and we therefore wish it
the brightest future.
18/45

26/01/2019

I must remind the Council that the Dominican
Republic hosted a dialogue between the opposition
and the Venezuelan Government, which took place in
2017 and 2018 and was attended by various countries
of the region. For several months, representatives of
the two sides sought to forge an agreement to resolve
the Venezuelan political crisis. That dialogue did not
achieve its desired goal, due to the fragmentation
of the opposition and because its leaders prioritized
their personal interests. It also failed because the
Government was inflexible in providing space for the
holding of competitive and credible elections, while
refusing to allow any opposition leader wishing to take
part from doing so.
The bloody-mindedness of both the Government
and the opposition meant that a valuable opportunity
provided by the Dominican Republic to achieve a
peaceful, democratic and stable exit to the crisis
was wasted. There was a lack of political will and
extreme inflexibility from both sides. The Venezuelan
Government and the opposition are both well aware
that the Dominican Government did its utmost to try
to ensure that that dialogue would lead to a lasting
solution. We were advocates for elections that would
guarantee the participation of all political actors, with
international support, in a climate of respect for human
rights, which would have allowed for the true voice of
the Venezuelan people to have been heard. It is obvious
that holding elections in Venezuela on the fringes of
even the minimum standards required for a democratic
process could not lead to the election of a legitimate
Government. A growing global consensus has emerged
that disregards those electoral results and, in turn, the
Government that ensued.
During the deliberations of the Organization of
American States (OAS), we once again underlined what
has been a core principle of our foreign policy — dialogue
as an acceptable mechanism for the peaceful resolution
of conflicts. Indeed, that was reiterated in the form of
a second instrument — a Dominican proposal for a
resolution of the OAS Permanent Council on 10 January,
which stated:
“only through ... dialogue with the participation
of all Venezuelan political actors ... can national
reconciliation be achieved and the necessary
conditions agreed upon for holding a new electoral
process that truly reflects the will of the ... citizens
and peacefully resolves the current crisis in
that country.”
19-02148

26/01/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

In order to prepare for that process of transition and
hold credible and competitive elections, the support of
the international community will be needed to help
political stakeholders in Venezuela convene a dialogue
that will ensure free and competitive elections as soon
as possible. In that regard, we advocate the support
of the United Nations and other international bodies,
which must be accepted by both sides in the process.
There is no doubt that the situation in Venezuela has
deteriorated and reached a point of serious concern. The
crisis is threatening stability and has forced millions of
Venezuelans to emigrate, creating serious problems for
many Latin American countries. Most important, those
who are suffering most are the Venezuelan people,
who are the victims of a worrisome shortage of basic
goods and medicine and a general climate of insecurity.
Venezuelan human rights are being threatened, which
has compelled the international community to become
involved in this unwelcome drama.
The Dominican Republic hopes for a democratic,
peaceful and consensual outcome in Venezuela.
However, it is vital that the rules of the game that are
the hallmark of genuine democracy be respected. In
that regard, new elections need to take place as soon
as possible, with the participation of all political
parties and leaders, to make the institutional changes
necessary and ensure the impartiality of the electoral
council and the independence of the judicial system.
It is also important that conditions be fostered to
ensure the adequate flow of medicine, food and other
basic goods in order to mitigate the negative impact of
the shortages and the critical economic situation. We
maintain the same concern for the Government and the
opposition that we did during the dialogue we hosted
in Santa Domingo. However, above all, we are most
concerned for the Venezuelan people, who are caught
up in a seriously difficult situation.
I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Since the representative of Germany devoted
a major part of his statement to speaking specifically to
me, I would like to make a few comments.
The use of preventive diplomacy is excellent. It
is of course better to prevent a crisis than to resolve

S/PV. 8452

it. However, putting forward an absurd eight-day
ultimatum is a very strange way of proposing how to
prevent the crisis. Some States did not even need eight
days to reject recognizing the legitimate authorities of
Venezuela. They completely disregard the sovereignty
of Venezuela, while imposing decisions on it that they
prefer. They have refused its people the right to resolve
their problems on their own. They are not calling on
the political forces in Venezuela to find common
understanding with a view to achieving internal peace
and stability. Rather, they are calling on the legitimate
authorities to simply acknowledge their defeat and
transfer power to the opposition. That is not called
prevention; it is known as incitement.
How would they feel if the Russian Federation
proposed discussing in the Security Council the issue
of the situation in France and the protests staged by
the gilets jaunes — approximately 22,000 people
took to the streets over the past weekend? Would that
be considered prevention? I would like to reassure
the representative of France that we do not intend to
propose such a discussion. Unlike France, however, we
are not trying to recognize or not recognize anyone.
Nonetheless, we recognize the legitimate authorities
of Venezuela. We call for, first, respect for legitimate
authority; secondly, non-interference in the domestic
affairs of the country; and, thirdly, the non-imposition
of outside solutions on Venezuela. Instead, we propose
that we help its people find a peaceful resolution to
their problems on their own.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of Germany has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I do not want to prolong
the meeting. I would just like to respond to my Russian
colleague. Unfortunately, in his intervention he did
not respond to any of my comments on the serious
human rights violations. He mentioned that 22,000
demonstrators took to the streets in France, but not that
more than 3.3 million Venezuelans fled their country
because of the situation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister of the People’s Power for Foreign
Affairs of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Arreaza (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): It is finally our turn to speak. We
have a written statement, but I would like to make a few
preliminary remarks.

19-0214819/45

S/PV.8452

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

We would also like to thank Mr. Mike Pompeo
because, in the light of the failure on Thursday,
24 January, at the Organization of American States,
the United States was bold enough to impose a draft
resolution and request that the Security Council
convene today’s meeting. Both President Maduro and
I had also been thinking about calling on the Council
to debate, not the situation in Venezuela but rather the
unconscionable intervention of the United States in our
country using the crudest means. We must point out
that, on this occasion, the United States is not behind the
coup d’état. I admit that it is not behind the coup d’état.
It is in front of the coup d’état. It is spearheading the
coup d’état. It dictates orders not only to the Venezuelan
opposition but also to the satellite Governments of the
United States in the region, and apparently in Europe
and other parts of the world as well.
We have all kinds of proof: tweets, social
network posts, calls from Secretary of State Pompeo
and Vice-President Pence to the security forces and
the National Bolivarian Armed Forces to speak out
against the legitimate authorities and the constitutional
Government of President Nicolás Maduro. It was a
tweet with a video from Vice-President Pence on
22 January that gave the green light for the coup d’état
in Venezuela and also, according to Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo, for someone to name
himself as President. He was not sworn in by any
institution or formal process or ceremony, but by means
of the self-proclamation of a member of Parliament in
a crowd, at one of the many peaceful public rallies held
in Venezuela over the past few years.
I therefore ask, if we consider article 233 the
Constitution of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
word for word, provision by provision, sentence by
sentence: where is the legality? And going beyond our
internal legal order, where is the legality with regard
to the fundamental principles of public international
law? Or are we now discarding international relations
based on international law and imposing international
relations based on the use of force, while bending
multilateral institutions to our arbitrary goals and
objectives? If any of this meeting’s participants were
to ask, in what article or provision of the Charter of
the United Nations can the legal basis be found for the
self-proclamation of an individual who was not elected
by anyone as President of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, we would have a legal debate, but I do not
think that is going to be possible.
20/45

26/01/2019

We also have to ask ourselves, when is this all
going to end? Mr. Rex Tillerson, former Secretary of
State of the United States, and then President Trump
himself, on the first day of the general debate of this
session of the General Assembly (see A/73/PV.6),
on the sacred podium of multilateralism, not only
announced sanctions — unilateral coercive measures
in contravention of international law — but also had
the nerve to announce a series of measures against
Venezuela that blatantly violate the Charter of the
United Nations, the sacred charter of multilateralism.
How is it possible that a President who threatened to
use military force — not John Bolton, not Mike Pence,
not Marco Rubio, but Donald Trump himself — against
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has not been
challenged by global multilateral institutions and now
takes it upon himself to accuse the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela because its Government and its people
have strictly adhered to their Constitution and to
international law?
In 1911 there was a military invasion in Mexico.
In 1912 United States Marines invaded Nicaragua,
which then led to an occupation that lasted almost
continuously until 1933, when Augusto César Sandino
and the Nicaraguan people threw them out of the
country. In 1914 the United States invaded Mexico; in
1915 Haiti; in 1916 the Dominican Republic; in 1918
Panama; in 1924 Honduras; in 1925 Panama; in 1926
and 1927 Nicaragua; in 1930 the Dominican Republic;
in 1933 and 1934 Nicaragua; and in 1941, Panama.
Then came the School of the Americas, followed by
the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance
and Cuba in 1952. Jacobo Árbenz was overthrown in
1954 in Guatemala. In 1956 the United States invaded
Nicaragua. In 1960 President Eisenhower authorized a
large-scale covert operation to topple the Government
of Fidel Castro, and then came Girón beach in 1961.
I could go on. João Goulart in Brazil in 1964. How
many people, Mr. President, died in the Dominican
Republic in 1965 following the invasion, supported
by the Organization of American States, to topple a
Government that did not suit its members or whose
ideology they did not like — a Government let by the
great Dominican, a great Latin American, Juan Bosch?
With respect to the Monroe Doctrine, the United
States should have been the country scrutinized and
subjected to ongoing review, given its perpetual
disregard for international law, interference in the
internal affairs of countries and its invasions following
19-02148

26/01/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

coups d’état. Then came the 1973 coup d’état against
President Salvador Allende, following the invasion in
Guatemala. In 2002, under President George Bush,
there was a coup d’état in Venezuela. It failed, but the
dictator was recognized. What occurred in 2002 set the
precedent for the situation in Venezuela today. At the
time the United States was behind the coup d’état, it was
not in front of it like it is now. It recognized the Carmona
dictatorship, which lasted 47 hours. An investigation
conducted by United States experts proved, through a
series of declassified documents, that the United States
had been involved in the coup attempt.
Something similar occurred in 2004 with President
Jean-Bertrand Aristide in Haiti, and in 2009 in
Honduras, where at first no one had even suspected that
the United States had been behind the coup attempt,
until Hillary Clinton admitted in a book that she had
given the order to topple the then President of Honduras
because she wanted to encourage the formation of a
constituent assembly. Meanwhile, other Presidents in
Central America have been elected without even being
candidates in elections. They have lost elections. There
were even reports by the European Union and the
Organization of American States citing election fraud.
But then Donald Trump makes a call; and they promise
him that they will move their Embassies from Tel Aviv
to Jerusalem. And then that is recognized not only by
Trump but by all of the satellite Governments in the
region of our America.
I simply wanted to illustrate the pattern we see in
social media, which really see. And I refer only to Twitter,
not other social media, and to official spokespersons of
the Government of the United States. Note how the trend
ticked up dramatically in January. The United States
was expecting a coup d’état and military uprising on
22 or 23 January, which was not in the offing because
the National Bolivarian Armed Forces put their lives on
the line to defend the Constitution. The United States
could not, through extortion, financing or incitement,
convince our military forces to overthrow President
Nicolás Maduro, and it will not be able to do so. It was
yet another misstep by the Government of the United
States and those who joined them.
This is just incredible, like recognizing a new State
at the United Nations: when President Trump tweeted
that he recognized the member of Parliament as the
dictator of Venezuela, immediately Colombia, Chile,
Argentina and Guatemala were all waiting for the order
to recognize him too. It is very clear and shameless:

S/PV. 8452

you can see through this coup d’état from every angle.
This cannot be accepted by the United Nations. Rather,
it must be condemned. I wish there were a Security
Council meeting to determine who was behind the
coup d’état and punish them. It would not take too
much judging to do that, for the proof abounds on social
media and in press releases.
I have here today’s Wall Street Journal, which,
as The New York Times did in September 2018, shows
that members of the Venezuelan military held meetings
with United States officials to supposedly overthrow
President Maduro. That is not coming from the
intelligence services of Venezuela, Cuba or Russia; it
is The New York Times, and also newspapers in Spain.
Today it is in the Wall Street Journal. It is right here
very clearly. The only missing piece to the strategy
for the coup d’état was an oath. The Associated Press,
which is also a United States news agency, very clearly
today came out with information that the member of
Parliament in question made covert trips to Colombia
and the United States to meet with officials. The
strategy was very well put together, but ham-fisted. The
carried it out quite badly, leaving too many trails.
One almost has to be sorry — we understand
that satellite Governments in the region have as
Presidents business persons who are subordinated
to the interests of the United States. But not so with
respectable Governments. Many small States of the
Caribbean — respectable States — have not yielded
to, or been blackmailed by, the United States, not at
the United Nations, in the Organization of American
States or anywhere else, despite even public threats by
Vice-President Pence, the Secretary of State and by
some in Congress. Not them. It is understandable that
satellite Governments in Latin America would yield to
the United States in that way. But it is surprising that
Europe falls in line behind the United States — and
not so much the United States, but the Government
of Donald Trump. Europe is giving us eight days?
For what? How do they think they have any power
to impose deadlines or ultimatums on a sovereign
people? How do they come up with such a meddlesome
action — I would even call it puerile? As President
Nicolás Maduro asked yesterday, why does not Pedro
Sánchez hold presidential elections? Who elected him?
Dare to hold elections in the United Kingdom. Why is
President Macron focusing on Venezuela, instead of
devoting his time to the ongoing yellow jacket protests
and the French working class? As soon as someone

19-0214821/45

S/PV.8452

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

wearing a yellow jacket approaches the Élysée Palace,
the guards all come out because they are afraid of the
people. Mind your own business. We do not interfere
in yours. Respect and comply with the Charter of
the United Nations. Respect the self-determination
of peoples.
Candidate Henri Falcón was here last year; you
know him well, Mr. President. He led Henrique
Capriles’ presidential campaign in 2012. Mr. Capriles
lost to Comandante Hugo Chávez. Oh, how they
pressured Henri Falcón to withdraw his candidacy.
Even European Presidents pressured him, as did, of
course, every United States spokesperson. He did not
withdraw it. But do you know what he did? He came
to the United Nations and told Secretary-General
António Guterres that it was essential that the United
Nations send observers to monitor the elections. That
did not take place. Why? Why were there no observers
from the United Nations? He was even in contact with
Federica Mogherini. I myself took Ms. Mogherini an
invitation to request that observers be sent to monitor
the elections in Venezuela. They refused outright. And
why? Because the plan for the coup d’état was already
under way. Three months prior to the elections Deputy
Secretary of State Sullivan was the first to say that
the elections would be fraudulent. Presidents then
came forward — from Colombia, Chile, Europe — to
say that they would not recognize the results of the
elections. Again, that was months before the elections
took place. When has that ever happened? How many
cases of the elections in Venezuela being impugned
have there been? Go for yourselves. Show me there was
fraud, even one vote. Mr. Duncan said that there was
vote stuffing, and yet Venezuela uses an automated
electronic voting system, and that includes verification.
The system produces a receipt that is then compared
with the electronic tally. And the tally matches up
100 per cent of the time.
The United States wants to build a physical wall
on the border with Mexico, but it is really building an
ideological wall. Many of the points made by Secretary
Pompeo today are reminiscent of the rhetoric used
during the Cold War and by Senator McCarthy and
President Nixon. They are trying to bring back the
Cold War and the Monroe Doctrine of 1823. It is not for
nothing that, in 1929, Liberator Simón Bolívar said that
the United States appeared to be destined by Providence
to plague America with misery in the name of liberty.
It was a self-fulfilling prophecy. In other words, it was
22/45

26/01/2019

a prediction, because that is exactly what the United
States has done.
Do you know what the cost has been to Venezuela
since 2017, when the United States started to implement
unilateral coercive measures against it, in contravention
of international law, and up until December 2018? It
amounts to $23 billion, thanks to the blockade and
persecution of the property and resources of Venezuela.
Would the Venezuelan economy be in its current
problematic state if it had been able to count on those
resources? An offer of $20 million was made at the
Organization of American States, which they then
took from us. At Euroclear alone, in Belgium, there
is $1.2 billion in frozen funds — Venezuelan wealth.
We cannot conduct any banking transactions. Any
transaction that is conducted through New York or
London cannot take place; the funds are either returned
or they freeze the money. Is that really fair to the
Venezuelan people? The representative of Russia was
very clear here — but for others there are no so-called
sanctions; there is no blockade. That is a lie. There have
been 18 or 19 rounds of sanctions against Venezuela,
but according to them they do not exist. We must think
about that. There is an ideological wall being erected
around Venezuela.
We support the dialogue initiative that was proposed
earlier by the representative of the Dominican Republic.
But that did not come out of nowhere. President Nicolás
Maduro appointed me — if I may be allowed to speak
of myself — as Foreign Minister in August 2017. Two
days later I met with you at your home, Minister Miguel
Vargas, and after that with President Danilo Medino at
the presidential palace, and called on the leaders of the
opposition and President Maduro to carry out a dialogue
in Venezuela. And what happened? We reached an
agreement. You know that, Sir. A document exists,
likely stored away in the archives of the presidency
of the Dominican Republic, that contains a signed
preliminary agreement. When we were about to sign
the agreement, President Medino and former Spanish
Prime Minister Rodríguez Zapatero, along with other
Foreign Ministers supporting them and other supporters
in Venezuela, were made to look like fools. They did not
sign the agreement. By coincidence, Rex Tillerson was
in Bogotá at the time. According to reliable sources,
the head of the delegation of Venezuela, who today is
taking refuge in Colombia, received a call instructing
him not to sign the agreement and to further complicate
the situation. These are truths.
19-02148

26/01/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Furthermore, let me say that, without rigorous
substantiation, many untruths have been spoken here. I
would say with respect: ask the International Monetary
Fund about the information provided by Venezuela and
whether or not its statistics on inflation are anywhere
close to the statistics we heard today. Ask the Director
of the International Monetary Fund. Be a bit more
rigorous in your investigations when speaking to the
world from this forum, which is essential when it comes
to the future, peace and security of humankind.
But ask about the 3 million migrants as well. As
mentioned by by the Foreign Minister of Colombia,
there is indeed a problem with migration, one that we
have not seen before. But it has a lot to do with the
financial persecution of Venezuela and the economic
situation, which we do not deny. We are working with
our people to try to restore the economy, with plans
to boost economic growth and achieve social and
economic prosperity. However, how many times have
we asked the Governments of Colombia, Peru, Chile,
Ecuador and Argentina for data? How many times have
we said, send it to us? We know that a Venezuelan
might leave through a bridge to Colombia and then
end up in Chile. How do I know that? You know what
happened in recent days? The President of Ecuador,
Lenin Moreno, called for the establishment of brigades
to go after Venezuelan migrants in Ecuador. Our
Embassy in Ecuador filled up with migrants asking
us to help them leave Ecuador because they were
facing xenophobic, fascist persecution in Ibarra, in the
north of the country. It was very painful. And do you
know what happened this Wednesday? Three planes,
including the presidential plane, went to pick up more
than 230 Venezuelan migrants. Three planes were sent
again today, as our Embassy is full. We are paying for
hotels, even with the difficulties in sending money to
our diplomatic missions because of the blockade. Yet
overflight authorization was not granted to aircraft
on a humanitarian mission to pick up Venezuelans
so they could return t their homes and families. This
is persecution. What is it about, this war against
Venezuela? We are awaiting a visit from Mr. Eduardo
Stein, which should take place this week. We are also
awaiting a visit from a former President and our friend,
Michelle Bachelet.
With regard to the violence, you here are saying
that the dictatorship is repressing and killing people.
Please study the history of Venezuela over the past few
years. The insurrectionist marches by the opposition,

S/PV. 8452

with dead put in place by them, facilitated the 2002
coup d’état. Sharp-shooters were also used. Look into
how many of the people who died in recent days died in
genuinely peaceful demonstrations. Who killed them?
The Venezuelan judiciary and Public Prosecutor’s
Office are investigating those incidents. The judiciary
has sovereign authority and needs no intervention from
any independent body. We will tell the truth about each
and every one of the dead, for in Venezuela we respect
each other. Those of you who sponsored the coup d’état
of 23 January were expecting tragedy and bloodshed
in the streets of Caracas, but it did not happen because
measures were taken; despite the fact that groups of
12 or 13 people went out in the night in the heavily
populated areas of Caracas to loot and destroy private
property, wherein we prevented a recurrence of the
tragedies that occurred on 11 April 2002, in 2014 and
in 2017, when extremists of the Venezuelan opposition,
who were funded by some countries represented here
today, took to the streets in an attempt, by way of mob
force, to overthrow first President Chávez and then
President Maduro.
We support dialogue initiatives just as we
supported the earlier initiative of the Dominican
Republic. We support the fact that Mexico, Uruguay
and the Caribbean Community have expressed a desire
for Venezuelans to sit together, with their facilitation,
to find our own way out, without being imposed upon.
No one is going to set deadlines for us, or tell us if there
will be elections or not. Any decisions will be taken by
Venezuelans, with members of the opposition and the
Government seated at the table.
The President of the National Constituent Assembly,
Diosdado Cabello, met with deputy Juan Guaidó
on 22 January to establish a channel for dialogue.
Compromises were arrived at, with Mr. Guaidó then
doing exactly the opposite the other day. After all, well,
he was under pressure — the tweets from Pence and
Trump and all the pressure from his people. What do
they want, to start a civil war in Venezuela? They will
not succeed. Presidents of the United States will, at
times, declare war when they face domestic problems.
President Trump already regrets saying that Iraq was
better off with Saddam Hussein and that Libya was
better off with Muammar Al-Qadhafi — whom they
brutally overthrew and assassinated, with the Secretary
of State at the time laughing about it. Savagery and
force cannot be permitted in today’s world. The United
States is even withdrawing its troops from Syria; is

19-0214823/45

S/PV.8452

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

it now going to look for a war in Latin America? Is
Venezuela Mr. Trump’s war trophy? We will not give
Donald Trump a war in Venezuela. Peace, stability and
understanding will prevail in Venezuela, in spite of
the efforts of many of the countries represented here
looking for a war.
With regard to the deadline Europe is trying to
give us, we recall the Liberator Simón Bolívar in the
year 1818 and the first dispute he had with an official
of the United States. Remember that the United States
did not support our countries’ struggles for freedom.
It had already gained its independence on its own,
winning a war against the British Empire. But when
the colonies of South America confronted the Spanish
Empire, the United States declared itself neutral. Is
that not interesting? And then afterwards, not only did
they declare that they were neutral, but they actually
secretly helped the royalists, the Spaniards. In one such
instance of clandestine support, at the Orinoco River in
Venezuela, they violated the decrees of the legitimate
Government of the then-President of the nation, Simón
Bolívar, and American ships with ammunition and
supplies were stopped, leading to a dispute. Ultimately,
the Liberator informed Irvine, the United States agent,
that it made no difference to Venezuela whether it fought
Spain or the whole world if the whole world offended
it. We take the same position again today. Fortunately,
we have great friends, who have spoken here in the
Council. However, whoever offends Venezuela will
find the people of Venezuela — along with President
Nicolás Maduro, the communal councils, the Poder
Popular and the armed forces — standing ready to
defend our sovereignty and integrity.
Allow me to conclude by reading from my prepared
statement and mentioning an article in our Constitution.
An effort has been made, surely hatched in laboratories
in Washington, D.C., to give a constitutional veneer to
the self-appointment of an individual whose name is just
becoming known in Venezuela — even the President of
Paraguay could not pronounce his last name correctly
the other day. Allow me therefore to read article 233 of
our Constitution.
“The President of the Republic shall become
permanently unavailable to serve by reason of any
of the following events: death; resignation; removal
from office by decision of the Supreme Tribunal
of Justice; permanent physical or mental disability
certified by a medical board designated by the
Supreme Tribunal of Justice with the approval
24/45

26/01/2019

of the National Assembly; abandonment of his
position, duly declared by the National Assembly;
and recall by popular vote.”
A recall referendum is held mid-term in Venezuela
if the people are unhappy; it happened in 2004 with
Commander Hugo Chavez, and he was retained.
“When an elected President becomes
permanently unavailable to serve prior to his
inauguration, a new election by universal suffrage
and direct ballot shall be held within 30 consecutive
days. Pending election and inauguration of the new
President, the President of the National Assembly
shall take charge of the Presidency of the Republic.”
Did not an inauguration take place in Venezuela? Were
there no elections?
If there is a discrepancy at one of the
branches — and there are five in Venezuela, all of them
legitimate — such as at the National Assembly, then go
to the other institutions. Go to the Supreme Tribunal
of Justice. But how can it be that because an individual
deputy proclaims himself as the interim President,
Governments throughout the world begin to recognize
him, Governments that are taken seriously, with legal
departments in their ministries that uphold the Charter
of the United Nations and are familiar with States’
Constitutions? To do so is to subject the rule of law to
force, and that is dangerous for humankind. We must
stop that today, here at the United Nations.
I think that what I have outlined is sufficient. To the
Venezuelan people, who are listening to us, we say that
we have seen here that Venezuela is not alone, a fact that
will continue to be demonstrated at this meeting, as it
has been in other international organizations, including
at the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, which
Venezuela chairs. The reason Venezuela is not alone is
because it upholds its Constitution and the Charter of
the United Nations.
We will continue following the path of our
democracy. We will not allow any decision or order
to be imposed on us by anyone. Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo herself said that this individual
deputy proclaimed himself President. Where is selfproclamation mentioned in this Constitution? I ask
those present to find it in the Constitution and show it
to me, and then we can debate it. On behalf of President
Nicolás Maduro, the public authorities, the people,
the Poder Popular and the communes and communal
19-02148

26/01/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

councils, we insist that Venezuela is, as the Constitution
says, irrevocably free and independent and that no
Power, however powerful, can dictate to our country its
destiny or the steps to follow.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the United States of America has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Abrams (United States of America): I had
not intended to speak, but it seems to me that it is
worthwhile, and indeed necessary, to respond to the
statements made on behalf of the regime in Venezuela.
I cannot respond to every attack that was made against
every country here, such as the insults that were made
by calling many countries here satellites. In fact, it was
interesting that every single country that the previous
speaker attacked or criticized was a democracy. Every
single one that was criticized was a democracy. It was
just a series of insults that reflects the fact that today
there is a satellite present here, and it is Venezuela,
which, unfortunately, has become a satellite of Cuba
and Russia.
The regime and its spokesman are hiding
behind the laws and Constitution of Venezuela while
imprisoning opponents, preventing free elections and
killing democrats like Fernando Albán. This is not
about foreign intervention in Venezuela. It is not an
attempt to impose a result on the Venezuelan people.
Democracy never needs to be imposed. It is tyranny
that has to be imposed. This discussion in the Security
Council is about the right of the Venezuelan people to
direct their own internal affairs and choose the future
of their own country democratically.

S/PV. 8452

It may surprise the representative of the United
States to learn that, when we discuss certain issues at
the Security Council, we never try to force any country
to conduct itself as we would like it to or as would be in
our interest. We always respect the sovereignty of every
country, whether it is a member of the Security Council
or not, and we always respect its opinions and policies.
If its policies or views correspond with our own, we
are happy. If not, we respect that every United Nations
Member is entitled to its own views and positions and
has the sovereign right to have its own foreign policy.
Unfortunately, there are many instances of the
country that the representative of the United States
represents not only using its satellite States to promote
its own interests but in fact forcing them to be in
lockstep with it. To discuss who has and who does not
have satellites is therefore not something I suggest
he do.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I call on the
Minister of the People’s Power for Foreign Affairs of
Venezuela to make a further statement.
Mr. Arreaza (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): With regard to what Mr. Elliott
Abrams said, it is sometimes difficult for some
spokespersons to speak with moral authority, especially
in view of their background and track records. We
respect the ability he has demonstrated in negotiating
many difficult cases, but he was tried and pardoned for
this very type of intervention in Latin America — for
the Iran-Contra incident and for collaboration with
dictators such as Rios Montt. In other words, perhaps,
such words would be more fitting for a spokesperson
from another generation.

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I was not going to speak again either.
However, the response by the representative of the
United States, and by extension whatever constituency
he is representing, has forced me to take the floor again.

In any case, insults are levelled at Venezuela
daily, including the words “dictatorship”, “regime”,
“torture”, “murderer”, “corrupt”, “drug trafficker”. For
God’s sake, why hurl such insults? These are standing
insults against Venezuela. Fortunately, the Federal
Government of the United States has reopened, as I
believe it has nothing better to do but focus its attention
on Venezuela. We can be thankful that its Government
has reopened as it will have more work to do.

For the information of the members of the Security
Council, Russia, unlike the United States, has no
satellites. Venezuela is not a satellite of Russia, and
neither is Cuba. We do not even utilize that kind of
terminology. It does not exist in our foreign policy or
our diplomacy.

Mr. Pompeo, who did not want to stay for our
statement. It is a pity that he left, as we have made
clear here — and as President Maduro has also made
clear — our intention to establish and maintain open
communication and dialogue with the Government of
President Trump. That is what we have tried to do since

The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the Russian Federation has asked for
the floor to make a further statement.

19-0214825/45

S/PV.8452

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

the first day Commander Chávez came to power, on
2 February 1999, and since President Nicolás Maduro
has been in power. What we have received in response to
our offers of dialogue has been blockades, persecution,
sanctions, violence, aggression, insults, interventions
and now this coup d’état. However, the channel remains
open so that we can conduct dialogue and treat each
other in a civilized way, as indicated in the Charter of
the United Nations, which we all have to respect.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
Mr. Trujillo García (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I commend the high-level authorities for their presence
here today and express my gratitude for the briefing
by Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs. I also thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting on the
situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Let me begin by welcoming the transition process
and the re-establishment of the constitutional order
that, under the leadership of Interim President Juan
Guaidó and the National Assembly, propelled by the
exhilarating democratic political forces and the broad
and eloquent citizen mobilization, is taking place in
our brotherly country in this new phase that began on
23 January. Colombia asked to take the floor in this
meeting to join the just call of the Venezuelan people
and express its firm and determined support for the
interim President of Venezuela, Juan Guaidó, and
the legislative competency of the National Assembly,
elected to power on 6 December 2015. Our actions
therefore reflect the fulfilment of our duties as a
State Member of the United Nations, a member of the
Organization of American States and a signatory of the
Inter-American Democratic Charter.
It bears recalling that such duties compel us to
act within the mentioned legal frameworks when
irregularities impede the democratic process, as was
the case in Venezuela as a result of the May 2018
electoral process, which lacked legitimacy. For the
same reason, together with other democracies in the
hemisphere and acting in the framework of the Lima
Group, Colombia has taken the political decision to
firmly commit its Government, under President Iván
Duque Márquez, to supporting fostering conditions
that will enable the brotherly people of Venezuela to
live again in democracy and freedom.
26/45

26/01/2019

The dictatorship in Venezuela has posed a threat
to peace, security and stability in the region, while
running contrary to international law, in particular
inter-American law. As a country neighbouring
Venezuela, Colombia has experienced and suffered its
consequences. This same dictatorship has appropriated
properties in which Colombian businessmen had
legitimate interests, has all but destroyed commercial
exchange that was profitable for and mutually beneficial
to both countries, and has harboured terrorist groups
that violate the right to and threaten, the life, property,
security and well-being of citizens in Colombia.
The destructive consequences of the dictatorship’s
actions in the economic, political and social realms have
been such in scope that they have led to the exodus of
more than 3.5 million people, who have abandoned their
land in desperation and despair in search of peace and
opportunities. In the spirit of responsibility, solidarity
and sense of humanitarian obligation, Colombia
has welcomed more than 1 million migrants from
Venezuela, despite its limited capacities and resources.
We will therefore continue to participate actively in
building a regional and global response to adequately
manage the migration crisis.
What moves us in humanitarian terms in the current
situation is ensuring that, upon reopening the doors
closed off by the dictatorship — thanks to the first steps
taken by Interim President Juan Guaidó — aid reaches
those in need. The international democratic community
has the moral and political duty to diplomatically and
politically mobilize without hesitation or delay support
for the efforts of a people who are reclaiming their right
to freedom and prosperity.
President Iván Duque Márquez once said that what
destroys Venezuela destroys us and what strengthens
Venezuela strengthens us. What Colombia has therefore
come to ask of the international community at this
historic Security Council meeting — very respectfully,
yet eagerly — is to support ending the usurpation
and starting the transition process with the holding of
free and transparent elections, with every guarantee,
under the leadership of Interim President Guaidó.
Colombia has come to ask for support for rejecting
insincere dialogues that the dictatorship has used to
stall processes, buy time and prolong the suffering of
the Venezuelan people. Colombia has come to ask for
support for the entry of humanitarian aid into Venezuela.
Colombia has come to ask that the international
community demand respect for the life and integrity of
19-02148

26/01/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Juan Guaidó, the members of the National Assembly,
those fighting for democracy and all Venezuelans who
are dedicating their efforts to building a better future.
Colombia has come to ask that more members of the
international community join in the referral of various
States to the International Criminal Court so that the
serious events that have taken place in Venezuela can
be investigated. Colombia has come to ask for support
for measures for the protection of assets confiscated
by the dictatorship and corruption. Colombia has come
to ask for political support from every corner of the
world for the developments that have restored hope to a
people who see the gleaming promise of a better future.
Colombia has come to ask for support for the decision
to move towards a transparent and secure electoral
contest in which the brotherly Venezuelans can choose
the Government that they want.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the Minister Adviser to the President
of Nicaragua.
Mr. Oquist Kelley (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish):
Nicaragua is participating in today’s Security Council
meeting to reaffirm its commitment to peace and
reiterate its solidarity with the Government and the
people of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and its
legitimately elected president, our brother, Mr. Nicolás
Maduro Moros. The Government and the people of
Nicaragua believe that Venezuela in no way represents
a threat to international peace and security, and we
therefore demand and urge that the sovereign decisions
of the Venezuelan people be respected.
The Venezuelan people have already exercised
their sovereign right by electing our brother Nicolás
Maduro as their legitimate constitutional president, and
not just for one, but for two consecutive terms. We must
recall and share with the international community that
the former President of the United States, Mr. Jimmy
Carter, described Venezuela’s electoral system as the
best in the world. We recall this in case anyone has
doubts about the accuracy and transparency of the
results of all the elections held in Venezuela in the past
20 years. By the way, it is important to point out that no
people in our Americas have exercised their sovereign
right to choose their leaders as many times as the people
of Venezuela have in these past two decades, which
serves as an important lesson for all peoples — a lesson
of sovereignty, social justice and democracy, conceived
by the Venezuelan people.

S/PV. 8452

The request for convening today’s meeting is
a clear interference in the internal affairs of States
and a violation of the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations and of international law.
The interest in and insistence on including the issue
of Venezuela on the Council’s agenda by the United
States is another form of interfering and intervening
in Venezuela’s internal affairs, the clear objective of
which is to impose a change of Government and to
replace the Constitutional Government of President
Nicolás Maduro through a coup d’état. These actions
do not contribute to a political and peaceful solution
that specifically fits the Venezuelan people, who are
the ones who should exercise their rights to sovereignty
and self-determination within the framework of their
domestic jurisdiction.
It is essential and urgent that the will of the people
be respected, that policies that violate international law
definitively cease, and that hostile actions, including
all unilateral coercive economic measures that threaten
economic development and hinder the achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, thereby violating
the human rights of the entire Venezuelan people, are
stopped. What characterizes the situation in Venezuela
are the shameless concrete attempts to destroy the
social gains in health, education, housing, reduction
of poverty and hunger achieved with great effort by
the Bolivarian revolution launched by the timeless
Commander Hugo Chávez Frías.
Nothing should derail the zone of peace in Latin
America and the Caribbean proclaimed by the Heads
of States and Governments of the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States in 2014. Accordingly,
any threat or act of military aggression is unacceptable
and reprehensible. Our Commander President Daniel
Ortega Saavedra has effectively summed up what is
happening in this sister nation as follows:
“And in these days, when it initiates hostilities against
peoples and nations like Venezuela, it is launching
an openly interventionist policy of interference.
What we are seeing is an action and an attitude of
arrogance and disrespect for international law by
a Power that, as history has shown, cannot coexist
with or abide by international law. Whenever it
wants to, it disregards international law, including
United Nations Security Council resolutions, and
takes unilateral actions, because it decides to do so,
based on the power it has.”

19-0214827/45

S/PV.8452

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Venezuela is all of Latin America and the Caribbean;
Venezuela is the whole world, because, in Venezuela,
the principles of non-interventionism and a multilateral
order based on the independence, sovereignty and
equality of States are being defended.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Rodríguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Today, Latin America and the Caribbean is the setting
for persistent threats that are incompatible with the
Proclamation of Latin America and the Caribbean as a
Zone of Peace, which was signed by Heads of State and
Government at the second summit of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States, in January 2014.
This commitment enshrines a duty to fully respect and
uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law; to refrain from
interfering, either directly or indirectly, in the internal
affairs of any other State; and to uphold the principles
of national sovereignty, the equality of rights and the
free self-determination of peoples.
The current Administration of the United States
of America has declared the Monroe Doctrine to be in
effect and, in a fresh extension of its imperialist policy
in the region, it is threatening Venezuela with particular
malice and has declared that all options are on the
table. The region today is like a vast prairie in a time of
drought. A single spark could set off an uncontrollable
fire that would damage the national interests of all.
We categorically reject the statements made by
the representatives of the United States of America in
the Council Chamber today. We regret the fact that the
Government of the United States of America is seeking
to exploit the Security Council in order to legitimize
its international campaign against the constitutional
Government presided by Nicolás Maduro Moros. The
main threat to peace and security in Latin America and
the Caribbean is the bullying of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela by the United States and its allies, which
is a flagrant affront to the will of the people and to
the institutional framework of Venezuela, which were
expressed in the elections held on 20 May 2018, in
which the Venezuelan opposition voluntarily refrained
from participating.
We reiterate our unwavering support to the
Chavista and Bolivian revolution, to the civil-military
union of the Venezuelan people and to their legitimate
and democratic Government, led by the constitutional
28/45

26/01/2019

President Nicolás Maduro Moros. We vigorously
condemn the attempt to impose, through a coup d’état,
a Government that will serve the interests of the United
States in Venezuela and the recurrent calls to Bolivarian
military members to join that effort. The sovereignty of
our peoples is seen in the attitude towards Venezuela.
Support for the legitimate right of our sister nation to
define its own future is to defend the dignity of all.
We must not forget other attempts, such as the 2002
military coup and the 2003 oil coup; the United States
aggressive executive order, which described Venezuela
as an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national
security and foreign policy of that super Power; the
unilateral corrective measures; the call for a military
coup d’état against the constitutional Government of
Venezuela; the warning of the President of the United
States with regard to the possible use of a military
option; and the attempt to assassinate President Maduro
on 4 August 2018.
The acts of a group of countries and the shameful
role played by the Organization of American States
constitute a new and desperate attempt to implement
a failed policy of regime change, which has been
frustrated time and again by the unbreakable resistance
of the Venezuelan people and their determination to
defend their national sovereignty. We reaffirm our
unwavering respect for the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and of international
law, the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States,
the non-use or non-threat of use of force in international
relations and the non-interference in the internal affairs
of States. The sovereign will of the people of Venezuela
will prevail in the face of imperialist intervention.
History will judge those who encourage and recognize
this coup.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines.
Mr. Bynoe (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
At the outset, permit me the opportunity to convey
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for
the briefing on the situation in the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has
been monitoring very closely the recent developments
in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela at the bilateral
and multilateral levels and, like many countries, we too
are deeply concerned and apprehensive about the events
unfolding in our neighbouring Caribbean country.
19-02148

26/01/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Let it be abundantly clear that Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines adheres to and upholds the fundamental
principles of non-interference and non-intervention
in the affairs of States; respect for sovereignty;
adherence to the rule of law; and respect for human
rights and democracy, as enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. Cognizant of the complexity of
the long-standing political crisis in Venezuela, which
has been exacerbated by recent events, we stress the
need for meaningful dialogue among all stakeholders
in the country to de-escalate the contentious and
conflictive situation.
We are undoubtedly living in an unpredictable
era and must categorically reject all attempts to
aggravate dangerous situations or engender change of
democratically elected leaders through impositions,
interventions and interferences that veer away from
the basis of lasting peace and security. In the history
of Latin America and the Caribbean, the imposition of
the mighty against the meek is far too well known. The
history of Latin America and the Caribbean is indelibly
scarred by military interventions and imposition of
dictator Governments. That egregious history and the
need to triumph over its lingering remnants drives the
countries in the hemisphere to regard any semblance
of its re-emergence as viscerally abhorrent. In our
Caribbean subregion, we have witnessed the urgent
fury of military intervention, while our consciousness
remains aware of the uninvited and illegal interference in
electoral processes as a result of cold war proxy battles.
Let us not lose sight of the forest for the trees and
be mindful that the region of Latin America and the
Caribbean remains a zone of peace as proclaimed by
the heads of State and Government of the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States in 2014. Let
Venezuela not relive the systematic act of terror and
attempted coup d’état that created bloodshed on the
streets of Caracas on 11 April 2002.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines laments the
convening of this meeting today, especially against the
backdrop of an unambiguous irony. Constitutionally,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has a duly
elected President in the person of His Excellency
Nicolas Maduro, who was officially inaugurated for
a second term on 10 January. Regrettably, however,
an unconscionable crusade against the legally and
legitimately elected president, orchestrated by the
Organization of American States (OAS), the oldest
hemispheric organization, aims to erect, unilaterally

S/PV. 8452

and extraterritorially, a parallel unelected presidential
Government and to destabilize order and the rule of law
in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Presently, the OAS has abdicated its role of arbiter
and indeed any serious leadership responsibility in
the hemisphere to defuse the impasse in Venezuela,
especially since it is revisiting its deplorable history
of being a conduit for imperialist aggression and
hegemonic ambition in Latin America and the
Caribbean. Thankfully, many member States within that
organization have not exhausted the option of dialogue,
nor have they abandoned the bedrock principles of the
OAS and United Nations Charters. Effectively and
more pointedly, Mexico and Uruguay have expressed
their willingness to mediate the political crisis, while
regional groupings such as the Caribbean Community
and the European Union have offered their good offices
to serve as honest brokers to facilitate dialogue among
all parties and resolve the crisis. Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines supports these responsible initiatives.
We affirm unequivocally that Venezuela is not a
threat and represents no danger to international peace
and security, even though the Government has been
subjected to a systematic campaign of aggression.
Undeniably, the country is confronted by a plethora
of complex challenges which must be tackled head-on
by democratic means and within the confines of the
supreme law of the land, its Constitution.
As always, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
stands ready to constructively assist our beloved
brothers and sisters in the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and bring about a rapprochement between
the contending forces. We must not abandon dialogue
as it is essential in multilateral diplomacy. History
teaches us that the rejection of dialogue is often the
precursor to unilateralism and war, an option that we
cannot countenance in our zone of peace.
Let us be guided by the central tenets of this
Organization and its Charter.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada): Canada welcomes the
opportunity to discuss Venezuela in the Council. Given
the severity of the worsening crisis and its grave impacts
on the people of Venezuela and on the security and
stability of the region, our discussion today is timely.

19-0214829/45

S/PV.8452

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Together with democratic countries around the
world, including most countries of the Americas and
the Organization of American States, we have firmly
rejected Nicolás Maduro Moros’s illegitimate claim to
power. The presidential elections in May 2018 were not
free and fair; in fact, they were fraudulent and for that
reason the Maduro regime has no authority to govern
Venezuela. Canada stands by the democratically elected
National Assembly and Venezuela’s constitutional order.
Canada reiterates its full support to Juan Guaidó,
President of the National Assembly, as the interim
President of Venezuela. We support his commitment to
lead Venezuela to free and fair presidential elections,
to invite the international community to support his
efforts and to respect Venezuela’s Constitution and
democratic institutions.
Canada watched this week as thousands of
Venezuelans took to the streets in a powerful and
peaceful demonstration of their commitment to
democracy. We have faith that a durable solution to
the crisis in Venezuela will be achieved through the
leadership and courage of the Venezuelan people.
(spoke in French)
While the international community forms a common
front to denounce Nicolás Maduro’s dictatorship, we
must not lose sight of the critical circumstances in
which millions of Venezuelans find themselves. They
are suffering from horrific human rights abuses and as
a result of the economic and political crisis, are unable
to meet their most basic needs, such as obtaining food
and access to health services and medicines. The urgent
nature of the humanitarian situation should leave no
one indifferent.
If Nicolás Maduro is turning a deaf ear to the calls
of the Lima Group and the international community,
perhaps he will listen to the more than 3 million
Venezuelans who have fled their homeland in search
of a better life, and who in many cases have fled in
order to survive. This exodus is already the largest in
the modern history of the region.
Many transit to or reside in neighbouring countries,
which have shown extraordinary generosity towards
our Venezuelan brothers and sisters. Canada expresses
its solidarity, gratitude and support for each of the
countries that have been forced to host hundreds — in
some cases hundreds of thousands — of Venezuelans.
If the situation persists, it is estimated that there will
30/45

26/01/2019

be 5.3 million refugees and migrants from Venezuela
by the end of this year. This situation poses a serious
threat to the stability and security of the region.
(spoke in English)
How can there be any doubt that the movement of
more than 3 million refugees so far — with the potential
of that number soon becoming 5.3 million — constitutes
a threat to regional security? In the face of this
catastrophe, we as the international community must
stand in solidarity with the democratically elected
National Assembly, with Interim President Juan
Guaidó, and with the Venezuelan people in pursuit of
a peaceful resolution to the current crisis. It is with
this goal in mind that Canada has taken such concrete
action as to impose targeted sanctions on 70 regime
officials and, along with Argentina, Chile, Colombia,
Paraguay and Peru, referred the situation in Venezuela
to the International Criminal Court.
Canada is also pleased to host the next meeting of
the Lima Group in Ottawa. Canada stands proudly with
Venezuelans. We commend their courage and reiterate
our own unwavering commitment to the universal
principles of democracy, rule of law and human rights.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Plurinational State
of Bolivia.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to congratulate
you, Mr. President, for the manner in which you are
conducting this meeting of the Security Council.
The decision of my delegation to participate in this
meeting was motivated by its attachment to international
law and the principles of self-determination of peoples
and respect for the sovereignty of States.
At the outset, we wish to express our solidarity with
the Government of President Nicolás Maduro Moros
and with the Venezuelan people. We would also like
to underscore a point that has been raised previously
in this Chamber. My region — the region of Latin
America and the Caribbean — has proclaimed itself a
zone of peace.
We have taken the floor to express our concern
over the convening of this Security Council meeting
today. This body is called upon to look into matters
related to threats to international peace and security,
and Venezuela does not in any way constitute a threat
19-02148

26/01/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

to either the region or the world. On the contrary, as has
been stated in this very Chamber, the aggressions of
which Venezuela has been on the receiving end are what
constitute a threat to international peace and security.
The members of the Security Council, and
particularly the permanent members, have the duty to
avoid the political and ideological instrumentalization
of this body. We therefore consider this attempt to
bring the internal situation of a State Member of
the United Nations to our attention absurd. On the
contrary, we call on Council members to encourage
respect for international law and the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, which were the basis
for the establishment of our Organization and include
explicitly the non-interference in the domestic affairs
of States and respect for their sovereignty.
The meddling policies used by the Government of
the United States of America to control this situation,
far from helping, are only making it worse. Convening
a meeting of the body dedicated to the preservation of
international peace and security only weakens the efforts
that multilateralism, especially the Security Council,
must develop. It erodes the dynamics of preventive
diplomacy, further distances the possibility of dialogue
between the parties and violates the principles of
equality of States, as well as the recognition of the will
and sovereignty of peoples.
The subject of the humanitarian situation
experienced by many Venezuelan citizens has come up
numerous times. I wish to make two remarks in that
regard. The first has to do with the illegality of unilateral
sanctions. The international framework makes it clear
that any sanctions imposed by any State on another,
outside Security Council resolutions, are illegal.
Furthermore, those who impose unilateral economic
and financial sanctions claim to be providing a method
of resolving the humanitarian crisis. Allow me to read
an excerpt from a report of the Congressional Research
Service of the United States on the sanctions situation.
(spoke in English)
“Analysts are concerned that stronger sanctions
could exacerbate Venezuela’s difficult humanitarian
situation, which has been marked by shortages
of food and medicines, increased poverty and
mass migration. Many Venezuelan civil society
groups oppose sanctions that could worsen
humanitarian conditions.”

S/PV. 8452

(spoke in Spanish)
If we are going to talk about the humanitarian
situation in Venezuela, then let us talk about who is
responsible. Let us talk about who is behind the illegal
unilateral sanctions.
Unfortunately, we see that the real purpose of
those who requested this meeting is not the defence of
democracy or human rights; the real purpose is to promote
situations of instability and to use those situations
to push regime-change and natural-resource-control
policies. There are three motives. The first of course
is oil, of which not much has been said during this
meeting. The second is geopolitical control. The third is
the warning to those States that do not align themselves
with the policies of the United States.
I wonder, what country is better off after the
intervention of the United States? Have we not
discussed repeatedly in this very Council the seriously
adverse consequences being experienced in Iraq, Syria
or in Libya? I reiterate that the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States has proclaimed that
Latin America and the Caribbean is a zone of peace.
The real purpose is to intimidate democratically elected
Governments that have manifestly rejected its policies,
considering those policies a threat to the sovereignty
and free determination of their peoples.
Finally, we call on the members of the Security
Council, who have a great responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations, to allow themselves to
be guided by the Charter and its principles, and in the
framework provided by the same to avoid situations
of uncertainty and confrontation. On the contrary,
they should promote spaces of dialogue and peaceful
mediation that allow lasting solutions to be reached.
We may have ideological differences, which is
natural. We may also have political differences. But we
must not differ in our interpretation of international law.
In the same way that unilateral sanctions are illegal,
threats are also illegal. Threats of use of force are
illegal. Interference in internal affairs is illegal. If we
remove those variables from the security equation, then
we might find a satisfactory solution to the situation in
Venezuela, in particular in the framework of solutions
that have been put forward by States such as Mexico
and Uruguay. However, we will not find a solution in
the systematic and widespread violation of the norms
of international law.

19-0214831/45

S/PV.8452

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Paraguay.
Mr. Arriola Ramírez (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank you, Mr. President, for giving me
the floor and for convening this open meeting on the
situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Republic of Paraguay reaffirms its commitment
to the principles of international law and to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and
regrets the breakdown of the rule of law, democracy and
respect for fundamental human rights in Venezuela, as
well as the humanitarian crisis it has generated.
The new presidential term of Mr. Nicolás Maduro
Moros is the result of an illegitimate electoral process,
which did not include the participation of all Venezuelan
political actors, nor the presence of independent
international observers, and lacked the international
guarantees and standards of a democratic, free, fair and
transparent process. For this reason, the Paraguayan
Government was the first to break off diplomatic
relations with regime of Nicolás Maduro on 10 January.
Paraguay has been denouncing the deterioration
of the political, economic, social and humanitarian
situation in Venezuela since its very beginning, and has
led support for the innumerable initiatives, appeals and
efforts for an effective dialogue between Government
of Nicolás Maduro and the various political sectors
that make up the opposition, in coordination with
the member countries of the Lima Group and the
Organization of American States. Accordingly, I would
like to emphasize that Paraguay was one of the six States
that last September requested the Prosecutor’s Office
of the International Criminal Court to commence an
investigation into the commission of possible crimes
against humanity in Venezuela.
Paraguay reaffirms today in the Chamber of the
Security Council its full support for and recognition
of the National Assembly, legitimately elected in
December 2015. The Paraguayan Government reiterates
that it recognizes Mr. Juan Guaidó as interim President
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in accordance
with the constitutional provisions of that sister country.
We trust that President Guaidó will begin the process
of democratic transition in Venezuela within the
framework of its Constitution, with the participation of
all political actors and with the necessary international
guarantees and standards for a democratic process, thus
calling for new elections as soon as possible.
32/45

26/01/2019

In conclusion, we urge the regime of Nicolás
Maduro to avoid all acts of violence and reiterate our
admiration for the courage of the Venezuelan people, as
well as our unconditional solidarity and support for that
suffering people. Paraguay will continue to advocate
in all multilateral forums a peaceful and democratic
solution to the crisis in Venezuela. Our commitment
to continue working for the full restoration of the rule
of law, democracy and respect for human rights in the
sister Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela remains firm.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Suriname.
Mrs. Sweeb (Suriname): First, we would like to
thank the Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her extensive briefing.
As so many others on our continent and throughout
the Americas are doing, the Government of Suriname
is following with great concern the situation in and
regarding the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Recent developments are particularly troubling as they
negatively affect the stability and tranquillity in that
sister country, while possibly steering the region away
from the ideals of a zone of peace.
As it has done in other forums, Suriname reiterates
its strong commitment to the guiding principles of
international law, as enshrined not only in the Charter
of the United Nations and various other international
agreements, but also in our own Constitution. It is the
principled position of my delegation, as stipulated by
our Constitution, to strive for peaceful coexistence and
resort to dialogue in any existing conflict — irrespective
of its nature, whether national or international — and
to uphold those internationally accepted principles
of non-interference in the internal affairs of States,
non-intervention, and respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States.
The Government of Suriname therefore rejects any
armed aggression, any form of political or economic
pressure, as well as any direct or indirect interference
in the domestic affairs of other States. Furthermore,
based on our principled position, Suriname cannot
support any Government that is not elected through
democratic processes and procedures in accordance
with countries’ respective constitutions. The rule of
law must be respected.
In the light of the foregoing, the Government of
Suriname restates its recognition of His Excellency
19-02148

26/01/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Mr. Nicolás Maduro Moros as the democratically
elected president of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela. With respect to the internal conflict that
has arisen in Venezuela, Suriname calls for inclusive
and meaningful dialogue, which, we believe, is the
only way to lasting and peaceful solutions, including
to addressing existing humanitarian needs. We implore
all parties concerned to engage in such a dialogue and
indeed to secure and sustain the whole of the Americas
as a zone of peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): We welcome the organization of this meeting,
as well as the briefing by Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo.
Argentina, along with a large part of the international
community, repudiated the legitimacy of Nicolás
Maduro Moros’s mandate initiated on 10 January as a
result of the electoral process of 20 May 2018 that did not
meet the requirements to be considered free, democratic
and transparent. On 10 January, Argentina announced
concrete measures against the Maduro regime,
including, inter alia, a ban on the entry of high officials
of the regime, suspension of the application of the visa
exemption agreement in diplomatic and official passports,
and alerts to banking and financial institutions about
the risks of working with the Venezuelan Government
or with companies that are owned or controlled by the
Venezuelan State.
As is well known, Juan Guaidó, President of
the Venezuelan National Assembly, took office as
Interim President in accordance with the Venezuelan
Constitution, in the context of the massive
demonstrations by the Venezuelan people on 23 January,
whose clamour for democracy and freedom has been
clear and forceful. The Government of the Argentine
Republic recognized Juan Guaidó as Interim President
of Venezuela, as did many other States.
On 24 January, at the behest of Argentina and other
countries, the Permanent Council of the Organization
of American States met in extraordinary session to
consider recent developments in Venezuela. As a
result of these deliberations, 16 countries signed a
declaration ratifying the constitutional authority of the
National Assembly and recognizing Juan Guaidó as
Interim President of Venezuela. In recent days, several

S/PV. 8452

international actors have again proposed dialogue
initiatives to overcome this crisis.
Argentina always bets on dialogue, but to be
conducive to positive results, dialogue requires the
good faith of the parties involved. Accordingly,
Argentina would like to recall that the Santo Domingo
dialogue process failed, owing to Maduro’s lack of real
willingness to engage in dialogue. Therefore, Argentina
warns of the risk that dialogue initiatives promoted
in good faith by various international actors could be
manipulated by Maduro’s regime, turning them into
delaying tactics.
Argentina believes that the United Nations and its
States Members should provide support to facilitate a
peaceful transition to free, democratic and transparent
elections as soon as possible. That is the only way to deal
with the serious political, economic and humanitarian
crisis that has plagued Venezuela for too long.
By October 2017, the Lima Group, of which
Argentina is a member, had already requested that
the Secretary-General and the United Nations system
contribute to addressing this crisis and the continuing
violations of human rights taking place in Venezuela.
Indeed, the crisis is regional and global in scope.
According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration, 3 million Venezuelan
migrants and refugees have been forced to leave
their country because of a political, economic and
humanitarian crisis that seriously impacts their human
rights. Of those, 2.4 million are now in Latin America
and the Caribbean.
Argentina once again strongly condemns the
repressive actions of the Maduro regime against the
Venezuelan people. The Argentine Republic will
continue to denounce the human rights violations
perpetrated by the regime, as it has been doing since
our President, Mauricio Macri, took office. In line
with this position, the Government of Argentina joined
other countries in requesting that the Office of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court initiate
an investigation into allegations of the commission of
crimes against humanity in that country, and promoted
the suspension of Venezuela’s membership in the
Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR), pursuant to
the Ushuaia Protocol on the Democratic Commitment in
MERCOSUR, the Republic of Bolivia and the Republic
of Chile.

19-0214833/45

S/PV.8452

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

In conclusion, Argentina believes that the Security
Council should reaffirm its role as a guarantor of
international peace and security. The very relevance and
effectiveness of the United Nations are being assessed
by our peoples and by the international community in
the light of its capacity to act in the face of this complex
crisis that is unprecedented in the Americas. The
Council cannot remain indifferent in the face of this
tragedy, which, in our view, is a threat to international
peace and security because of its tragic consequences,
particularly for the Venezuelan people and the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Gómez Camacho (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
As a country with a legitimate interest in Venezuela,
a sister nation, Mexico is grateful for the invitation
to participate in today’s Security Council meeting
pursuant to rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
Mexico reiterates its concern about the deterioration
of the situation in Venezuela and regrets the loss of life
resulting from the most recent events. We support the
Secretary-General’s statements and approach — that
all of the actors involved reduce tensions, do all they
can to prevent an escalation of the conflict and reject
all violence.
We must exhaust all avenues for dialogue and
conciliation that promote respect for human rights.
Mexico takes this opportunity to demand finding
a peaceful and democratic solution to the complex
situation facing Venezuela. The Venezuelan people
must choose their own course without interference.
In keeping with a long diplomatic tradition,
Mexico trusts that there is a negotiated solution based
on dialogue among all those involved, including the
options set forth in Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations. The Governments of Mexico and
Uruguay have therefore proposed a new inclusive and
credible negotiation process that fully respects the rule
of law and human rights. We reiterate our full support,
commitment and willingness to work together for the
stability, well-being and peace of the Venezuelan people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): My country is grateful to the Dominican
Republic for having convened this open meeting of the
34/45

26/01/2019

Security Council amid the grave political, economic
and social crisis in the brotherly country of Venezuela.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing.
Ecuador reaffirms the right of all the peoples of
the world to democracy and the obligation of their
Governments to promote and defend it. For that reason,
we echo the pronouncement of the Venezuela’s National
Assembly, which, within the framework of the norms
of the Venezuelan Constitution, has declared that a
presidential changeover is necessary. As such, the
Republic of Ecuador recognizes the President of the
National Assembly, Juan Guaidó, as interim President
of Venezuela.
Ecuador endorses the statement made yesterday by
the Argentine Republic in the Organization of American
States, on behalf of a group of countries, including
my own. Echoing that position, we wish to reiterate
the constitutional authority of the democratically
elected National Assembly of Venezuela and our firm
support for the actions taken to secure international
humanitarian aid, the release of political prisoners, the
freezing of the assets of corrupt Government officials
and the provision of guarantees to civilian and military
officials who support the restoration of democracy and
the rule of law in Venezuela.
Our country has always shown its solidarity with
the Venezuelan people, which is why we have welcomed
more than 240,000 Venezuelans into our territory,
of whom 100,000 already have a long-stay visa, thus
helping the 3 million Venezuelans, to date, who have
been forced to emigrate. We call for continued efforts
to help return Venezuela to the path of democracy
via a peaceful transition while safeguarding and
guaranteeing the integrity, exercise and full respect of
the human rights of its people, especially the rights to
life, integrity and personal freedom. Ecuador hopes that
the new interim president, within the context of the law,
will call as soon as possible for free and transparent
elections, with broad international monitoring, and
thus inaugurate a new era of democratic prosperity and
fraternity in his country.
I want to address the references to the public
reactions to the death of Diana, a 22-year-old pregnant
woman, at the hands of her Venezuelan partner. We
regret that, but I want to assure the Venezuelan people
that my people consider them brothers and sisters,
which is why, as I said before, more than 240,000 are
19-02148

26/01/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

now living in my country on the path to being granted
full permanent residence. In addition, hundreds of
thousands of Venezuelans have been able to enter and
leave my country, to whom we have given medical care
and support that they had not received in their country.
In April, Ecuador convened the third meeting
on the problem created by the migration of 3 million
Venezuelan brothers and sisters in order to seek
solutions to the greatest humanitarian problem in
our region. A democratic solution to the Venezuelan
crisis will be achieved only through dialogue and
compromise, and cannot be imposed through terror,
torture and murder. Instead of succumbing to the chaos
of unarmed innocents becoming victims of hit men and
State agents, we need calm, foresight and intelligent
and comprehensive political solutions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Barbados.
Ms. Thompson (Barbados): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on this matter
of the utmost gravity. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her briefing.
The Heads of State and Government of the following
members of the Caribbean Community — Antigua
and Barbuda, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Jamaica,
Montserrat, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Trinidad and
Tobago — together with the Foreign Ministers of
Grenada and Suriname, met by video-conference on
24 January and issued the statement that I today have
the honour to deliver to the Security Council. This
statement was subsequently endorsed by the Republic
of Guyana. I will now read the statement verbatim:
“Heads of Government are following closely
the current unsatisfactory situation in the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, a neighbouring
Caribbean country. They expressed grave concern
about the plight of the people of Venezuela and
the increasing volatility of the situation brought
about by recent developments, which could lead to
further violence, confrontation, breakdown of law
and order and greater suffering for the people of
the country.
“Heads of Government reaffirmed their guiding
principles of non-interference and non-intervention
in the affairs of States, respect for sovereignty,

S/PV. 8452

adherence to the rule of law and respect for human
rights and democracy.
“Heads of Government reiterated that the longstanding political crisis, which has been exacerbated
by recent events, can be resolved peacefully only
through meaningful dialogue and diplomacy.
“In that regard, Heads of Government offered
their good offices to facilitate dialogue among all
parties to resolve the deepening crisis.
“Reaffirming their commitment to the tenets of
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United
Nations, which calls for Member States to refrain
from the threat or the use of force, and article 21
of the Charter of the Organization of American
States, which refers to territorial inviolability, the
Heads of Government emphasized the importance
of the Caribbean remaining a zone of peace.
“Heads of Government called on external
forces to refrain from doing anything to destabilize
the situation, underscored the need to step back
from the brink and called on all actors, internal and
external, to avoid actions that would escalate an
already explosive situation to the detriment of the
people of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and
that could have far-reaching negative consequences
for the wider region.”
That concludes the statement, as issued on
24 January. The Heads of Government of the Caribbean
will continue to monitor and engage on this very serious
matter, as appropriate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the convening of this meeting to
address an issue of the highest importance that affects
the region and in which we believe a principal organ
of the United Nations, such as the Security Council, is
called on to play a fundamental role. We also appreciate
the presence of various ministers of our region and the
briefing by Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs.
As a key element of its foreign policy, Chile
supports democracy as the political system that
represents the appropriate framework for full respect
for the basic rights of all human beings. The values of
tolerance, dialogue, equality of opportunity and social

19-0214835/45

S/PV.8452

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

inclusion and cohesion, as well as the full exercise of
fundamental freedoms, are best ensured in a context
where the rule of law prevails, where there is respect
and balance among the powers of the State and where
public institutions operate effectively. A democratic
culture based on those principles is built day by day
and is a task that requires the participation of society
as a whole.
Unfortunately, today Venezuela is suffering a
profound crisis of its democratic institutions and an
unacceptable deterioration in the living conditions and
fundamental rights of its citizens under an authoritarian
and repressive Government.
The Government of Chile does not recognize the
legitimacy of the elections that took place in Venezuela
last year, as a result of which the Government of
Nicolás Maduro Moros assumed a new term. But it is
not only that. Venezuela’s Supreme Court of Justice
declared Maduro’s presidency illegitimate. Under those
circumstances, Venezuela’s National Assembly, which
is the only democratically elected institution with full
legitimacy, decided, under Venezuela’s Constitution,
in particular article 233, to appoint Juan Guaidó as
Acting President with a very clear mandate — to
restore democracy in Venezuela by calling for free,
fair, democratic and transparent elections.
In that context, Chile, together with many other
countries of the region, recognizes and has publicly
expressed its full support for the President of the National
Assembly, Mr. Juan Guaidó, who has become Acting
President of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
through the implementation of constitutional norms.
We support the beginning of the democratic
transition process in Venezuela so that new elections
are held as soon as possible with the participation of
all political actors and with the necessary international
guarantees and standards for a democratic process.
Furthermore, we condemn the acts of violence that
occurred in Venezuela, and we urge that the rule of
law, the fundamental rights of individuals and social
peace be ensured while the transition of Government
takes place.
Chile therefore shares the concerns expressed by
the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
about the use of the State’s punitive power to criminally
prosecute political dissidents and incapacitate a
number of dissident leaders. In that context, we would
like to refer to resolution 1/2019 of 25 January of the
36/45

26/01/2019

Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, under
which it granted precautionary measures to Acting
President Juan Guaidó and his family.
The solution to Venezuela’s problems lies in
restoring genuine democratic values. That means
releasing political prisoners, restoring and respecting
the freedoms and human rights of all Venezuelans,
opening a humanitarian corridor to help to mitigate
the crisis due to the lack of food and medicine and,
of course, moving decisively towards full democracy
in Venezuela.
In conclusion, I would like to say that Chile
promotes efforts for the international community to
work together towards the prompt and full recognition
of Acting President Juan Guaidó and to support his
constitutional plan, which seeks to hold elections and
to restore democracy in Venezuela.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): On 23 January, Venezuela
witnessed extraordinary events. In accordance with
the Venezuelan Constitution, and as endorsed by
the Supreme Court of Justice, the President of the
Venezuelan National Assembly, Mr. Juan Guaidó,
assumed the functions of acting President of Venezuela.
The fact that on that same day an unprecedented number
of people took to the streets in peaceful demonstrations
to demand change in Venezuela only stresses the
momentous nature of the events that we are witnessing.
Minutes after Juan Guaidó made his announcement,
Brazil, together with many other countries committed
to respect for the rule of law, legitimacy and democratic
transition in Venezuela, immediately recognized him
as Acting President of that country. That coordinated
action was not an abrupt, ill-thought-out or irresponsible
decision. It was the result of a collective understanding
that we need to support Venezuela’s Constitution and
its legitimate institutions. It was also the result of a
very long process of diplomatic dialogue and action to
help Venezuela and its people.
Even before President Bolsonaro took office in
Brazil on 1 January, Venezuela was already a priority for
him and his team. The first trip of our Foreign Minister,
Mr. Ernesto Araújo, was to participate in a meeting of
the Lima Group to signal Brazil’s firm commitment to
taking the lead and to working with other partners to
issue a very clear and strong statement of support to
19-02148

26/01/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

S/PV. 8452

the National Assembly and to the Supreme Court of
Justice for democratic transition and for urgent change
in Venezuela.

$9 billion and that the country’s foreign debt in 2018
could reach $140 billion, that is, three times higher than
in 2017.

Since that first day, Brazil has also been in
permanent contact with members of the democratic
opposition in Venezuela and with the representatives
of its legitimate institutions to contribute to the process
of democratic transition. Therefore 23 January is only
a new stage — albeit a fundamental one — in the quest
for the rebirth of Venezuela. We are already working
with the acting President to help with whatever it takes
to fulfil the tasks that Venezuelans expect of him.

It is vital that we understand, here in the Security
Council, exactly what we are dealing with. Venezuela
and its people have not only been quashed by a brutal
and corrupt dictatorship; they have been held under a
regime with links to organized crime, drug trafficking,
money laundering and terrorist organizations. That
toxic combination has created risks for Venezuela and
for us all, with unpredictable consequences for peace
and security.

It is crucial that the Security Council and all
Members here today address the situation in Venezuela,
not only because it could pose real and immediate
risks to peace and security in Latin America and the
Caribbean but because it is a situation that demands
collective and urgent action.

We therefore have an obligation to contribute to the
prompt and full restoration of representative democracy
and the rule of law in Venezuela, so that Venezuelans
can forge a new path. Brazil understands that this will
not happen without growing international pressure and
international aid.

The increasing deterioration of the political,
economic and social situation in Venezuela is not new
and has been cause for deep concern on the part of the
Brazilian Government and other countries in the region
in recent years. Venezuela is the product of a dictatorship
that sacrificed its people in order to remain in power.
Faced with an unsustainable situation of hunger,
scarcity, misrule, disorganization and insecurity, many
Venezuelans have simply been forced to flee their
country. They were welcomed with open arms in Brazil
and other countries of the region and elsewhere, but I
am sure that they would have preferred to stay in their
homes, with their families, in their country.

Let us not be naive. Those who have long held
power in the country are comfortable where they are,
and they will remain convinced that they are allowed
to promote further chaos if they are not faced with
collective pressure on our part. Such pressure can take
different forms given the various regulatory milestones
and the specificities of each country’s relations with
Venezuela, but increasing pressure is needed. Brazil
and many countries have already done their part and
will continue working in the same direction.

Representative democracy in Venezuela disappeared
long ago, in particular the separation of powers. Until
very recently, it was a police State, with hundreds of
political prisoners and assassinations of opponents,
including in State custody — all of this in an environment
in which the independent press was muzzled and
Venezuelans had lost the right to information.
The Maduro regime produced an economic crisis
of unprecedented dimensions that poses a challenge in
terms of methods of evaluation and comparison. Figures
from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the
World Bank indicate that the gross domestic product
has dropped by more than 35 per cent since 2013. The
IMF predicts a significant worsening of Venezuelan
hyperinflation, with the rate estimated at 1.3 million
per cent in 2018. The World Bank, for its part, estimates
Venezuela’s international reserves to be on the order of

I would recall that in August 2017, after concluding
that there had been a breach of the democratic order
in Venezuela, Brazil and the other partners of the bloc
activated the Ushuaia Protocol on Commitment to
Democracy in MERCOSUR, the Republic of Bolivia and
the Republic of Chile and decided to suspend Venezuela
in all its rights and obligations as a State party.
Subsequently, the Brazilian Government considered
the Venezuelan electoral process held on 20 May 2018
to be completely illegitimate. Those elections did not
include all political actors in the country, nor did they
meet the minimum guarantees and standards required
for a free, fair and transparent process. Moreover, there
were no independent international observers. For that
reason, Brazil joined the countries of the Lima Group
in issuing a declaration on 4 January that considered
the presidential mandate of Nicolás Maduro that began
on 10 January illegitimate. The Brazilian Government
and the Lima Group countries recognized the National
Assembly, legitimately elected on 6 December 2015, as

19-0214837/45

S/PV.8452

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

the only democratically elected constitutional body in
Venezuela. From there, the necessary next step was to
recognize President Guaidó and to start working with
him. Today we are here reiterating our position and
seeking the support of other Members.
There are countries that have not yet recognized
Guaidó and that advocate for dialogue with the old
regime. Brazil is in favour of dialogue with acting
President Guaidó and with the democratic opposition
in Venezuela. However, Brazil is firmly opposed
to any kind of dialogue, in any format, with Nicolás
Maduro and his accomplices. We know full well what
Maduro understands by dialogue. For him, it is another
opportunity to buy time and to continue his campaign
of oppression of Venezuelans and deconstruction
of Venezuela.
The only possible dialogue is one that will
speed up the already ongoing process of democratic
transition — a dialogue with Guaidó and all those
committed to democracy and to the interests of
Venezuela and its people.
Brazil is convinced that only through the rapid and
full restoration of democracy and respect for human
rights will it be possible to address the causes of the
political, economic, social and humanitarian crisis
faced by our neighbour to the north. Brazil will fully
support the transition process, both politically and
economically, so that democracy and social peace
can return to Venezuela. Brazil trusts that the other
members of the Council and of the Organization will
do likewise.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank you very much, Mr. Minister, for
presiding over this meeting of the Security Council this
morning. I thank also Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her
very concise and comprehensive briefing.
I should like to begin by reiterating Uruguay’s
previously expressed position that the issue of
Venezuela is not on the agenda of the Security Council
and that this is not the most appropriate body in which
to consider the situation in that brotherly country.
By the same token, Uruguay reiterates the relevance
and validity of Article 52, paragraph 2, of the Charter
of the United Nations — under Chapter VIII, entitled
“Regional Arrangements” — which states that:
38/45

26/01/2019

“The Members of the United Nations entering
into such arrangements or constituting such
agencies will make every effort to achieve pacific
settlement of local disputes through such regional
arrangements or by such regional agencies before
referring them to the Security Council.”
The Government of Uruguay has been following
very closely the evolution of the political, economic
and social situation in Venezuela and reiterates once
again that the worst possible solution for the people
of Venezuela would be to deepen its international
isolation. In that spirit, a few days ago the Government
of Uruguay, together with the Government of Mexico,
appealed to all of the parties involved, both within and
outside the country, to reduce tensions and to avert any
escalation of violence. In keeping with the principles
of international law, both Governments urged all
stakeholders to find a peaceful and democratic solution
to the complex situation in Venezuela and proposed
a new round of inclusive, credible negotiations that
would fully respect the rule of law and human rights.
Both Governments reiterated their full support for,
commitment to and willingness to work jointly for the
stability and well-being of the Venezuelan people and
peace in their country.
But there will be neither stability nor peace in
Venezuela absent a political agreement between the
various stakeholders that is reached through a broad
and fully inclusive process of dialogue that includes
the Government, actors from the entire political
spectrum and civil society. Dialogue is not a succession
of monologues, but requires listening to the other
party, understanding their points of view and seeking
understanding. The Uruguayan Government once again
urges all parties to follow that path in the strictest
respect of human rights and while taking into account
the legitimate interests of all the Venezuelan people.
To conclude, I would like to highlight the attitude
with which Latin American countries have reacted
to the sad phenomenon of massive migration of
Venezuelan citizens, which has been to open our
doors and societies, without rejecting migrants at
the border or building walls. Uruguay emphatically
reaffirms its determination to uphold international law,
peacefully settle disputes and strengthen democracy
and the legal equality of States. Likewise, regardless
of the circumstances, Uruguay will never, in no
setting whatsoever, support an armed intervention in
19-02148

26/01/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

any country in the region as a supposed solution to an
internal crisis.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): As an
aside, and as I have mentioned, I completed part of my
secondary education in Venezuela.
The will of the sovereign in a democracy is manifested
in free, open and verifiable electoral processes. As
Costa Rica has already indicated on several occasions,
the electoral process carried out in Venezuela on 20 May
2018 lacked legitimacy because it did not include the
participation of all Venezuelan political actors or the
presence of independent international observers or the
international guarantees and standards necessary for it
to be considered a democratic, free, fair and transparent
process. Costa Rica therefore reaffirms today that it
does not recognize the legitimacy of the Government
that began on 10 January.
Deprived of that democratic capacity, once again,
on 23 January, the Venezuelan people vindicated their
aspirations for peace and reconciliation. And it is for
that reason that Costa Rica has endorsed the transitional
actions taken by the Venezuelan National Assembly.
Costa Rica supports the steps taken to move towards
the holding of free, fair and transparent elections, in
accordance with international standards and in the
period provided for by the Venezuelan Constitution.
Consistent with its commitment to the promotion
of democracy and the rule of law and aware of the need
to respect human rights everywhere, in accordance
with international law, Costa Rica actively joins the
international community in calling for every effort
to restore constitutional order in Venezuela as soon
as possible and resume a path to peace, democracy
and rebuilding of its prosperity, for the benefit of its
inhabitants. We reiterate that any solution to the crisis
must come from Venezuelans themselves and be achieved
through peaceful means and inclusive dialogue.

S/PV. 8452

Ms. Bannis-Roberts (Dominica): The Government
of the Commonwealth of Dominica wishes to express
its deep concern regarding the recent developments
in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and the
worrisome consequences of those events. The
Commonwealth of Dominica strongly upholds the
principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of
any sovereign State.
Elections were held in the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela on 20 May, in accordance with its
Constitution. The election outcome returned President
Nicolás Maduro as the duly elected President of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. The Government of
the Commonwealth of Dominica, in its utterances and
by its actions, fully respects the will of the people of
any sovereign nation as exercised through the electoral
process. Following the accepted standards governing
outcomes of the duly held elections, the Government
of the Commonwealth of Dominica accepted the results
and recognizes the re-elected Government of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Commonwealth of Dominica is concerned
about the expressions of support for a transitional
Government in Venezuela and declarations of the
illegitimacy of the Nicolás Maduro Government. We
wish to place on record our opposition to such a position.
The recognition of a self-declared Government outside
of the electoral process is a clear repudiation of the will
of the people. There cannot be a parallel Government
in Venezuela.
Such recognition does not reaffirm the right of the
people of Venezuela to peace and democracy; rather,
it opens the door to confusion and civil strife. Instead,
the international community should expend efforts to
help build peace, promote reconciliation and help find
a solution that will not result in bloodshed.

Costa Rica will continue to monitor developments
in Venezuela, in order to put an end to the serious
and constant violations of the human rights of the
Venezuelan population and achieve the prompt
restoration of democracy and the rule of law, as a reality
and not simply a desire.

We maintain that, in order to peacefully resolve
the situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
there must be dialogue between the parties. The
Commonwealth of Dominica stands ready, in
conjunction with other like-minded States, to offer its
good offices to assist in that regard. We therefore urge
Member States to exercise caution and let prudence
guide us.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Dominica.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of El Salvador.

19-0214839/45

S/PV.8452

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Mr. Escalante Hasbún (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): I believe that it is regrettable when any country
in Latin America and the Caribbean is the subject of
discussions within the Security Council. I make that
point irrespective of the views that the members of the
Security Council might have — and, more important
yet, those that members of the General Assembly might
have — as to whether or not it is fitting for the Security
Council to take up item X, Y or Z.
I understand that I am one of the last speakers
on the list today, and I will therefore try to be very
brief and get to the point, while also out of respect
for everyone’s weekend. I would like to begin by
welcoming the presence of Minister Jorge Arreaza of
Venezuela. We would like to once again reiterate in this
forum a point that was previously made by my national
authorities, that is, expressing our deep concern about
the new escalation in the political confrontation that
is undermining the stability and development of our
brother country Venezuela.
Once again, we express our view that it is
principally incumbent upon the Government and the
other Venezuelan political forces to find a solution to
any problem or dispute within the country’s society,
while it is imperative to rely on the political track
and resume discussions leading to an agreement. As
a responsible State, a member of the international
community and a founding Member of the United
Nations, El Salvador reiterates that the peaceful
resolution of disputes and full respect for the principles
of non-intervention, the sovereignty of States and the
prohibition of the use of force or the threat of the use
of force are the best way forward for overcoming any
difficulty confronting Venezuela and for contributing
to regional stability, which is extremely vital for all
with regard to the development and well-being of our
peoples in the region.
Lastly, we recall that the Government of El Salvador
expresses its support for the diplomatic initiative of
those countries that are committed to achieving peace
and stability in the region and foster and hope to
contribute to finding a political and peaceful solution
to the disputes in Venezuela.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Honduras.
Ms. Flores (Honduras): My delegation congratulates
you, Mr. President, for convening this timely debate on
the situation concerning Venezuela to attend to the new
40/45

26/01/2019

developments of a political and humanitarian crisis in
which more than 3 million refugees and migrants have
left the country since 2015. Those who remain are at
risk of enduring an escalating conflict, which today
members of the security Council are called upon to
prevent, while taking all the necessary to protect the
Venezuelan population.
The Inter-American Democratic Charter, with
respect to the principle of non-intervention, established
mechanisms for collective action in case of a sudden
or irregular interruption of the democratic political
institutional process in order to respond rapidly in
defence of democracy. For that purpose, the Permanent
Council of the Organization of American States
adopted a resolution to not recognize the legitimacy
of Nicolás Maduros’ new term as of 10 January and
called for a new electoral process that would reflect the
will of the Venezuelan people. All member States of
the Organization of American States are called upon
to adopt, in accordance with international law and
national legislation, diplomatic, political, economic
and financial measures, as appropriate, to contribute
to the prompt restoration of the democratic order in
Venezuela and support other measures to allow access
to humanitarian aid.
As mandated by the Venezuelan Constitution, the
President of the Assembly, Juan Guaidó, has assumed the
functions of interim caretaker President of Venezuela,
amid a monumental demonstration of support by
Venezuelan citizens, garnering the recognition of States
in the region, the Lima Group and the international
community, accompanying democracy, in trusting
that Venezuela can soon commence a process of
credible elections.
Upon those actions in the face of the restoration of
constitutional order, tensions have increased and serious
violations of human rights have been duly reported.
Notwithstanding Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, regarding regional arrangements and
relating to the maintenance of international peace and
security, the Security Council has the responsibility to
respond to threats to international peace and security.
As all of our region and its peoples are impacted by
the protracted crisis in Venezuela and the deterioration
with regard to the rule of law, stability, security and
elemental guarantees and freedoms, we request the
security Council to urgently and diligently attend to
this matter.
19-02148

26/01/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

In favour of our youth and of assuring prosperity
for generations to come, let us today shift the culture of
denial and dismissiveness of critical issues that require
the care and the attention of our United Nations, and
embrace a new conscientiousness with full respect for
human rights.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Antigua and Barbuda.
Mr. Webson (Antigua and Barbuda): Let me begin
by first congratulating you, Mr. President, on your
leadership of this organ during the month of January.
My country, Antigua and Barbuda, is extremely proud
of your exemplary leadership as a small State in the
Security Council for this month.
We cannot, and no one, can describe the situation in
Venezuela in any other term but serious. The situation
of the Government and the people of Venezuela is of
great importance to my region and country. We do not,
and will not, stand to see the promise of the zone of
peace in our region break.
Our world is littered with examples by which
external interference in other countries in an attempt
to bring about or impose peace has resulted in those
countries and societies remaining in a state of
uncertainty, disorganization and chaos, and they have
yet to find peace. The Charter of the United Nations
is clear with regard to the promotion of international
peace and respect for sovereignty. The Charter also
makes clear that Member States should refrain from
the threat or use of force. Any unilateral declaration
of support for one side or the other and undue and
uninvited influence in the internal affairs of the
Bolivian Republic of Venezuela do nothing other than
undermine the peacebuilding process, which requires
our full attention, urgency and focus.
My Government therefore rejects any external
force that interferes with the internal matters of the
Government of the Bolivian Republic of Venezuela,
and furthermore rejects any attempt by any political
unit within the country to take power in a manner
other than by the constitutional process, through which
they are all allowed. My region and Government in
the Caribbean experience relative peace. We continue
to emphasize our zone of peace. In our region we
promote brotherhood and sisterhood, and therefore the
Government and the people of Antigua and Barbuda,
together with the Governments of the other Heads
of the Caribbean Community — as was stated here

S/PV. 8452

earlier — continue to avail themselves of facilitating
dialogue and a peace process that will return the
Government of Venezuela to its continued operations
and functions legitimately conferred upon it by the May
2018 elections.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Panama.
Ms. Quiel Murcia (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
The Republic of Panama is participating in this
emergency meeting of the Security Council to again
share its increasing concern about the seriousness
of the political, economic, social and humanitarian
situation that Venezuela is undergoing. As a result of
the search for a peaceful and democratic solution to the
crisis and the restoration of the democratic order, the
Government of the Republic of Panama has explicitly
recognized the President of the National Assembly,
Juan Guaidó as the interim President of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela. Now that the legitimate term
of the Government of President Nicolás Maduro Moros
has concluded, Panama supports a peaceful democratic
transition that will lead to fair elections, with the equal
participation of all political actors. We also reject any
act of violence or repression that restricts the rights of
the Venezuelan people and the security of Venezuela
and, ultimately, our entire region.
Based on this vision, Panama has expressed strong
support for the measures adopted to seek international
humanitarian assistance and the release of political
prisoners. We also deeply regret the loss of human lives
while people were exercising their right to protest, and
we condemn acts of violence in all their manifestations,
regardless of who commits them.
Concern about the situation in Venezuela is genuine
and it cannot be interpreted as an interference into
its internal affairs, given the massive and continuous
exodus of Venezuelans who cross the border in search
of refuge in our countries. Official reports indicate, as
has been said in this Chamber, that this is the largest
migratory crisis of this type in the recent history
of Latin America. Many efforts have been made by
regional bodies prior to this meeting without success,
but we will continue to pursue these efforts with the
aim of finding a peaceful solution that benefits the
Venezuelan people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of Cuba has asked to make a further
statement. I give her the floor.

19-0214841/45

S/PV.8452

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

26/01/2019

Mrs. Rodríguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We have requested the floor again to respond to the
slanderous statements made by the Secretary of State
of the United States of America, Mr. Michael Pompeo,
and Mr. Elliott Abrams, which we categorically reject.

and independent nation that makes its own decisions.
Venezuela is not and cannot ever be anybody’s satellite.
It has its own institutions, a people who overwhelmingly
support the Bolivarian and Chavista revolution and the
constitutional President, Nicolás Maduro Moros.

In response, I would just ask Mr. Pompeo or his
representative in this Chamber if it is not true that
the attempt to impose on Venezuelans an illegitimate
president, whom no one had heard of until a few days
ago, was orchestrated and motivated by Washington,
D.C. Was it not his country that organized and
immediately recognized the coup d’état that took
control for a few hours in Venezuela in April 2002,
at the cost of many lives? Was it not his Government
that, for years, has subjected Venezuela to an
unrelenting economic war intended to damage the
living standards of the Venezuelan people, restrict their
potential for development and provoke suffering and
social instability?

We reiterate that the main threat to international
peace and security in our region is the interventionism
of the United States of America, the return to the
Monroe Doctrine and the bullying of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela with the declared aim of regime
change and the imperialist goal of looting the greatest
oil reserve on the planet. We recall that it is the United
States, not Cuba, that has set up military dictatorships
and organized bloody coups d’état in Latin America.
It is the Government of the United States of America,
not that of Cuba, that unscrupulously intervenes in
the electoral processes and the internal affairs of the
majority of the States of the planet, seeking. It is trying
to replace by force the legitimate Government of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and conducting
a brutal campaign of defamation against it and by
threatening military action, while it calls for violence
and a coup d’état.

The delegation of the United States America
should clarify whether or not it was its Government
that deliberately undermined the attempts to reach
a negotiated solution in the Dominican Republic
when the Bolivarian Government and representatives
of the opposition were ready to ratify a negotiated
agreement that was mutually acceptable to both sides.
The delegation of the United States of America should
also clarify what its country’s attitude will be and what
responsibility it will assume if its irresponsible acts
provoke a situation of rampant instability for Venezuela
and the entire region, whose victims will be the people.
The cooperation and solidarity between Cuba and
Venezuela — like that we offer to almost all countries
of Latin America and the Caribbean and to many other
countries in the so-called third world — is dedicated
to help meet the essential needs for life, in particular
health care and education. That is well known to all
in this Chamber, including the representatives of the
United States. The Organization recognizes it, as
do many specialized agencies of the United Nations
system. To state the contrary, as the Secretary of State
of the United States of America did this morning, is an
undignified attack on the truth and demonstrates his
Government’s lack of respect for the Security Council
and the United Nations.
Both Mr. Pompeo and Mr. Abrams, I repeat, are
intentionally lying and failing to recognize that the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is a free, sovereign
42/45

I suggest that Secretary of State Michael Pompeo
review the history. He must not blame others for the
attempts of the United States of America to impose its
imperialist hegemony on our America by invoking once
again the obsolete, aggressive and dangerous Monroe
Doctrine and gunboat diplomacy.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Minister of
the People’s Power for Foreign Affairs of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela has asked to make a further
statement. I give him the floor.
Mr. Arreaza (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): I would like to respond to some
things that have been said this afternoon.
First of all, we made it clear in our first statement
that the reason we referred to President Trump’s
statement to the General Assembly in 2018 (see A/73/
PV.6) was to denounce the fact that President Trump,
from the rostrum that embodies multilateralism and
international law, again validated the Monroe Doctrine,
which considers our Latin America to be the backyard
and exclusive zone of influence of the United States.
In outlining the United States new national security
doctrine, he reiterated that fact, which, in that context,
represents a military threat against the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela. If the United Nations, through
19-02148

26/01/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

its Security Council and General Assembly, cannot
condemn that, then I do not understand what can be
condemned in this institution.
Venezuela has three satellites — one for telecommunications and two for ground observation — thanks
to its cooperation with the People’s Republic of China.
Venezuela thanks Cuba wholeheartedly for committing
its personnel to provide the Venezuelan people with
health care, education and life at a time when we
did not have, as we do today, an army of doctors and
professionals. Thanks to the Cuban revolution and
Commander Fidel Castro, Raúl Castro and, today,
Miguel Díaz-Canel Bermúdez, we have been able to
offer well-being and happiness to our people.
A few months ago, on 4 August, there was an attempt
to assassinate President Maduro Moros at a public
event. Individuals from Colombia and Miami took part
in that failed attempt. Among them was a Peruvian
journalist living in the United States who claims that
he had attended meetings and that he had wanted to buy
more drones to assassinate President Maduro, the entire
political and military leadership and Venezuelan public
authorities at an event commemorating the anniversary
of the National Guard.
We requested both Colombia and the United
States to extradite the individuals responsible for that
attempted assassination. We gave them indications of
where the individuals were located: for example, the
municipality of Chinácota in Colombia, and the city
of Atlanta in the United States. We gave them names,
including those of the immigration agents who allowed
the individuals, drones and explosives to pass through.
We gave them everything, but we have received no
response. Instead, they offered refugee status to the
masterminds behind the attack, who were revealed
in the confessions of those who carried it out. None
of what I have just mentioned has been discussed or
condemned here.
We also want to tell the people and authorities of
Colombia that although they insult us, ignore us and
refuse to communicate with us, the Bolivarian revolution
of President Maduro will always be available to the
people and institutions of Colombia to achieve peace in
that country — the site of the last armed conflict on our
continent, and one with direct links to the production
and export of cocaine, among other drugs. We are ready
to assist Colombia to achieve a lasting peace in all its
processes of negotiation.

S/PV. 8452

The United States has over 800 military bases around
the world. It has 70 military bases in Latin America.
We do not have a single one. Our Constitution — to
which everyone here has referred with a view to the
illegal undermining of our President — prevents us
from having foreign military bases. What we have is
military cooperation. The United States cut off military
cooperation with us 15 or 16 years ago, but Russia,
China and others have offered us military cooperation,
and it is our sovereign right to protect our territorial
integrity, our people and our sovereignty. We do not
seek to attack anyone or to ever put anyone at risk.
We have had 25 elections in Venezuela in 20 years.
The Bolivarian revolution won 23 elections, and in the
two that we lost, we immediately recognized the loss.
With respect to the electoral system used, the electoral
authorities that organized the election of the National
Assembly in December 2015 have not changed. There
are even greater guarantees because, at the request of
the Dominican Republic, we created more security
guarantees in the electoral system that elected President
Maduro last year.
The Venezuelan opposition could not agree on
a single candidate. They pressured candidates not
to participate, although some did. There was a legal
constitutional election that led to a popular outcome
that we cannot simply disregard. It is in line with our
Constitution, and overturning it would mean scoffing
at the wish of some 10 million voters.
Venezuelan migration has been mentioned several
times. As I have said previously, there is indeed
migration, but not of the magnitude and scale that we
have been led to believe. I thank those countries who
have received Venezuelan migrants and would ask them
to share information with us so that we can effectively
corroborate their number, where they are, how to help
them and how to implement our plan of return so that
they can come back to the country. However, refugee
status is being given orally to millions of them. How
can that be? Who says they are refugees? We must be
more rigorous in our use of terminology.
There is economic migration that is largely the
result of the blockade and economic persecution of
the United States against Venezuela. Perhaps it would
be a good idea to invite Mr. José Luis Rodríguez
Zapatero, former Prime Minister of Spain, to testify as
to the process of dialogue in Venezuela, the electoral
guarantees that were provided and why the commitment

19-0214843/45

S/PV.8452

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

among the parties that would have guaranteed peace
was not signed. Perhaps we could also learn why those
who did not sign it are now at the head of a coup d’état
in Venezuela.
It is a heavy responsibility to recognize
Governments that have not been constitutionally
elected. Harm is being done. A mistake is being made.
States are entering a new stage of international law, and
we invite them to reflect. We invite Europe to reflect.
Europe should take the eight-day ultimatum it imposed
on us to reflect. Perhaps in eight days Europe can learn
to respect the Constitution of Venezuela and support an
egalitarian dialogue in a framework of respect for the
sovereignty of Venezuela, as it should be and as we all
would like to see.
There were 300 observers. I ask that we be
provided with any report from the electoral observers
in Venezuela stating that the elections were not honest
or that the voting machines had problems. Let us have
a fact-based dialogue. Let us be diligent. It seems that
speakers here are following the same script. Some seem
forced to read what has been dictated to them, and that
is painful. The sovereignty of our brethren States on the
continent is being undermined.
As I said about two hours ago, I think we also need
to acknowledge that the Government of Ecuador denied
us the flight authorization necessary for the return of
Venezuelan immigrants who, fleeing the persecution
promoted by President Lenin Moreno Garcés against
Venezuelans, had taken refuge in our Embassy and
diplomatic missions in Ecuador. Although it was
not granted yesterday, as would have been right, or
this morning, the Ecuadorian Ombudsman’s Office
intervened. Finally, the Ecuadorian Ministry for
Foreign Affairs granted authorization, and we can
retrieve our compatriots.
Venezuela is at peace. Attempts to provoke a war
in Venezuela have not been successful. Venezuela is a
country that will defend its sovereignty and will always
use dialogue. In Venezuela, the people, the workers, the
trade unions, the farmers, the local councils and the
businessmen are in favour of sovereignty and peace. We
will not allow any Government or country to violate our
sovereignty or to promote war. Nor will we give Donald
Trump the pretext he seems to need to start a war.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia has asked to make a
further statement. I give him the floor.
44/45

26/01/2019

Mr. Trujillo García (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): I want to make a brief statement in response
to a reference was made specifically to the domestic
situation of Colombia. I only wish to take the
opportunity provided by that reference to thank the
Security Council once again for its unanimous support
for the report submitted by the Secretary-General
(S/2018/1159) on the progress that has been made in
the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
signed by the previous Government of Colombia with
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo. Unanimous support was lent to that
report, and I simply wanted to take this opportunity to
thank the Security Council for that endorsement.
I also take this opportunity to reiterate the
willingness of the Government of Colombia to comply
with its obligations with respect to counter-terrorism
activities as provided for in resolution 1373 (2001).
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the Russian Federation has asked to
make a further statement. I call on him to do so.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I understand that this discussion has dragged
on, and I do not want to prolong it. This is not a right of
reply. I simply want to make one comment that I believe
worth stating.
As I mentioned today, United States Secretary of
State Pompeo claimed that his country’s position is
shared by the majority of members of the international
community and that the Maduro regime is supported
by only five countries, which I listed. I must reply that
in listening to the representatives of the countries that
spoke today, we counted 11 Latin American countries
that spoke in favour of the legitimate Government
of Venezuela, whereas 10 countries spoke against.
The representative of Barbados referred to the joint
statement of the Caribbean Community, which stresses
non-interference in the internal affairs of States,
respect for sovereignty and independence. I am not
even including the members of the Security Council
that are also divided on this matter.
First of all, that confirms what I said earlier while
Secretary of State Pompeo was still in the Chamber,
to the effect that there is not as much unity in support
of his position in the world as he thinks. We believe
that there is a majority in favour of those who
19-02148

26/01/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

support the sovereignty, territorial independence and
non-interference in the internal affairs of Venezuela.
Secondly, what we are seeing today clearly
demonstrates that the United States and its allies have
not been able to achieve their aim. What, then, was
the point of holding this meeting? It has been useful
because it has shown our United States colleagues
the true attitude of the international community with
regard to what is going on in the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
We once again repeat — let us not escalate tensions
around Venezuela. Let us stop all the threats and
threatening the use of force against that country. Let us
set aside ridiculous ultimatums of eight days. What is

S/PV. 8452

the special significance of eight days? Why not seven
days or thirty days? Who was the genius who came up
with the eight-day formula? Let us give Venezuelans a
chance to solve their own problems. If we can help them
do that then let us help them. But let us not try to trip
them up on that path.
We welcome the initiative of Mexico and Uruguay,
which have extended their good offices in fostering
dialogue between the Government and the opposition.
We call on everyone to join that effort in good faith
and with good intentions, unlike what has been
demonstrated by some today.
The meeting rose at 1.50 p.m.

19-0214845/45
