UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/105
5 February 1998
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: FRENCH

LETTER DATED 5 FEBRUARY 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to attach the text of a letter dated 4 February 1998
which I received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would have it brought to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

98-02640 (E)

060298

060298

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1998/105
English
Page 2

Annex
[Original:

English]

Letter dated 4 February 1998 from the Secretary-General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to
the Secretary-General

In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the
thirteenth monthly report on Stabilization Force (SFOR) operations. I would
appreciate your making this report available to the Security Council.

(Signed)

Javier SOLANA

/...

S/1998/105
English
Page 3

Appendix
Thirteenth monthly report to the United Nations Security Council
on Stabilization Force operations

1.
There are approximately 35,000 troops currently deployed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in Croatia, with contributions from all the members of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and from 20 non-NATO countries. Over the
reporting period (21 December 1997-20 January 1998), most of the temporary
reinforcements that had been sent in to support the Republika Srpska Assembly
elections redeployed out of theatre.
2.
SFOR has continued to conduct surveillance and reconnaissance by means
of ground and air patrols. A total of 2,250 sorties were flown by combat
aircraft over the reporting period, with the SFOR helicopter fleet flying 156
hours.
3.
Over the reporting period, SFOR forces continued to secure the
transmission towers used by Srpska Radio Television at Duga Nijva, Udrigovo and
Veliki Zep in Multi-National Division North and at Trebevic, and at Leotar in
Multi-National Division South-East.
4.
On 27 December, SFOR troops ensured a safe environment and freedom of
movement for the inaugural meeting of the new Republika Srpska Assembly in
Bijeljina and for the subsequent meetings, which took place on 12 and
17 January 1998, all of which were conducted without incident. In addition,
following the election of a new Republika Srpska Government in mid-January and
in response to a request from the Office of the High Representative, SFOR
increased patrols and established observation posts in the vicinity of Republika
Srpska government offices in and around Pale. No unusual activities were
reported.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
5.
The parties remain generally compliant with most military aspects of
the Peace Agreement across the whole area of operations.
6.
The inspection and verification of barracks and cantonment sites
remains a priority task for SFOR. The operation to reduce those sites by
25 per cent began in June 1997, when SFOR reported 770 sites (323 combat sites
and 447 infrastructure sites) and set the deadline of 20 December 1997 for the
reduction. Thanks in part to the willingness of both entities, this goal was
exceeded, and as of 9 January 1998 there were 534 approved sites in the SFOR
area of operations (a total of 255 combat sites and 279 infrastructure sites).
SFOR will pursue further site reductions in 1998.
7.
During the reporting period, SFOR inspected 253 military weapon
storage sites: 96 Bosniac, 77 Bosnian Croat and 80 Bosnian Serb. The following
unauthorized weapons were confiscated: from the Bosnian Croats, 1 sniper rifle,
6 rocket-propelled grenades, 12,700 small arms rounds, 40 grenades and 165
mines; from the Bosnian Serbs, 10 had grenades. In addition, on 13 January SFOR
/...

S/1998/105
English
Page 4

troops confiscated two tons of illegal weapons from the Ozren enclave, southeast of Doboj in the Republika Srpska. Various mortars, nearly 200 grenades and
more than 20,000 rounds of ammunition were confiscated and, in line with
established policy, will be destroyed.
8.
SFOR continues to support the International Police Task Force (IPTF),
on a case-by-case basis, in its inspections of local police stations. Over the
reporting period the following weapons were confiscated: from the Federation,
14 grenades, 15 mines, 1 rifle, 1 rocket-propelled grenade and 23 small arms
rounds; from the Bosnian Serbs, 1 long-barrelled weapon and 10 7.62-mm rounds.
All these confiscated weapons will be destroyed after a period of time, to allow
for appeals.
9.
With respect to the Specialist Police, the Republika Srpska Police
Anti-Terrorist Brigade (PATB) is under SFOR control and surveillance, with SFOR
liaison officers attached to each unit. The PATB units in northern Bosnia are
already fully compliant with all the instructions issued by the Commander of
SFOR on 15 August 1997. In south-eastern Bosnia, the delivery of SFOR-issued
identity cards to PATB members is expected to be completed shortly. All
Republika Srpska policemen continue to be encouraged to join the IPTF
certification process.
10. Over the reporting period, no unauthorized checkpoints were reported.
However, there were some reports of blocked roads, due largely to individuals
participating in street demonstrations to protest against local conditions.
These demonstrations were not organized by the entities and are thus not
considered an overall threat to freedom of movement. SFOR and IPTF monitored
every such situation without incident, and the roads were invariably cleared
quickly.
11. A further impediment to freedom of movement occurred when railway
traffic between Zenica and Zavidovice was suspended on 9 January 1998. The
suspension was in response to several stoning incidents and was the first of its
kind since June 1997. The cantonal police response has been to provide an
additional police escort.
12. A regular bus line, authorized by the Office of the High
Representative in early December, connecting Sarajevo and Banja Luka was
operational for less than two weeks because the bus line and timetable had not
been officially approved by the Bosnian Serb authorities. The Deputy High
Representative warned that failure to re-establish the line was a direct
violation of the Peace Agreement and that SFOR and IPTF would monitor the
movement of buses and ensure unimpeded access. The bus line was subsequently
re-established and is now operating on a daily basis without problems.
13. Over the reporting period SFOR monitored a total of 378 training and
movement activities: 228 Bosniac, 51 Bosnian Croat, 96 Bosnian Serb and
3 Federation. A ban on all training and movement activities was imposed on the
Butila unit of the Federation Rapid Reaction Brigade from 28 November 1997 until
31 January 1998 because of non-compliance during the municipal election and
threatening behaviour. In addition, a 14-day ban (from 6 to 19 January) was
imposed on the Bosnian Serb 14 Logistic Base and on the Educational Recruit
/...

S/1998/105
English
Page 5

Centre as a result of their continual late notification of training
cancellations.
14. Over the reporting period, SFOR monitored 65 demining operations,
which resulted in the removal of 52 anti-personnel mines and 2 items of
unexploded ordnance. SFOR has developed a training programme for instructors
and team leaders in order to enable the entities to run their own courses in
February and March, with the aim of increasing the number of deminers in the
spring. The courses for the Bosnian Serbs and the Bosniacs started in Banja
Luka and Tuzla, respectively on 24 December, with 30 students in each. The
Bosnian Croat course started on 5 January in Mostar with 16 confirmed students.
Reports indicate high student quality, enthusiasm and positive results.
Although the number of demining operations for the past month has been low,
overall compliance is deemed satisfactory, in view of the personnel and demining
equipment in use in the courses and given the bad weather and the holiday
period.
Cooperation with international organizations
15. Within its capabilities, SFOR continues to provide assistance to the
international organizations in theatre and works routinely with the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the Office of the High
Representative, IPTF, the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
16. SFOR is continuing to support the installation phase of the municipal
elections, primarily by providing a secure environment and area security and by
supporting IPTF. SFOR also continues to participate in the OSCE election
results implementation committees at the national and regional levels.
17. SFOR has been working closely with the parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to help them develop modalities for reconfiguring battle tanks as
mine rollers within the framework of the arms control limitations agreed under
article IV of annex I B of the Peace Agreement. The aim of this initiative is
to enable the parties to use the tanks for mine-clearance work without fear of
violating their arms control agreement.
18. SFOR continues to support the opening of additional airfields to
civilian use. Over the reporting period, representatives from SFOR and the
Office of the High Representative met with Bosnian Federation President Ganic
and with Tuzla airport and canton officials to discuss arrangements for civilian
aircraft to operate from Tuzla airfield. Similarly, in Sarajevo, SFOR has been
meeting local airport officials and airline representatives to examine ways of
increasing the number of slots available at the airport for civil passenger
aircraft.
19. As reported last month (see S/1998/39, para. 15), SFOR had been
negotiating with the Department of Civil Aviation and the Croatian and Serbian
air-traffic control to make additional airspace available to facilitate civil
aircraft overflights. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was, however, not
prepared to sign the agreement and thus no progress can be reported.
/...

S/1998/105
English
Page 6

Outlook
20. Tension is expected to remain in contested areas as the municipal
election results continue to be implemented, and acts of intimidation and
violence might occur in conjunction with the return of refugees and displaced
persons.

-----
