S/PV.8851

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8851

st meeting
Wednesday, 8 September 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Byrne Nason. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ireland)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Lekhi
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
United Nations transitions
Letter dated 24 August 2021 from the Permanent Representative of Ireland to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2021/756)

In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security Council
addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, this official record of the Security Council will be supplemented by
a compilation of annexes (S/2021/783) containing the statements submitted by interested
non-members of the Council.

21-24509 (E)
*2124509*

S/PV.8851

United Nations peacekeeping operations

early and sustained collaboration among field missions,
host Governments, United Nations country teams and
local and global partners. It also depends on building
trust with the people and communities that we are there
to serve.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
United Nations transitions
Letter dated 24 August 2021 from the
Permanent Representative of Ireland
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2021/756)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Her Excellency Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, former
President of Liberia; and Ms. Safaa Elagib Adam,
President of the Community Development Association
of the Sudan.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/756, which contains the text of
a letter dated 24 August 2021 from the Permanent
Representative of Ireland addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept note on the item
under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Secretary-General: My thanks to Ireland
for convening today’s debate on the important issue of
peacekeeping transitions.
As the Security Council knows well, United
Nations peacekeepers are an extraordinary group of
women and men who put themselves in harm’s way to
protect people, create space for dialogue and political
trust and plant the seeds of peace for the future. But
their missions are never intended to be permanent, and
transitions do not come with an on-off switch.
Transitions are complex processes that are
individual to each country’s context. They involve a
careful reconfiguration of the presence, strategy and
footprint of the United Nations in a country. They
begin not only when a mission is nearing its end, but
when the first boots hit the ground. Success depends on
2/23

08/09/2021

The drawdown of United Nations peacekeeping can
be an exciting moment for a country emerging from
conflict and looking forward to peace, but it is also
a moment of heightened risk. Years of peacebuilding
and protection gains are at stake. Global attention and
focus, including perhaps the focus of the Council, can
vary. There is still work to do to make sure the seeds of
peace can blossom.
Consolidating peace, building resilience and averting
conflict relapse are at the heart of my prevention
agenda. Three years ago, I launched the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative to make our operations more
efficient and impactful, including after mission
transitions. Earlier this year, I launched the Action for
Peacekeeping Plus initiative to focus on key areas of
work and protect hard-won gains as countries make
that shift. We are committed to constantly improving
the transition process and learning from the lessons of
past missions.
The first lesson is that political engagement needs
to be sustained throughout the transition and beyond.
After the transition, we need to intensify our focus on
collaborating with local and national Governments to
rebuild vital systems. The work of the Peacebuilding
Commission, United Nations country teams, regional
offices and envoys is more important than ever.
For example, the tireless work of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel was critical to
sustaining engagement in Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and
Guinea-Bissau. In the Sudan, the United Nations
managed one of the most complex reconfigurations in
recent history, drawing down the peacekeeping mission
while scaling up a special political mission. That
mission was dedicated to a sustainable and nationally
owned peace process as the country continues its
journey towards recovery and sustainable development.
That brings me to the second lesson, namely, the
importance of national leadership and ownership of
the transition. Peacekeeping missions can help put the
country on the right track, but only national stakeholders
can keep it there over the long term. That idea is at the
heart of our Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative.
We want to make sure that national Government
21-24509

08/09/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

institutions, partners and civil society groups,
especially those representing women, minorities and
young people, are all working together to carry peace
forward and build truly representative, responsive and
accountable institutions.
For example, the conclusion of the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the Kasaï
provinces was followed by a detailed benchmark
transition plan for full withdrawal by 2024, should the
conditions for peace be met. The plan was developed
with the national Government, working shoulder to
shoulder with the United Nations country team and the
Council. It also includes support for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as it strengthens economic,
security, legal and justice systems and institutions for
the future. The leaders and the peoples of countries in
transition must be the ultimate architects of peace, with
the United Nations and the global community playing
supporting roles.
The third lesson is the importance of sustainable
transition financing. As global attention wanes, the
attention of donors can soon follow. The closure of a
United Nations mission often coincides with shrinking
and less predictable aid flows. That financial cliff can be
a huge risk for a country still taking those first tentative
steps towards sustainable peace and development.
The Peacebuilding Fund is aimed at partially
closing those gaps. Support for transitions is one of
the three priority windows for the Fund, with a target
of 35 per cent of annual investment dedicated to that
context. However, many more resources will be needed.
I welcome the General Assembly’s decision
to convene a high-level meeting on financing for
peacebuilding next year. As demand for support from
the Peacebuilding Fund continues to outpace available
resources, we must build momentum. We need to match
the commitment of Member States to peacebuilding
with concrete outcomes in how the commitment
is financed.
The first lesson is to support national authorities
as they protect people and rebuild for the future. When
a United Nations mission closes, the risks to civilians
and vulnerable groups do not simply vanish. We need
to help Governments establish security and protection
systems. We need to ensure that parties to conflict
live up to their obligations under international law. We
need the help of the Council to address any remaining

S/PV. 8851

threats to civilians. For example, the situation in Darfur
is a stark reminder of the need to remain vigilant. The
Juba Peace Agreement, signed in October 2020, was
an inspiring sign of progress but the drawdown of the
peacekeeping mission and the establishment of the
political mission have been accompanied by recurring
intercommunal violence.
Those and many other deeply concerning situations
remind us that peace is a long process. The path is
seldom straightforward. The role of the world and the
global community remains essential as those countries
continue their journeys. Peace is possible. Peace is
necessary. Peace is the only pathway to a sustainable
future. I therefore look forward to working with the
Council to continue strengthening the transition
process and pursuing our shared goal of peace for all
people in all countries.
The President: I sincerely thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Johnson-Sirleaf.
Mrs. Johnson-Sirleaf: Please allow me to stand
on the existing protocols and congratulate you, Madam
President, and through you, the Government and the
people of Ireland, on your country’s assumption of
the leadership of the Security Council for the month
of September.
May I also thank the Government and the people of
India for their leadership of the Council for the month of
August. Interestingly, both Ireland and India, and many
other nations represented around the table, contributed
troops to the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL). I and all Liberians are forever grateful to the
friendly countries, Governments and peoples.
I am honoured today to respond to the request
to brief the Security Council on the important
consideration of transitioning in peacekeeping, and
to share this opportunity with His Excellency the
Secretary-General. I thank the Secretary-General for
the leadership he has demonstrated in reforming United
Nations peacekeeping.
As a former President of a country that shares
common borders and strong friendships, I start with
Guinea, pointing to the condemnation of the coup d’état
by the leaders of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the commitment to a
democratic society dedicated to constitution adherence
and the rule of law.

21-245093/23

S/PV.8851

United Nations peacekeeping operations

As the global guardian of the world, peacekeeping
intervention by the Security Council continues to be
most sought after in parts of the world that are conflictprone. While costly, in terms of lives and resources,
it is important that peacekeeping interventions be
viewed as successful, not only in restoring security but
also in enabling sustainable peace. It is worth noting
the tremendous contributions made by the States
Members of the United Nations, especially working
with the Security Council, to guarantee the continued
success of the United Nations in its peacekeeping and
peacebuilding roles. We are of the firm conviction
that true peace must really be in the hearts of men and
women of any nation. It is important for the peoples of
any war-ravaged country to adopt peace afterwards as
a way of life.
With the Council’s indulgence, I will now turn
to Liberia. Members may recall that over a 15-year
period, the United Nations Mission in Liberia was, at
some point, classified among the largest deployments
of peacekeepers in the world, consisting of up to 15,000
military personnel. At its peak, 180,000 peacekeepers,
16,000 police officers and more than 24,000 civilian
staff worked at various times over the period of
war. UNMIL is viewed nationally, regionally and
internationally as successful.
The success was due in large part to strong regional
support and engagement with the 15 member States of
ECOWAS. The Council may recall it was the regional
body that first constituted the Economic Community
of West African States Monitoring Group, which
transformed into the ECOWAS Mission in Liberia that
became the progenitor of UNMIL. That was due to the
strong support of Liberia’s international development
partners, such as the United States, Sweden, India,
Ireland and the European Union. We deeply thank the
Government of India for the inclusion and involvement
of an Indian women contingent, which had a positive
impact on the Liberian Government’s efforts to attract
women to the country’s security system.
We commend the efforts made during the
period of the Mission’s mandate for coherence and
cooperation across the United Nations system with
regional and international partners. In her remarks
in Liberia on the occasion of the closure of Mission,
the Deputy Secretary-General referenced the plans
of the Secretary-General to enable the whole United
Nations system to deliver as one — more coherently,
cooperatively and in a more integrated manner, with
4/23

08/09/2021

timely support to national Governments. We thank the
Secretary-General for those reforms, now in the One
United Nations system. I am pleased to report that
today, the United Nations system in Liberia functions
as he had envisioned and operates more coherently,
while ensuring more effective relationships, integrated
support and productive partnerships with national
stakeholders. However, I would be less than honest if I
were to say that operations were fault-free.
An UNMIL report says it squarely — the challenges
faced in the country were nothing short of daunting,
to lead a country exhausted from three decades of
civil strife, with destroyed infrastructure, a collapsed
economy, a non-existent security sector and State
institutions capable of providing basic services to its
people. To add to those challenges, the country faced a
sharp decline in the economy from the effects of Ebola
and the loss of significant financial support in the
withdrawal of peacekeeping forces. That suggests the
need for transition plans to recognize the specificities
and special circumstances of countries, particularly in
post-conflict situations and to have flexibility in those
plans to address such conditions, despite the fact that
the prime responsibility is that of the Government.
Yet I am pleased to report that today, more than
three years since the final withdrawal of UNMIL from
Liberia, on 30 March 2018, our country remains largely
at peace with itself and with its neighbours. Moreover,
Liberia is proud that it contributes a contingent to
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali.
On behalf of the people of Liberia, I thank all
Member States, and particularly the Security Council,
for the support extended to Liberia when we desperately
needed it. The Security Council must continuously
re-examine and assess opportunities for more
successful models of peacekeeping operations and meet
its global responsibility to maintain international peace
and security — but not necessarily in a one-size-fits-all
jacket, as the colour and the helmet remain universally
recognizable as Blue Helmets. It is therefore critical for
successful transitions that the peacekeeping process be
nationally owned, integrated, coherent and sustainable.
A successful transition goes a long way to actually
defining a mission’s overall success.
One way the Security Council can support those
important ingredients for success is to include them in
a mission’s mandate and further require that they be
21-24509

08/09/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8851

considered in the regular briefings and update reports
of a mission to the Council. Specific measurable
activities, including with civil society organizations, as
well as women and youth groups, ought to be developed,
supported, monitored and reported on as part of a
mission’s overall intervention report to the Council.

higher and a return to conflict is considerably lower. I
thank the Secretary-General for effecting the necessary
changes in that regard. I also thank the Security
Council for recognizing the value of, and providing
better support for, peacebuilding commissions through
assessed contributions.

As many have rightfully observed, restoring and
sustaining peace is more than silencing the guns and
disarming belligerents and/or ex-combatants. It extends
to enabling the conflicted society to deal successfully
and sustainably with the drivers of conflict long after
the process has ended and long after the peacekeeping
mission is officially closed. In order to do that
effectively, the Council may consider practical and
measurable indicators that will register deliberate
engagement involving all the relevant stakeholders
of a society, especially civil society, women, youth
and minorities.

Peacebuilding helps countries prevent conflicts.
Perhaps we need to more closely consider some
regions of the world for early engagement in peace
and conflict resolution. Close to $8 billion was spent
on peacekeeping operations in Liberia. With a new
focus, we might spend less in preventing new conflicts
in countries like Cameroon and Myanmar, where the
warning sounds are growing louder and louder.

It must also be said that the experience of the active
participation of women in the peacekeeping operations
in Liberia offered Liberian women a needed sense of
renewed hope for the Mission’s success, as well as
the opportunity to exchange experiences, leading to
changes in attitudes and long-held perceptions about
the value of women. That brought about a renewed
appreciation of women in Liberia. Even if that did not
necessarily translate into complete trust, their presence
inspired some measure of confidence, especially when
the Blue Helmets were no longer around. Memories of
that still linger.
One of the milestones of transition planning must
be the institutional measure of reforms of national
security and the rule of law. Invariably, the breakdown
in the capacities of institutions to fairly and justly seek
adherence to, and enforcement of, the rule of law are
flashpoints for triggering new conflicts or igniting old
ones. Transition planning must therefore ensure both
a responsible, orderly drawdown of United Nations
troops and that the national Government and its security
sector are prepared to stand up for and protect all
inhabitants, especially civilians, under a fully owned
new programme, with active citizen participation at
various levels on the rule-of-law continuum.
This highlights the importance of integrating
peacebuilding quite early in peacekeeping intervention
planning. As Liberia proved, when the two are enabled
to work together and deliver as one, the overall margin
for success of a peacekeeping mission is considerably

Finally, our world is embattled with the devastating
effects of the coronavirus disease pandemic and current
challenges of climate change. Under these two broad
canopies, global inequities and injustices are being
exposed. Multilateralism has been under threat. Indeed,
we face the urgency of acting together, more inclusively,
to confront the realities of our changing world.
Indeed, our world continues to change. The nature
of conflicts and challenges to our peaceful cohabitation
on Mother Earth have changed. How we pursue conflict
resolution in existing conflicts and how we prevent
conflicts where they seem likely to occur remain
one of the biggest challenges for the Council, in my
humble and considered view. The important mandate
of maintaining international peace and security must
also change. The change we seek is a change we must
believe in so as to ensure that it occurs. Nowhere is
that reality more pronounced than around the Security
Council table, which holds the power of the world.
As an African, I cannot conclude without taking
this opportunity to address this important organ of the
United Nations and to remind it of the common sense
position of the African Union, as expressed in the
Ezulwini Consensus, for the improved and increased
full representation of Africa and other countries and
regions of our world on the Security Council. Not only
does Africa deserve such consideration for permanent
representation, but it is also among the regions
generally requiring peacekeeping operations. We
believe that, with such a change — with more equity
in the composition of the Security Council — we will
have more successes in meeting the global purpose of
our world for its existence. It is time for the Council to

21-245095/23

S/PV.8851

United Nations peacekeeping operations

change. It is hard to adopt change, but it is necessary for
the success of a better world.
The President: I thank Mrs. Johnson-Sirleaf for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Adam.
Ms. Adam: I thank the President of the Security
Council and the Government of Ireland, SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and the members of the
Security Council, as well as Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf.
I also note the presence of Ms. Diop and other women
whom I know and work with.
I am honoured and pleased with the very strong
speeches delivered by senior stakeholders at the
international level, as well as with the spirit of
this meeting. I am pleased to reflect on my modest
experience of being in the conflict zone in the Sudan
and to amplify the voices of Sudanese women from their
struggle, during the revolution and prior to that during
the armed conflict in Darfur, to bring about sustainable
peace. I thank the Security Council and hope that this
will be my testimony.

08/09/2021

VII with a protection mandate — left the Sudan under
a hurried exit strategy, leaving Darfur in a situation of
no peace/no war and with a fragile security situation.
Those two missions, one with a peacekeeping
mandate and one with a peacebuilding mandate,
provided many lessons learned.
We recognize the crucial role played by UNAMID
during its presence in Darfur, with the support of
the international community and the African Union.
However, owing to many factors, we consider it a
missed opportunity for making maximum use of the
mission —as follows.
First, the lack of political will on the part of the
previous Al-Bashir military regime presented obstacles
in attaining that objective, as did the partially signed
peace agreements, the fragmentation and spread in
the region of many armed groups and militias and
the proliferation of weapons. Facing that situation,
UNAMID assumed the role of a peacekeeping mission,
and that created many constraints for it, which could be
a point for discussion.

The Sudanese people impressed the world with
the vital role of women and youth in leading the
non-violent historic revolution of December 2019. The
revolution ended Al-Bashir’s brutal military regime
after 30 years of war and political unrest in different
parts of the Sudan and Darfur. The change resulted in
a tough negotiation between civilians and the military
to reach a mixed deal on civilian-military Government
through the Constitutional Declaration. That marked
the way for governing the Sudan’s transition period
within a framework of liberty, peace and equality.
In that regard, I salute all the young people who
participated in the process, which was meant to lead to
a democratic transformation.

As I said, the UNAMID exit strategy was carried
out in a hurry, which left behind a fragile security
situation in Darfur, coupled with tribal conflict.
That situation continued during the transitional
Government — currently mostly in Darfur — and with
the presence of UNITAMS. A peacebuilding mission
with no protection mandate, UNITAMS continues to
face the same challenges, that is, a fragile security
situation and a partial peace deal — the Juba Peace
Agreement is not yet comprehensive. Without a
protection or peacekeeping mandate, it cannot respond
to the current fighting in Darfur or incidents of killing,
rape of women and girls and the looting of villages
by armed militias. As is the case in other countries in
Africa, women are the victims of the conflict.

After the transition in the Sudan in 2020, the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in
the Sudan (UNITAMS) took on a new mandate, under
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations, to
engage in peacebuilding and help the Sudanese people
finalize the establishment of peace, with the objective
of building and helping to move towards a democratic
transformation during the transitional period in the
country. I bear in mind what has been contributed
by previous speakers. At the same time, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) — a peacekeeping mission under Chapter

I would like to highlight that people are more
concerned about the gaps in protection and security for
civilians in conflict and about the situation of women
and girls in camps for internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and refugees. That frustration increased in
Darfur, in the Sudan, especially after UNAMID’s
withdrawal as a peacekeeping mission with a mandate
to protect civilians. Incidents of killing, the looting of
villages and the rape of women and girls in conflict areas
and during tribal clashes occur frequently. Community
women, men and youth are calling for a civilian
democratic Government where the role of the security

6/23

21-24509

08/09/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

sector, the army and the police is to protect civilians
and the Constitution, help with the election and provide
security during the constitutional transition period.
A source of frustration for the Sudanese people in
Darfur, especially women, is the exclusive nature of
the security process and the reluctance of the military
to accelerate the security sector reform process.
Moreover, we think that members of civil society and
women should be part and parcel of security sector
reform and monitoring of accountability, with a view to
democratic transformation and in accordance with the
Juba Peace Agreement. Moreover, transitional justice
issues concerning the victims of the war are another
crucial competent for a more coherent and integrated
transition process. Victims are waiting for the rule of
law and transitional justice.
The issue of women’s meaningful participation
during the transition period is crucial. We know that
Sudanese women created change through the revolution
and through peace agreements — in Darfur and other
parts, such as the Nuba Mountains. But meaningful
participation means that women, including young
women, participate equally not only on the second
track of the peace process — they are always assigned
the role of observers in peace processes — but as
stakeholders and at the level of political parties.
This must include women in the public domain — at
the grass-roots level, in rural areas, in farmers and
nomadic associations — as well as IDPs and refugees
returning to their villages. They also need to be part
of all commissions established through the peace deal,
in governance reform and in rebuilding the Sudan.
Despite the struggle of Sudanese women to have the
gender dimension included in the transitional process,
the current representation of women in the transitional
Government is far below the 40 per cent floor of
women’s participation set forth in the Constitutional
Declaration and Juba Peace Agreement. Resolution
1325 (2000) also provides for women’s participation
and protection.
UNITAMS is mandated to help in the democratic
transformation, so it needs to push towards enhancing
the political will of all parties to implement the Sudan’s
national action plan established pursuant to resolution
1325 (2000), which has been adopted by the transitional
Government. That is one of the dividends of the
revolution. The advocacy and engagement of women’s
civil society groups and networks should be part of
the monitoring-mechanism process. Furthermore,

S/PV. 8851

civil society groups and networks should be part of
the implementation of the component designed to
protect women from sexual and gender-based violence,
especially in Darfuri IDP camps, with the consultation
and inclusion of women’s protection networks and
groups to assist IDPs in Darfur and conflict zones,
where the process is nationally owned and nationally
led through meaningful participation.
The
peacebuilding-activities
component
is
indispensable to paving the way for Sudanese civil
society, especially women, youth and war-affected
groups, to get engaged in all livelihood activities,
community-building and reintegration during the
transition period. Moreover, peacebuilding activities
will help affected communities to engage in the
national democratic process through consultation and
participation in constitution-making and the local
governance system.
For the United Nations to assist the Sudan in
establishing a national democratic process, it must
help to implement the Juba Peace Agreement so that
people can see the dividends of the Agreement when
it is actually implemented in the ground, especially
in Darfur and conflict zones, in terms of security,
protection, justice and rule of law. Furthermore, it must
help IDPs to return to secured camps and protected
villages, especially in Central Darfur and West Darfur.
In addition, the immediate implementation of security
sector reform is crucial to encouraging the non-signatory
parties to the Peace Agreement to develop trust and
join the current peace talks in Juba. Through inclusive
peacebuilding, which is one of the roles of UNITAMS
with the support of the Security Council, conflicting
Sudanese parties will move through non-violent
dialogue towards democratic transformation to help
shape the Constitution, with armed groups becoming
political parties that would prepare for elections.
Assistance from the Security Council through
UNITAMS is needed to help parties undertake
immediate security sector reform and to fill the
protection gap for civilians and IDPs left by UNAMID.
This assistance should include technical support in
arms control and collection during the security sector
reform process. Capacity-building and gender training
and code of conduct for security sector personnel
must be provided. In terms of transitional justice, a
victim fund providing compensation and reparation
must be established, and psychosocial support for war
victims provided.

21-245097/23

S/PV.8851

United Nations peacekeeping operations

UNITAMS should assist in engaging civil
society in security sector reform and advocacy for a
democratic transformation that will lead to building
a civilian government. It must support building and
enhancing civil society, including youth and women’s
groups, in preparation for elections and consultation
for Constitution-making. It must support the
implementation of the national action plan established
pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000) to attain the
meaningful participation of women at all levels during
the transition. UNITAMS must help the transitional
Government to finish establishing the government
structure in the form of a legislature or parliament
and the appointment of Government commissions, in
particular a peace commission, a women’s commission,
the Constitutional Court and a justice-reform system.
Lastly, as to recommendations, bearing in mind
that we have experienced the presence of civil society,
a peacekeeping mission and a peacebuilding mission
in our territory, we believe that the peacekeeping
mission should be deployed where a final peace is
agreed — not just partial peace. Learning from Darfur
and the current UNITAMS mandate in the Sudan, a
holistic or adaptable approach mixing peacebuilding
and peacekeeping is highly recommended and needed
in the current situation in the region. Such a holistic
approach will help to fill the gaps in IDP and civilian
protection in a fragile security context. We must keep in
mind that without peace no democratic transformation
will take place.
Funding for implementation of the Peace
Agreement, for the development of civil society and for
various peacebuilding activities is crucial. Providing
livelihoods to and the economic empowerment of
youth and women is critical, especially in the current
economic situation in the Sudan.
The mandate of UNITAMS should be reviewed
to include a protection component for the Darfur
region and where a future African Union or United
Nations mission at the highest level can strategically
take on board the lessons learned from UNITAMS
and UNAMID.
In any event, the people of the Sudan will still have
the hope of attaining inclusive peace if the transitional
Government players, on both civilian and military side,
demonstrate the strong political will and desire to make
this change through active dialogue and by setting up
8/23

08/09/2021

a national consultation and engaging women and youth
in the process.
Finally, without the international support that
we enjoyed before, that is, without funding, none
of the foregoing could happen. We therefore thank
the international community for its funding and
security support.
The President: I thank Ms. Adam for her briefing.
I now warmly welcome among us Her Excellency
Ms. Meenakashi Lekhi, Minister of State for External
Affairs of India.
Ms. Lekhi (India): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate Ireland for assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month September 2021. I also
would like to thank the President for convening today’s
important open debate on United Nations peacekeeping
operations with a focus on transitions. This is a timely
initiative on a very significant aspect of peacekeeping,
which we appreciate.
Let me thank the Secretary-General, Mr. António
Guterres, for his comprehensive briefing. I also thank
Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, former President of
Liberia, for sharing Liberia’s experience with respect
to United Nations peacekeeping and the subsequent
transition. India has a unique bilateral relationship with
Liberia, which we deeply value. Let me also express
my appreciation to Ms. Safaa Elagib Adam, President
of the Community Development Association of the
Sudan, for her insights and for bringing the civil society
perspective to today’s debate.
Over the past seven decades, more than 1 million
men and women have served under the United Nations
flag in more than 70 peacekeeping operations. India
joins other delegations in paying tribute to the men
and women who have served and continue to serve
in peacekeeping operations for their professionalism,
dedication and courage. We also remember the 4,089
peacekeepers who have laid down their lives — and the
courage and bravery of India’s 174 peacekeepers who
made the ultimate sacrifice in the line of duty.
India is the largest troop contributor to United
Nations peacekeeping operations in cumulative
terms, and, since their inception has deployed
more than 250,000 peacekeepers across 49 United
Nations missions. That attests to India’s commitment
to contributing a reliable, well-trained and highly
professional peacekeeping force. As of today, nearly
21-24509

United Nations peacekeeping operations

08/09/2021

5,500 Indian peacekeepers are deployed across nine
United Nations missions. India was also happy to
donate vaccines for all United Nations peacekeepers
and upgraded two of its peacekeeping hospitals to
combat the pandemic.
We take pride in the fact that the first-ever all
women peacekeeping contingent was from India and
stationed in Liberia. In virtue of their dedication,
professionalism and motivation, the all-female formed
policed unit proved to be strong, visible role models,
gaining world-wide attention and illustrating the
significant contribution that women can make to global
peace and security. India’s Female Engagement Team
is today also playing an important role in the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
United Nations peacekeeping missions have been
playing an important role in bringing about peace
and stability in countries of deployment, despite
numerous operational challenges. One of the major
operational challenges that continues to hamper
peacekeeping operations has been the transition phase
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. The drawdown
of a United Nations peacekeeping operation and its
reconfiguration into a minimal modified United Nations
presence represents a critical phase for the success of
any United Nations peacekeeping mission. For the host
country, on the one hand, that signals progress towards
political stability and new development opportunities,
but, on the other hand, it also presents a real risk of the
country relapsing into conflict.
The transition of peacekeeping operations and
peacebuilding depends on several factors, including
the way such transitions are envisaged, planned and
executed by the United Nations. In order to be successful,
that critical phase requires the active collaboration
of all stakeholders. That was illustrated by the recent
transition of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur into the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan.
In that context,
several observations.

I

would

like

to

offer

First, effective mandate-delivery by United
Nations peacekeeping missions is critical to achieving
the benchmarks for transitions. Peacekeeping missions
should be given clear, focused, sequenced, prioritized and
practically achievable mandates, and, most important,
they should be matched by adequate resources.

S/PV. 8851

Second, it is important that mission transitions
be well planned, taking into account an objective
assessment of various factors in the host country. The
drawdown of peacekeeping missions should not be driven
by the temptation for austerity. The cost of relapsing
is always much higher than any short-term savings. In
that regard, India welcomes the important advisory,
bridging and convening roles of the Peacebuilding
Commission, especially when the Council is discussing
the mandates of peacekeeping missions.
Third, the primary responsibility to protect
civilians across its territory lies with the host State.
The Council should encourage and support the efforts
of the host State towards the effective implementation
of a national plan for civilian protection.
Fourth, full respect for the sovereignty of a country
can never be over-emphasized. Transition strategies
should recognize the primacy of national Governments
and national ownership in identifying and driving
priorities. The efforts of the host State towards
security sector reform, capacity-building of the police,
justice and correction and the promotion of the rule
of law and good governance need to be supported
and supplemented.
Fifth, a political solution to a conflict is paramount
for achieving stability and sustainable peace.
Political stakeholders should strive for the creation of
political and administrative institutions that improve
governance and inclusiveness and provide equal
political opportunities for women and youth, as well
as marginalized and underprivileged populations.
Reconfigured peacekeeping operations have a crucial
role to play in fostering a positive environment and
encouraging collaboration among all relevant parties.
Sixth, peacekeeping and peacebuilding are not
mutually exclusive. It is important to actively support
the post-conflict peacebuilding and recovery initiatives
of host States. In that regard, the efforts of the United
Nations in peacebuilding should be strengthened
by providing it with adequate financial resources,
if necessary, by engaging international financial
institutions, the private sector and civil society
organizations. I have just returned from a bilateral visit
to Colombia. I saw for myself how the Government
is making commendable efforts towards peace and
reconciliation, with the support of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia.

21-245099/23

S/PV.8851

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Seventh, technology, especially digital technology,
can play a crucial role in post-conflict peacebuilding
to improve public services, promote transparency
in governance, enhance the reach of democracy and
promote human rights and gender sensitivity. India has
been a strong advocate for the urgent need to introduce
new and advanced technology in peacekeeping missions.
In the context of transitions in operations and postconflict peacebuilding, technology is equally relevant.
India’s contributions in the area of human-centric
peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction
work in Africa are well known. India’s fundamental
approach to peacebuilding efforts is to respect national
ownership and be guided by host States’ development
priorities. We are convinced that human-centric,
gender-sensitive and technologically primed solutions
and the robust functioning of democratic institutions
of governance that give all stakeholders a say in
creating a better future are the biggest guarantee for the
success of peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Going
forward, India will continue to be a force multiplier
for peacebuilding, with an emphasis on the humancentric approach.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I express my deep appreciation to Ireland for its
initiative of choosing this important topic for today’s
meeting. I also thank Secretary-General António
Guterres, Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, former President
of Liberia and Ms. Safaa Elagib Adam, President of the
Community Development Association of the Sudan, for
their valuable briefings.
The main purpose of peacekeeping operations
is to end conflicts and achieve sustainable peace that
restores stability and lays the foundation for peaceful
coexistence in an environment of trust among all
parties following the withdrawal of a United Nations
mission at the end of its mandate. We believe that the
cessation of hostilities or violence does not necessarily
mean the end of conflict and the restoration of peace.
History is full of examples of conflicts that are
reignited and revert to the cycle of violence after the
exit of a peacekeeping mission. The transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding is therefore a delicate
and extremely important operation that must be prepared
for thoroughly to create the necessary environment to
ensure the sustainability of the peace process.
Tunisia stresses the pivotal role played by United
Nations missions in creating the conditions necessary
10/23

08/09/2021

to achieve sustainable peace and stability. We believe
that enhancing peacebuilding capabilities after the
exit of such missions must be based on integrated
and coordinated transition strategies that draw on the
gains achieved during the peacekeeping phase and
on supporting national authorities, as needed, in their
efforts to restore basic State functions — such as those
involving policing, the judiciary, public infrastructure,
the provision of basic services and ensuring protection
for civilians — in addition to strengthening the
economy and rebuilding State institutions, all the while
emphasizing the fundamental responsibility of national
Governments to that end.
As Chair of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, Tunisia attaches great importance to the
transition from achieving peace to building peace. We
held a meeting on the topic in December 2020. At the
meeting, we stressed the importance of adopting transition
strategies with clear objectives, based on early planning
and effective coordination among interconnected
United Nations actors, in addition to establishing
parameters and realistic benchmarks that measure the
progress achieved in peacebuilding and provide the
necessary financial and logistical capabilities.
Against that backdrop, Tunisia reiterates the
importance of developing transition strategies for
peacebuilding missions in a participatory and integrated
way, in close consultation with national authorities,
civil society organizations and all components of
society, on the one hand, and regional and subregional
organizations,
relevant
international
financial
institutions and United Nations funds, programmes and
agencies, on the other.
We also stress the importance of the participation
of women and young people as fundamental actors,
especially in enhancing national peacebuilding
capabilities and promoting the culture of peace and
respect for human rights.
Furthermore, we value the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the efforts of the Secretary-General to
reform peacebuilding operations and render them more
efficient and effective through his different initiatives,
which highlight the importance of advancing political
solutions, enhancing the protection of civilians,
promoting the safety and security of peacekeepers
and supporting the participation of women in
peace processes.
21-24509

08/09/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Tunisia will continue to participate actively in
United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations, in which it has been engaged since the
1960s, while emphasizing its commitment to serving
international peace and security.
Ms. Deshong (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
At the outset, I thank His Excellency Secretary-General
Guterres, Her Excellency Mrs. Johnson-Sirleaf and the
President of the Community Development Association
of the Sudan, Ms. Safaa Elagib Adam, for their insightful
remarks. I also commend the Republic of Ireland for
convening this timely discussion. We also welcome the
presence of Her Excellency Minister Lekhi of India.
Peacekeeping engagements are important political
tools that shape and reconfigure the social, economic
and civic landscapes of conflict-affected States.
Despite their indispensable role, peace operations face
a range of impediments that hinder their effectiveness
and performance, including the changing character
of conflict where asymmetric threats, including acts
of terror, improvised explosive devices and other
unorthodox but increasingly sophisticated tactics
are used by combatants; the shifting priorities and
competing political objectives of powerful actors,
both local and foreign, that wield influence over peace
processes; and the prevalence of risk multipliers, such
as climate change, which exacerbate human suffering
and breed new patterns of conflict.
Against that precarious and uncertain backdrop,
mission transitions and exit strategies must always
be conducted with the full consent and consensus
of all stakeholders, particularly that of the host
country. Regular triangular cooperation among the
Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries is essential to ensure that
all drawdowns and transitions are strategically sound.
Exit strategies should never be driven by budgetary
considerations, but rather determined through a
comprehensive review of the situation on the ground.
In all circumstances, the needs and priorities of host
countries must take precedence over any decisions to
withdraw or reconfigure peacekeeping missions.
It is an oft-repeated mantra — but one that
bears reiterating — that the peace and security and
development challenges facing our world today cannot
be solved in isolation of each other, and neither can they
be sufficiently addressed by military means alone.

S/PV. 8851

In all theatres of operation, there is an urgent need
for comprehensive and inclusive development solutions
to reinforce ceasefire agreements, buttress peace
processes and provide conflict-affected countries,
in particular their disenfranchised youth, with viable
opportunities for life, living and production. Peace
dividends provided through sustainable, genderresponsive
and
climate-friendly
development
initiatives pave the way for successful transitions and
sustainable exits.
Through the institutional nexus involving the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council, with the Peacebuilding Commission
playing a bridging, convening and advisory role, greater
coordination, coherence and complementarity across
all peace and security, development, human rights and
humanitarian activities must be pursued. Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines encourages all Member States
and international financial institutions to scale up
their financial support to all peacebuilding initiatives
and mechanisms, including the Secretary-General’s
Peacebuilding Fund.
We also underscore the invaluable commitments of
regional and subregional organizations, especially the
African Union, to peacekeeping and peacebuilding. In
all settings, and at all stages of the conflict cycle, and
we must strive to draw on the immeasurable expertise
of local and regional actors whose political and
community-level engagements are better suited than
externally imposed one-size-fits-all approaches. Their
contributions are crucial when devising, implementing
and evaluating the rule of law, security sector reform
and transitional justice initiatives, which prove vital
to sustainable exits and reconfigurations. Cultural
and religious leaders, academia and civil society
representatives, particularly women, are indispensable
stakeholders for successful transitions.
To conclude, my delegation emphasizes the need
for focused, realistic and actionable mandates for both
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, backed by adequate
resource allocations to achieve the desired political
impact. During drawdowns and mission transitions,
when the risks of relapse into conflict are elevated,
peacekeeping gains should always be supplemented
and safeguarded by comprehensive development and
peacebuilding solutions.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I would like to thank Secretary-General

21-2450911/23

S/PV.8851

United Nations peacekeeping operations

08/09/2021

Guterres as well as former President Johnson-Sirleaf
and Ms. Safaa Elagib Adam for their briefings. Allow
me also to thank Ireland in particular for hosting this
very important discussion on the topic of peacekeeping
transitions. I would also like to take this opportunity to
thank all peacekeepers who take on such important tasks.

stakeholders, the United Nations country team and
international partners, both diplomatically and in the
broader non-governmental organization community.
Key to our vision was ensuring that the Government of
Liberia was also prepared, as was building confidence
in the local security institutions and their services.

During the December 2020 renewal of the
peacekeeping mandate for the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, our top priority was to help formulate
a strategic vision for the Mission. That strategic vision
is our way of challenging ourselves, our fellow Security
Council members and the United Nations itself to
think beyond the mandate to the topic at hand, that
is, transitions.

The United States worked with the Liberian armed
forces, the United Nations and the donor community to
help make the Liberian National Police more responsive
and accountable to the Liberian people. UNMIL
built capacity in Liberia’s courts and trained judicial
personnel to lead institutions that could effectively
protect Liberians. Local efforts to sustain peace were
equally important. Liberian civil society, including
religious leaders, women’s groups and journalists,
worked to prevent and mitigate conflict at the local
level. We worked with local officials to monitor the
Government’s implementation of the peacekeeping
plan. They observed elections to ensure that they were
free, fair and credible. All those efforts were guided
by an inclusive vision and a strategic plan, focused on
addressing the needs and interests of everyday people.
UNMIL worked tirelessly to protect civilians and ensure
a drawdown that did not lead to increased violence.

In order to truly plan for the future of a mission,
including its conclusion, mission leadership must
look beyond the time limitations of the mandate and
plan for what is to come. Peacekeeping missions are
not intended to be permanent, but many have become
just that. A strategic vision means smoother, more
sustainable political transitions with earlier and more
holistic planning across the United Nations system.
No one understands that better than former
President Johnson-Sirleaf, which is why I am so glad
she has joined us here today. I had the great fortune of
working with former President Johnson-Sirleaf while
serving as Ambassador to Liberia, leading up to the
decision to close the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL). I would like to expand on her comments
here today.
After 14 years of a deadly civil war and 15 years
with a peacekeeping force, Liberia held three successive
free and fair elections and successfully turned over
power to a second President in a peaceful transition.
Today Liberia even contributes its own peacekeepers
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, as we heard earlier.
That remarkable transition started with early,
close and frequent coordination among me, the former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Liberia — Ms. Ellen Margrethe Løj — and former
President Johnson-Sirleaf. We knew that UNMIL’s
leaving could cause challenges for stability and safety,
and we therefore developed a vision long before it was
necessary to make that transition. We used that vision to
share a common message with the people of Liberia. We
made sure everyone stayed committed to the purpose.
That meant engaging frequently with civil society, local
12/23

At this point, if I may, I would like to commend
India for providing women peacekeepers. They were
very important as role models for young Liberian women
and girls, who saw the power of women in uniform.
I thank India for that. That also required the United
Nations country team, the host Government and civil
society to step up to create sustainable mechanisms for
protecting civilians after the peacekeepers withdrew.
We hope to see that inclusive approach in Darfur
now that the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) has drawn down
and during upcoming Council discussions regarding
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in Sudan.
Transitions are successful only if they are supported
by committed and accountable host Governments. We
appreciate the reform efforts of the Government of the
Sudan. However, we remain very concerned about the
intercommunal violence occurring in Darfur and the
resulting number of people displaced from their homes.
We urge the Government of the Sudan to implement its
national plan to protect civilians and help ensure that
the transition from UNAMID is a success.
21-24509

08/09/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Successful transitions show the best of what
the United Nations can accomplish and honour the
service of peacekeepers in peacekeeping missions.
But transitions really take real vision and long-term
planning. I hope we can use the lessons learned from
Liberia and Darfur and develop clear strategic visions
focused on the interests of everyday people to guide
future transitions.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening today’s debate. I
also thank the Secretary-General, Her Excellency
Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf and Ms. Adam for their
powerful briefings today.
I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for leading us today in paying tribute to those killed
or injured in the service of the United Nations. Our
peacekeepers serve in some of the most challenging
circumstances — supporting peace processes, protecting
civilians and building the conditions for the transition
to lasting peace. Many make the ultimate sacrifice. We
must therefore ensure that all peacekeepers have the
necessary training, equipment and support, including
the right medical capabilities, to perform at their best.
They should be assured that we have done our utmost to
enable and build on their work.
Last year, the United Kingdom deployed peacekeepers
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), delivering
a capability that directly improves the reach, agility and
responsiveness of the Mission, particularly in protecting
civilians. Working alongside Bangladeshi, Swedish,
Nigerien, Irish and German partners, among others, the
forces of the United Kingdom have engaged with Malian
communities that had never before met United Nations
peacekeepers to understand their needs and concerns.
They have gathered intelligence to support mission
planning and improve overall mission performance and
responsiveness to threats. Peacekeepers from the United
Kingdom, working closely with Mission planners,
have helped Malian officials and civilian human rights
colleagues in MINUSMA to increase their reach — a
powerful example of the military support in the United
Nations system and of promoting local governance.
United Kingdom troops and their partners fulfil our
expectations of peacekeepers — preventing violence,
building host State capacities and laying the foundations
for long-term peace and a sustainable mission transition.
However, no matter how effective our operations,

S/PV. 8851

long-term peace and successful transitions in Mali
and elsewhere rely on finding sustainable political
solutions. That requires our collective, coherent and
consistent response at all levels — multilateral, bilateral
and regional. I welcome the Secretary-General’s focus
on the issue through the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P)
agenda and his A4P+ priorities.
For our peacekeepers’ efforts to be worthwhile,
we must continue reinforcing our support for such
solutions long after peacekeeping missions draw down.
In the Sudan, as we have heard, the establishment of
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in Sudan, following the drawdown of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, has enabled the continuation of international
support to the Sudan’s efforts to build lasting peace and
security in Darfur.
Sustainable transitions require United Nations
peacebuilding structures, the peace and security
architecture and the development system to work
together. The United Kingdom welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s directive to United Nations missions, country
teams and Headquarters entities on early joint planning
and financing, operational support and staffing.
Sustaining peace relies on robust national ownership,
host States building their own capacities, with the right
international support and making plans for transitioning
responsibilities with clear benchmarks for a desired end
state, not an end date.
As we have heard today, the voices of women,
youth and civil society are essential if transitions are
to be sustainable. In Mali, bilateral funding from the
United Kingdom helps increase the participation of
women in the peace process and helps strengthen
civilian coordination in order to facilitate humanitarian
access. More broadly, the United Kingdom is a
strong supporter of the Peacebuilding Fund, having
contributed more than $300 million since its inception.
The combination of peacekeeping efforts and wider
support from the international community are key to
creating the conditions for sustained peace.
Effective transitions require all actors across and
beyond the United Nations system to plan together to
consolidate peace and to follow through in support
of political solutions. In doing so, we can safeguard
the legacy of all our peacekeepers and ensure their
sacrifices are not in vain.

21-2450913/23

S/PV.8851

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Ms. Juul (Norway): First, allow me to thank Ireland
for calling attention to a topic that deserves more focus.
Let me also thank the Secretary-General, President
Johnson-Sirleaf and Ms. Adam for their very pertinent
and informative briefings.
Transitions pose particular challenges for
peacekeeping. To overcome them, it is crucial to sustain
our momentum in the implementation of the SecretaryGeneral’s reform initiative, Action for Peacekeeping.
If we succeed in following up on all eight priority
areas, transitions will be made easier, which ultimately
benefits all parties involved.
As Security Council members, we have a shared
responsibility for crafting mission mandates that call
for planned gradual and sequenced transitions from the
outset. Norway strongly believes that transitions should
depend upon progress along clear political, security,
judicial and humanitarian benchmarks. They should
be based on an exit strategy developed collaboratively
among the United Nations, host State authorities and
civil society. The transition process should be guided by
a view of transitions not as a withdrawal, but rather as a
reconfiguration of the United Nations country presence.
Transitions must therefore entail close coordination
with, and adequate financing of, other United Nations
entities that assume additional functions as missions
draw down. That should include country teams,
resident coordinators and regional offices, as well as
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund. To ensure sustainable peace, transitions
must consolidate progress on all aspects of mission
mandates. Allow me to briefly note four areas of
particular importance.
The first is the protection of civilians. Transitions
can have a destabilizing impact on the security
environment, potentially endangering vulnerable
populations as a mission’s protective capabilities
diminish. It is critical to establish a protective
environment during transitions.
The situation in the Sudan is a case in point.
During a recent visit to the Sudan by our Minister
of Development, the increased level of violence and
alarming protection challenges were highlighted by
all humanitarian partners. That is also reflected in
the Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2021/766) on
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan, where he observes that insecurity
and lack of protection of civilians remain issues of
14/23

08/09/2021

concern. Norway takes note of the steps taken so far by
the Government of the Sudan to implement its national
action plan for the protection of civilians. At the same
time, we would like to stress the urgency of speedy
follow-up and underline the importance of continued
United Nations engagement.
The second area is women, peace and security.
Transitions must be planned and carried out through
inclusive processes that include the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women and are based on
gender-transformative approaches. The aim should be
to consolidate and sustain pretransition gains on the
women and peace and security agenda.
The third area is climate and security. A United
Nations country presence should incorporate the
implications of climate-related security risks in its
reconfiguration strategy. To that end, it must ensure
that adequate analytical and programmatic capacity
remains to support host communities in addressing
risks and building resilience.
The fourth and final area is peace diplomacy. As
the resolution adopted today reaffirms, lasting peace
can be achieved only through political solutions. It is
therefore vital that United Nations support to host-State
peace efforts continue during transitions.
The goal of transitions should be to help host-State
authorities consolidate political and security gains and
sustain peace through strong institutions, the rule of
law, human rights and sustainable development. To
achieve those goals, it is imperative that the Council
continue to advance peacekeeping reform and that we
help consolidate the reforms of the United Nations
development system, in particular the key role of the
reinvigorated resident coordinator system. This will
ensure that we are equipping ourselves to effectively
implement transitions as truly one United Nations.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like
to thank Ireland for taking the initiative to convene
this debate. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, Mrs. Johnson-Sirleaf, the former President of
Liberia, and Ms. Adam for their informative briefings.
I welcome the Minister of State for External Affairs of
India to today’s meeting.
Transition is a crucial phase in the peace continuum
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and sustaining
peace. When United Nations peacekeeping missions
are withdrawn or reconfigured, it is often a sign of
21-24509

08/09/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

progress, indicating the capability and readiness of
post-conflict countries to achieve sustainable and
lasting peace. But transitions also pose challenges and
risks. As mentioned by the Secretary-General, at times
the international community pays less attention and
provides fewer resources and inadequate support to the
country concerned. Socioeconomic instability, lack of
development and existing causes of conflict can risk
reversing hard-won gains. In that regard, we would like
to emphasize the following points.
First, national ownership is of key importance
during transitions. The planning and implementation
of transitions should take into consideration the unique
and specific contexts of the host country. There cannot
be a one-size-fits-all model. Transitions should be a
close collaborative exercise between the United Nations
and the country concerned, with international support.
The goal is for the host country to own its problems and
to develop the capacity to solve them and own its future
in a sustainable way.
The United Nations should adopt a comprehensive
approach in order to tackle the root causes of conflicts
and hostilities, promote State capacities and preserve
achievements. That process should also seek to protect
the role and needs of various socioeconomic actors,
including women, children and other vulnerable groups.
Secondly, continuity and sustainability should
be ensured. Transition can be deemed successful
only when the successes before it are translated into
sustainable successes after it. International assistance
is greatly needed to support the political processes and
national institutions of countries where United Nations
missions are in transition, and must be provided through
consultations, taking into account each country’s
particular circumstances, priorities and needs.
The United Nations should maintain a comprehensive
and coherent role in transition processes and beyond by
remaining closely engaged in supporting the countries
concerned, including through United Nations country
teams, so that they can address the challenges related to
sustaining peace and achieving economic growth and
sustainable development. In particular, assistance can
be enhanced through the Peacebuilding Commission,
which has an important role — to provide advice to
the Security Council and peacebuilding assistance
to States.
Thirdly, cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations should be enhanced. Their in-depth and

S/PV. 8851

unique understanding of their region and the countries
within is critical to addressing international peace and
security challenges. In that connection, regional and
subregional organizations have the potential to provide
support in transition processes, as needed, through
dialogue and coordination with the United Nations,
peacekeeping missions and countries concerned.
On the whole, partnerships between international
and regional and subregional organizations, as well
as among international organizations, including
international financial institutions, should also be
strengthened. New partnership opportunities should be
explored, with a focus on preserving development gains
and strengthening the capacities of countries in fragile
contexts of transition.
In conclusion, we call for enhancing deliberation
on this important issue with a view to ensuring
effective and sustainable transitions in the interest of
peace, stability and development for all countries and
people concerned.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General, President Johnson-Sirleaf and
Ms. Safaa Elagib Adam for their briefings.
France supports the approach of the SecretaryGeneral. The success of transitions indeed depends on
the ability of the actors to meet their responsibilities.
First of all, it is up to the host States to demonstrate
the political will to fulfil their obligations. The
protection of civilians, respect for human rights, the
full participation of women and the restoration of State
services are obviously essential. That is the challenge
facing, for instance, the Sudanese transitional authorities
today, with the support of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
The United Nations, for its part, must meet the
challenge of integration between civilians and soldiers,
consolidation and peacekeeping, and humanitarian and
development actors. France welcomes the emphasis
placed on that objective within the framework of
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and its A4P+
continuity strategy.
Finally, the Security Council itself has the
responsibility of defining strategic orientations
sufficiently upstream and of defining clear mandates
that take into account the reality on the ground. France
is working systematically to that end on all mandates.
Our goal must be to avoid disruptions in terms of

21-2450915/23

S/PV.8851

United Nations peacekeeping operations

international support. In more than 70 years, the United
Nations has established 71 missions, 59 of which have
been completed. These past transitions offer lessons.
We must work upstream in conditions that allow
a withdrawal to be considered at the appropriate
time. Mandates must therefore require support for
strengthening the capacities of States, the restoration
of basic services to populations, the reform of the
security sector and the participation of all in peace
processes. In Mali, for instance, the participation of
women in the implementation of the Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation has improved since that goal
was enshrined in the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali.
We must also endow the special political missions
that take over from peacekeeping operations with the
mandates and resources to effectively support the
authorities of the host State. I am thinking, for example,
of the establishment of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti, which seeks to coordinate the efforts
of the international community and in particular to
maintain support for the police and the judiciary.
It is essential to support the withdrawal of
peacekeeping operations through enhanced cooperation
with United Nations agencies, funds and programmes,
including the Peacebuilding Fund. The liaison office
model set up by UNAMID in Darfur is an example
of flexibility that must be able to continue after the
withdrawal of the peacekeeping operation.
France is convinced that transitions can be
successful only through a partnership with regional
and international players. That is the approach we are
pursuing in the Sahel, where the Coalition for the Sahel
seeks to respond to all the dimensions of the crisis and
to ensure the complementarity of the efforts of the
United Nations, the European Union and the countries
of the region.
Regional engagement is also decisive in the Central
African Republic, where the African Union, the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the International Conference of the Great Lakes Region
play a decisive role, alongside the United Nations,
in supporting the implementation of the Political
Accord for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic.
16/23

08/09/2021

Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ireland, which this year has the
honour of hosting the annual debate on peacekeeping
reform, for drawing attention to the important topic
of transition in peacekeeping operations. We thank
the Secretary-General for his informative briefing
and for the special focus he placed on the key role
of national leadership and national responsibility
in peacebuilding. It is difficult to overestimate the
contribution to the discussion of former President
of Liberia Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, whose country
overcame a very difficult period of conflict and postconflict reconstruction with the active assistance of
the international community. We are also grateful
to Ms. Safaa Elagib Adam for her assessment of the
situation in the Sudan. We welcome the participation of
the Minister of State for External Affairs and Culture
of India, Ms. Meenakashi Lekhi, in today’s exercise.
Every conflict has its own unique set of causes and,
therefore, every individual case requires a delicate and
impartial approach, a patient analysis and a search for
a unique solution, above all at the national level. We
are convinced that high-quality, meticulous political
and mediation efforts play a key role in advancing
international peace and security. Regardless of the form
of international support for a country in conflict — be
it a peacekeeping operation, a political mission or the
good offices of the Secretary-General — such efforts
will be limited in their effectiveness without a
political agreement.
In that regard, we believe that the best
transformation of the mandate of any United Nations
mission is the complete transfer of responsibility
to the State itself, both to prevent and address the
consequences of conflicts, and to sustain peace and
move towards recovery and development, while taking
into account the interests and rights of the country’s
entire population.
Unfortunately, such a result can rarely be achieved,
especially in a short period of time. In today’s world,
peacekeeping operations remain among the most
important tools for ending armed confrontation in
order to create conditions in which the parties can
achieve a definitive reconciliation. The Blue Helmets
help the host country to take the first step on the path
from conflict to sustainable peace and play a key role in
the early stages of peacebuilding. An important part of
peacekeeping mandates is assisting the Government in
establishing control of the territory of an entire country,
21-24509

08/09/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

protecting civilians, strengthening State institutions,
implementing disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes, and reforming the
security sector.
While in recent years peacekeeping mandates
have become excessively complex and include many
non-peacekeeping tasks, we are convinced that
providing States with long-term assistance in the areas
of development and human rights through peacekeeping
organizations is not appropriate.
As peacekeeping missions fulfil their core functions
and stabilize the situation on the ground, they should
be drawn down in a timely manner and transformed
into other formats of international assistance. At the
same time, as missions are downsized or closed, their
continuity must be ensured in order to prevent relapses
into conflict during the transition period. In any case, the
opinion of the host country should be key in considering
the withdrawal of peacekeepers. In that context, we note
the close work undertaken with the Sudanese authorities
to draw down the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and to determine the mandate of
its successor, the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS). We trust
that the activities of UNITAMS will build Khartoum’s
capacity in key areas, in particular peacebuilding,
and will support the conduct of economic reforms,
sustainable security sector reform and the maintenance
of domestic peace and the rule of law. It is important to
build the country’s economic potential to resolve those
key tasks. Supporting the mobilization of resources is
also an important part of the mandate.
We have consistently advocated that international
support for building and sustaining peace, if needed,
should be provided only at the request or with the
consent of the Government, in accordance with its
priorities, without dictates and with unconditional
respect for State sovereignty. We do not believe that
one-size-fits-all or automatic approaches are suitable.
We do not consider it necessary to overburden the
Secretariat and host countries with a predetermined set
of goals and general parameters, which are often not
directly related to the resolution of the crisis situation
in a particular country.
Of course, there is a certain connection between
peace and security, development and human rights, as
enshrined in the resolutions on peacebuilding. However,
that cannot serve as a pretext for mixing the mandates

S/PV. 8851

of United Nations organs and offices of the Secretariat.
In that context, we emphasize the unique role of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), which coordinates
and consolidates the efforts of national and international
actors to achieve long-term peace and development. We
support its work and call for the strengthening of that
important organ of the Organization.
Liberia, as the former Liberian leader noted
earlier, is a unique example of a productive partnership
between the United Nations and national participants
in peacebuilding.
The PBC has also demonstrated its potential to
draw the attention of the international community
to national priorities in the areas of peacebuilding
and development in Liberia, which was in need of
international assistance, and it provided a platform for
moving from theory to practical work in the spheres of
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I would like to
thank the Secretary-General, Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf
and Ms. Safaa Elagib Adam for their briefings.
As the Security Council well knows, the most
difficult thing is not to come between warring parties
and silence the weapons in a conflict, but to leave the
host country in a peaceful climate that is favourable
to recovery and sustainable development. The latter
objectives can only be achieved if peacekeeping
succeeds in leaving the host country authorities
with an environment conducive to peacebuilding.
Indeed, a precipitous withdrawal or a poorly prepared
reconfiguration of peacekeeping missions carries
enormous risks of relapse into violence, which could
wipe out all hopes for peace.
That is why the Security Council, which bears the
heavy responsibility for establishing and dismantling
peacekeeping missions, should first and foremost ensure
that the conditions that would justify disengagement
are sufficiently met before deciding to disengage, since
those decisions and/or timetables are unfortunately
sometimes made in haste, at a time when vulnerable
populations still need the United Nations presence in
their territory.
The Security Council must make a thorough
assessment of the situation on the ground before
taking a decision to withdraw United Nations forces.
It must also take into account the views of local and
international actors on the appropriateness of the

21-2450917/23

S/PV.8851

United Nations peacekeeping operations

withdrawal through success indicators set forth in
their mandates. No United Nations withdrawal should
take place unless national actors have the minimum
capacity to manage transitions themselves, which,
given the fragility of post-conflict environments, must
be carefully planned.
It is clear that the complexity of peace-process
implementation and ensuring that all related activities
are rooted in the country contribute to the stabilization
of a country weakened by conflict. Restoring,
consolidating and maintaining peace — or building
and strengthening State institutions — is a tedious,
time-consuming task. Particular attention must
therefore be paid to how a peacekeeping operation
engages in integrated planning with local and national
authorities, communities, civil society and the United
Nations system as a whole, with a view to ensuring a
successful transition.
As transition is clearly a period of transfer of power
to local authorities, it is crucial that the host country
identify its own priorities and take ownership of the
gains and consolidate them. The reason the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire has often been cited
as an example of a successful transition is that engaged
Ivorian actors took ownership of the peace process in
a meaningful way, developing consensual transition
plans tailored to their needs. The recent transitions in
Liberia in 2018 and in Darfur in 2020 offer lessons that
can significantly contribute to improving transitions,
even though each situation has its own specificities.
In order to obtain the commitment and support
of local populations, they must be associated with all
stages of the peace process. The people must be allowed
to express their concerns, visions and needs. To achieve
this end, it is essential that the United Nations develop
effective communication with all local actors and local
populations in all their diversity.
The planning of an exit strategy must necessarily
be established in symbiosis with the national strategies
they are supposed to support, which implies intense
coordination with all actors — the host country, the
United Nations system and the range of actors involved
in the host country — in the diversity of their activities.
Furthermore, given the impact and role played by civil
society, in particular youth and women, in all their social
organizations and economic and social development
projects, the Council, if it really wants to achieve the
success desired in peacebuilding, must ensure the strict
18/23

08/09/2021

application of all relevant resolutions ensuring civil
society groups’ full and complete participation in the
planning and execution of all strategies.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to remind
the international community, and more specifically
the donor community, of the need to endow transitions
with the substantial financial resources commensurate
with the multidimensional activities that are being
undertaken as well as with all the challenges stemming
from the fragile situations of regions in conflict.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes Ireland’s initiative to hold today’s meeting,
and we thank Secretary-General Guterres and
Mrs. Johnson-Sirleaf for their briefings. I have also
listened carefully to Ms. Safaa Elagib Adam’s briefing.
Peacekeeping operations (PKOs) are an important
means for the United Nations to maintain international
peace and security. A properly formulated and
effectively implemented transition strategy is the key
to the success of peacekeeping operations. It is also a
common topic that requires Council members to take
stock of lessons learned and continuously improve.
We must optimize the overall planning of
peacekeeping operations. PKOS should always follow
the political goals and, based on the evolution of the
situation, make timely adjustments in terms of the
scope of mandates and prioritization.
Protection of civilians, protection of human rights
and transitional justice are all means to serve the
political process, and they cannot replace the political
process itself.
At the early stage of peacekeeping deployment, the
Security Council should incorporate relevant ideas on
peacebuilding and strive to lay the foundations for longterm peace and stability in the countries concerned. As
the situation gradually stabilizes, a clear and feasible
exit strategy needs to be formulated, as this is an
important element in promoting a smooth transition.
Accordingly, the transitions in Timor-Leste, Sierra
Leone, Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia are success stories
for the United Nations. We should make good use of
such positive experiences and proactively promote their
application in new contexts.
We must focus as a top priority on supporting
the countries concerned in nation-building. Countries
emerging from conflicts see their infrastructure
in ruins. The transition from peacekeeping to
21-24509

08/09/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

peacebuilding is the key to national reconstruction,
which is primarily the responsibility of the countries
in question. However, due to their vulnerability and
fragility, post-conflict countries are hardly capable of
independent development during the transitional phase.
The United Nations and the international community
must shoulder the responsibility of providing targeted
support to these countries so as to build and improve
their self-driven development capacity. It should be
emphasized that political and social stability hinges on
steady economic development.
In the transition strategy of peacekeeping
operations, priority should be given to key sectors, such
as infrastructure, agriculture, utilization of resources,
accessibility of education, and poverty eradication,
inter alia, as these are all important components of
the long-term peace and stability of the country.
What transpired recently in Afghanistan is proof
that a “democratic transformation” imposed from the
outside will inevitably end in failure. The international
community and the United Nations should identify
lessons learned and continue to provide effective and
strong support to post-conflict countries, such as
Afghanistan, in their reconstruction efforts.

S/PV. 8851

For many years, China has actively supported
the reconstruction and development of post-conflict
countries, especially developing countries, and has
provided support in the areas of economic development,
education, health and infrastructure, while focusing on
helping them improve their independent development
capacity and achieve a greater level of self-reliance and
self-sufficiency. The China-United Nations Peace and
Development Fund has actively supported the countries
concerned in undertaking collaborative projects,
countering terrorism, peacekeeping, good offices
mediation and sustainable development.
China stands willing and ready to work with the
international community to continue its positive
contribution to helping post-conflict countries in
achieving peace and sustainable development.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I join others in thanking
the Secretary-General, President Johnson-Sirleaf and
Ms. Safaa Elagib Adam for their briefings.

We must persist in the formulation of transition
strategies that are in line with local conditions. Postconflict transitions involve, inter alia, rebuilding State
institutions, national reconciliation and security sector
reform. These are all related to national sovereignty
and cannot be separated from the specific political,
economic and cultural conditions of the country
in question.

The aim of every United Nations peacekeeping
mission is to end and make itself redundant, but,
as past experience has shown, peace requires a
multidimensional approach, which has been adopted by
several United Nations peacekeeping missions. How the
various dimensions enable peace, however, is different
and, as such, require according particular attention
to when and whether to end or transition them. That
makes proper transitions into multi-year processes that
require sustained political, security and programmatic
engagements, bringing together the entire United
Nations system in a different kind of configuration and
United Nations support for the host country.

In designing the transition plan of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation, we should fully heed
and respect the wishes of the country so as to ensure
convergence and complementarity with the national
development strategies and priorities independently
formulated and decided by the countries themselves.
It is also essential to adapt in a timely manner to the
evolving situation on the ground in those countries.

Transition planning has to take into account broad
challenges, including risks to stability, governance and
the rule of law, as well as the political, humanitarian and
human rights context. In that regard, wide coordination
with different stakeholders — including women, youth
and those who protect and promote human rights — is
crucial in order to ensure a successful pivot to postconflict peacebuilding.

In the past 30 years, the United Nations has
organized and deployed several missions in Haiti and
has made a significant investment in there. Yet many
problems pertaining to State governance remain in that
country, which is disappointing. The current model
for Haiti is unsustainable. The Haitian Government
should shoulder its responsibilities and tackle
them independently.

Integrated mission transitions require the transfer
of a multitude tasks to a variety of actors, including
international partners, host Governments and
civil society organizations, while at the same time
maintaining continuity. In the past, drawdowns have at
times occurred amid incomplete political settlements,
persistent threats to civilians and significant social and
economic disparities.

21-2450919/23

S/PV.8851

United Nations peacekeeping operations

08/09/2021

Therefore, greater attention to transitions should be
considered, and there should be periodical reporting on
the status of transitions under way. Past experience has
also demonstrated how changes in the mission footprint
benefit from being accompanied by adequate attention
to corresponding environmental and ecological impacts.
Care must be taken to ensure that environment- and
climate-related security implications are considered in
transition assessments.

The first concerns objectively determining when to
end or substantially modify a mission’s mandate. The
decision to withdraw a mission must not be subject to
considerations that are not linked to the reality on the
ground. Artificial deadlines establishing the end of a
mission must also be avoided. The experience in Haiti,
for example, compels us to ask ourselves whether the
decision to transition to the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti was made at the right time.

The protection of civilians and the promotion of
human rights are central to the United Nations political
strategy and dialogue with host-State authorities, and
they remain just as relevant as the United Nations
strategic goal shifts towards peacebuilding, with hostState authorities shouldering greater responsibility.

The second involves taking into account existing
capabilities so as to ensure the protection of civilians.
As we have seen in the case of the Sudan, the closure of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur has had its challenges in that regard, and some
of its consequences are to be regretted. It is therefore
essential that the actual capacities of national actors on
the ground be taken into account in order to ensure the
protection of civilians and work with them on effective
protection plans.

Finally, the overarching requirement in all
transitions is the importance of national ownership,
whether by the host country, local communities or civil
society partners. As United Nations missions change
their posture, the result should lead not to a reduction
in the safety of people and the stability of peace, but
greater local empowerment and resilience.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We join others in thanking you, Madam
President, for convening this open debate. We are also
grateful for the briefings by the Secretary-General, the
former President of Liberia, Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf,
and the President of the Community Development
Association of the Sudan. In addition, we commend
Ireland for submitting a draft resolution on this issue,
which we have co-sponsored with full conviction
and which we trust will provide greater clarity to the
transition processes of peacekeeping missions.
Peacekeeping operations are key elements to the
peacebuilding architecture. The 2015 and 2020 reviews
on the subject made it abundantly clear that there can
be no development without peace and no peace without
development, and that focusing on the structural causes
of conflicts is crucial to preventing and resolving
them. The evolving nature of conflicts also means that
the focus of the Security Council must turn towards
designing effective and flexible transitions. As we
have seen, transitions can determine the path towards
stability or relapse into violence.
In that context, I should like to raise several points
that pertain to assessing the transition or the reduction
of a peacekeeping operations mandate:
20/23

The third concerns focusing on the civilian aspects
of any transition, from civilian capacity planning,
particularly with regard to capacities in place for the
promotion and protection of human rights, to gender
equality, the rule of law, access to justice, security
sector reform, the proper management of arms and
ammunition, the reduction of community violence,
reconciliation and strengthening electoral systems,
among others.
The fourth concerns the need to involve resident
coordinators and country teams. That is the only way
to ensure inclusive peacebuilding strategies that allow
for the restoration of the social fabric and responding
to the interests of the societies and Governments of the
countries that they are reaching out to. In that regard,
we welcome the fact that, from its inception, the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan was established as an integrated mission.
Fifthly, there is a need to strengthen collaboration
with the Peacebuilding Commission through a
shared responsibility approach. The Commission has
considerable capacity when it comes to convening all
relevant actors in transition contexts and establishing
strategic partnerships with regional organizations. It
also makes it possible to keep conflicts under review
without the perceived pressure of being under the
scrutiny of the Security Council, as in the case of
Guinea-Bissau or Burundi.
21-24509

08/09/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

As has been repeatedly stated, the active
involvement of women, young people and minorities
as central actors in processes to prevent new outbreaks
of violence and to promote political stabilization
is indispensable.
Finally, I would like to note that the recommendations
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
have the great advantage of including the views of
troop- and police-contributing countries in order to
ensure that its proposals align with experiences on the
ground and build on lessons learned.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I want to join others in
thanking His Excellency the Secretary-General, Her
Excellency Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf and Ms. Safaa
Elagib Adam for their insightful briefings. I also
welcome the presence of Her Excellency Ms. Meenakshi
Lekhi, Minister of State for External Affairs of India.
Allow me also to commend you, Madam, for
convening this debate and for leading us this morning in
commemorating all those peacekeepers who have paid
the ultimate sacrifice in the service of peacekeeping.
We honour the memory of those valiant men and
women and pay tribute to every peacekeeper, whether
uniformed or civilian, serving or retired.
Today, peacekeeping largely deals with complex
and protracted intra-State conflicts, often involving
situations of active terrorist or insurgent groups that
deliberately and indiscriminately target civilians and
civilian objects. For peacekeepers to fulfil their mandate
to protect the peace and civilians from such targeting,
they themselves must be safe from being targeted.
In that regard, I reaffirm Kenya’s support for the
innovative efforts of the Secretary-General in his
Action for Peacekeeping and Action for Peacekeeping
Plus initiatives. We associate ourselves in particular
with the key components of those initiatives, including
strengthening protection of civilians, enhancing the
safety and security of peacekeepers, promoting the
women and peace and security agenda and advancing
political solutions.
Kenya is proud to deploy peacekeepers who are
trained for the existing environment. Our International
Peace Support Training Centre is a regional facility
of excellence that offers cutting-edge training in
all aspects of peace support operations in complex
security situations. From dealing with improvised
explosive devices to building effective relations with

S/PV. 8851

local communities, we are committed to growing the
next generation of peacekeepers.
But even as we advocate for effective peacekeeping,
we are drawn to today’s topic on how to better handle
transitions of missions as they exit the theatre. It is our
strongly held conviction that the exit strategy defined
as part of the original mission planning should include
effective transitions. We note that conditions on the
ground evolve, especially as missions take longer
than originally planned. The longer the mission lasts,
the more it impacts the social, economic and political
environment. Disengagement must therefore take that
into account so as to prevent new crises at the local and
national levels.
Allow me to underscore a few points that we believe
should be considered while formulating transitions and
exit strategies in peacekeeping.
First, it must always be borne in mind that
peacekeeping is not a substitute for conflict resolution.
It must be undertaken alongside a well-resourced and
highly prioritized political process to address the root
causes of the conflict.
Secondly, peacekeeping missions create an
economic effect from the supply chains they require.
In time, they become drivers of employment and
production and can have uplifting effects on local
economies. Their departure can have the unintended
effect of employment falloffs, which could be
detrimental to peace and security. Transitions should
therefore be planned and coordinated in collaboration
with national, regional and international economic
development bodies.
Thirdly, peacekeeping by definition is undertaken
in fragile environments that are regarded as politically
risky by investors. Transitions by United Nations
missions should therefore be linked to investment
promotion schemes that actively seek to de-risk
investment and push it to comply with environmental,
social and governance frameworks that are favourable
to maintaining hard-won peace gains. That is where the
Peacebuilding Fund that the Secretary-General referred
to earlier comes in.
Fourthly, the Security Council should draw more
advice from the Peacebuilding Commission to help
ensure that the longer-term perspective required for
sustaining peace is reflected in the formation, review
and reconfiguration of peace operations.

21-2450921/23

S/PV.8851

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Fifthly, the United Nations should, as far as
possible, involve the host country in the negotiation
and formulation of peacekeeping mandates, including
transition aspects, to promote national ownership and
responsibility. In addition, extensive consultations
should be held with key national actors, as well as
regional and international stakeholders.
Finally, as part of ensuring sustained peace in a
post-peacekeeping context, efforts for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants
should be undertaken during and after mission mandates
as the specific situation demands.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ireland.
I want to start by thanking the Secretary-General
for his insightful briefing. The Secretary-General’s
presence at the Council earlier today is a clear
expression of his steadfast support for the thousands
of peacekeepers working to build and sustain peace
around the world. I also want to thank former President
Johnson-Sirleaf. Liberia’s journey from conflict
to peace is a testament to her leadership and to the
transformative impact of United Nations peacekeeping.
Irish troops were proud to serve in her country as part
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia. Finally, I
want to thank Safaa Adam for her powerful testimony.
Her voice, experience and recommendations are what
this Council needs to hear.
For more than six decades, Irish women and men
have served in United Nations peace operations across
the globe. Every community on the island has bid
farewell to a Blue Beret upon deployment and counted
down the days to their return. Some have never made
it home. Today, we remember and honour all those who
have given their lives in the cause of peace.
At its best, United Nations peacekeeping
is a remarkable and meaningful expression of
multilateralism and international solidarity. These
brave women and men work night and day in some
of the world’s most fragile contexts across the globe.
They work to keep safe those who need protection, to
resolve conflict and to create conditions for peace to
thrive. As an Irish woman, I know from the experience
on our island that hard-won peace can be fragile and
that sustained commitment is needed for it to prosper.
The fact is, the end of violent conflict brings with
it an opportunity to deliver sustainable peace, not a
22/23

08/09/2021

guarantee. When that opportunity arrives, it is up to us,
collectively around this table, to be ready and prepared
to grasp it.
Peacekeeping can open the pathway to a peaceful
future. A sustainable transition to peacebuilding can
ensure that we do not falter along the way. Yes, the
challenges are complex; they are interconnected; but
they are not insurmountable. That is why Ireland has
prioritised this issue, not only today but throughout our
Council membership.
The draft resolution that will be voted on tomorrow,
and which many members around this table have already
co-sponsored, sends a clear and united message. It is
the first stand-alone draft resolution on transitions. It
will deliver a road map and a framework for how we
approach and manage this critical and sensitive juncture
in a country’s history.
When the time does come for our peacekeepers to
leave, it is vital that the United Nations system be ready
to step up and to step in. To do that, it is important
that the Council has a shared vision of what that means.
For Ireland, we understand transition as a strategic
process, designed to build towards the reconfiguration
of the United Nations presence in the field. We see it as
a gradual process, enabling and supporting long-term
peacebuilding efforts.
Of course, we should not be naïve. The process
will not always be linear. We have heard today from
our briefers of the enormous challenges that can arise
as circumstances on the ground change. However, with
early and inclusive planning, incorporating a whole-ofUnited Nations approach, and with national ownership
at its core, we can ensure that the foundations for peace
created by peacekeeping are not lost, but rather are
built upon.
Our discussions today are not merely technical
matters. In fact, for thousands of vulnerable people,
they are far from abstract. Those people are depending
on the Council and the United Nations to work with
their Governments to ensure their safety and to protect
them from harm. When the Secretary-General was here,
he highlighted the need for greater attention to be paid
to the protection of civilians during the reconfiguration
of United Nations presences.
We know that States bear the primary responsibility
for the protection of their civilian population. The
Council also has a role to play. It has a responsibility
21-24509

08/09/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

to encourage and support Governments in developing
and implementing national strategies that reflect the
protection needs of all elements of the population. That
means the full participation of local communities and
stakeholders, including women, youth and civil society.
Today’s debate has demonstrated that peace is not
a moment. It is not the signature of a deal, nor is it the
departure of a United Nations peacekeeping mission. It
is a process; it is a commitment. It takes time, planning
and forbearance, and it always takes hope. The Council
must exercise its unique authority to organize, equip
and structure reconfigured United Nations missions in
a way that gives that peace the best possible chance of
success. We owe this to our peacekeepers and to those
they were sent to protect.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

S/PV. 8851

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
I should like to thank once again all of the
participants who have joined us in our discussions
today, including for their recognition of Ireland’s
former President, Mary Robinson, who attended today’s
important debate.
I would also like to thank the following Member
States that have so far submitted written statements
on the subject of today’s discussion: Belgium, Brazil,
Colombia, Fiji, Germany, Indonesia, Japan, Jordan,
Malaysia, Malta, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Switzerland and the United Arab Emirates. We
look forward to receiving more statements. Statements
that are received by the end of today will form part of
the compilation of statements from this meeting.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

21-2450923/23
