A/RES/75/129

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
21 December 2020

Seventy-fifth session
Agenda item 74
Report of the International Court of Justice

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 14 December 2020
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/75/L.48 and A/75/L.48/Add.1)]

75/129.

Trust fund for the Judicial Fellowship Programme of the
International Court of Justice
The General Assembly,
Convinced that States, international and regional organizations, universities and
institutions should be encouraged to increase their activities to promote the teaching,
study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law, in particular those
activities which are of special benefit to persons from developing countries,
Noting that the promotion of international law and its teaching in universities
and institutions of higher education contribute to the progressive development of
international law and to friendly relations and cooperation among States, as well as
to the advancement of the rule of law at the international level,
Commending the International Court of Justice for establishing a Judicial
Fellowship Programme enabling recent law graduates with a special interest in
international law who have been nominated by their university to gain professional
experience at the Court and to improve their knowledge of the peaceful settlement of
disputes through law under the supervision of a member of the Court,
Noting with satisfaction that, since its establishment in 1999, the Judicial
Fellowship Programme of the International Court of Justice has enabled 193 law
graduates to enhance their knowledge of international law, and in particular the
working methods, jurisprudence and practice of the Court,
Noting with concern that financial constraints have impeded the ability of
universities based in developing countries to nominate law graduates and the efforts
of the Court to extend participation in the Programme to law graduates from as wide
a geographical basis as possible,
Emphasizing the need to increase opportunities for law graduates from
universities based in developing countries to participate in the Programme,

20-17078 (E)

281220

*2017078*

Trust fund for the Judicial Fellowship Programme
of the International Court of Justice

A/RES/75/129

Convinced that the establishment of a trust fund to cover the financial costs of
participation in the Programme will increase the number of law graduates nominated
by universities based in developing countries,
1.
Requests the Secretary-General to establish and administer a trust fund for
the Judicial Fellowship Programme of the International Court of Justi ce, in
accordance with the terms of reference as set out in the annex to the present resolution,
through which States, international financial institutions, donor agencies,
intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental organizations and natural and
juridical persons can make voluntary financial contributions in support of the
Programme;
2.
Decides that the resources of the trust fund should be utilized to provide
fellowship awards to eligible nationals of developing countries nominated by
universities based in developing countries and selected by the Court;
3.
Calls upon States, international financial institutions, donor agencies,
intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental organizations and natural and
juridical persons to make voluntary financial contributions promptly and generously
to the new trust fund for the Programme;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to publicize the Programme
and periodically to invite States, international financial institutions, donor agencies,
intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental organizations and natural and
juridical persons to make voluntary financial contributions to the new trust fund or
otherwise assist in the implementation and possible expansion of the Programme;
5.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at
its seventy-sixth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
44th plenary meeting
14 December 2020

Annex
Terms of reference of the trust fund for the Judicial Fellowship
Programme of the International Court of Justice
I.

Establishment
1.
The trust fund for the Judicial Fellowship Programme of the International Court
of Justice is established by the Secretary-General at the request of the General
Assembly.

II.

Background
2.
The International Court of Justice is the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations. It functions in accordance with its Statute which is annexed to the Charter
of the United Nations. The seat of the Court is at the Peace Palace in The Hague, the
Netherlands.
3.
The Court’s role is to settle, in accordance with international law, legal disputes
submitted to it by States and to give advisory opinions on legal questions referred to
it by United Nations organs in accordance with the Charter and by specialized
agencies authorized to do so. The Court is composed of 15 judges, who are elected
for terms of office of nine years by the General Assembly and the Security Council.

2/6

20-17078

Trust fund for the Judicial Fellowship Programme
of the International Court of Justice

A/RES/75/129

It is assisted by the Registry, its administrative organ. Its off icial languages are
English and French.
4.
The Court has always had a special interest in engaging young people in its
judicial activities. The Court has continuously emphasized in its annual reports to the
General Assembly, especially since 2012, the importance of enabling students from a
wide range of geographic and linguistic backgrounds to familiarize themselves with
the work of the Court and develop their skills in the field of the peaceful settlement
of international disputes through the law. This lon g-standing interest of the Court is
in line with several Assembly resolutions in which States, international organizations
and institutions are encouraged to increase their activities to promote the teaching,
study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law, in particular those
activities which are of special benefit to persons from developing countries. 1
5.
Unfortunately, there is no line in the budget of the Court which allows it to fund
temporary stays of recent law graduates at the Court to gain working experience. The
Court was therefore greatly pleased when in 1999 the New York University School of
Law offered to provide fellowship awards to five of its students per year to serve as
university trainees at the Court and to enable these law graduates to gain experience
working under the supervision of a member of the Court. The Court accepted this
offer and established a University Traineeship Programme for this purpose. Under the
terms of the agreement between the Court and New York University, the University
was responsible for providing a monthly fellowship award to the selected candidates
for the 10-month duration of their training at the Court.
6.
In the following years, the Court sought to expand the University Traineeship
Programme to other universities. Therefore, the Court invited other universities to
nominate candidates to the Programme. Thanks to these efforts, between 2002 and
2015, a number of universities joined and started to nominate candidates for the
Programme. To enlarge even further the number of participating universities,
participation in the Programme was opened in 2015 to all universities with law
faculties, which have been invited every year since 2016 to nominate candidates
through a call for applications posted on the website of the Court.
7.
In 2017, the Court changed the name of the University Traineeship Programme
to that of “Judicial Fellowship Programme” to reflect more ac curately the nature of
the activities in which the fellows are required to participate at the Court.
Nonetheless, the Judicial Fellowship Programme retained the key features of the
University Traineeship Programme.
8.
The Judicial Fellowship Programme is an apprenticeship programme which
enables recent law graduates to develop their skills in the field of the peaceful
settlement of international disputes through the law. It aims to improve participants’
understanding of international law and the Court’s pr ocedures by actively involving
them in the work of the Court. Each fellow is assigned to one judge for a period of
around 10 months, from early September to June or July of the following year. During
this period, participants attend public hearings of the Court, research and write
memorandums on legal questions or factual aspects of pending cases and are involved
in other aspects of the Court’s work. Each participant works alongside an associate
legal officer, who is the primary legal assistant of a judge a nd is employed by the
United Nations.
9.
The Court accepts up to 15 fellows a year, with no more than one from each
nominating university. The Court looks for candidates who have achieved excellent
__________________
1

20-17078

See, for example, the twelfth preambular paragraph of resolution 74/185 on the United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of
International Law.
3/6

Trust fund for the Judicial Fellowship Programme
of the International Court of Justice

A/RES/75/129

results in their law studies and who have demonstrated an interest in international law
through their studies or publications. Candidates are usually in the early stages of
their legal careers. In making its selection, the Court seeks to choose candidates of
various nationalities.
10. To date, all candidates have been nominated and sponsored by their respective
universities, which undertake to fund the stipend, health insurance and travel costs of
the candidate, if selected.
11. Over the years, it has become clear to the Court that the fact that participating
universities are expected to provide a stipend to the students they nominate has tended
to exclude less-endowed universities, particularly those based in developing
countries, from nominating candidates, thus limiting the possibility for the Court to
select fellows from a number of geographical regions. As a result, otherwise eligible
students, who do not attend well-endowed universities based in developed countries,
do not have the opportunity to participate in the Programme.
12. From 2000 to 2019, a total of 193 fellows participated in the Programme; 95 per
cent were sponsored by universities based in countries of the Group of Western
European and other States. During the same period, no fellows were sponsored by
universities in Africa and Eastern Europe. Only one fellow (0.5 per cent) was
sponsored by a university in Latin America and the Caribbean, and eight fellows
(4 per cent) were sponsored by universities in the Asia-Pacific region. Of the
193 fellows, the overwhelming majority (68 per cent) were natio nals of countries of
the Group of Western European and other States. Only 11 fellows (5 per cent) were
nationals of Eastern European countries, 13 (6 per cent) of African countries,
17 (8 per cent) of Latin American and Caribbean countries and 30 (13 per c ent) of
Asia-Pacific countries.
13. As the above statistics demonstrate, there is a need to establish a mechanism
which would offer universities based in developing countries an opportunity to
participate in the Programme on a sustainable basis and to nom inate students who
may be selected as judicial fellows by the Court. This would correct the current
imbalance in the Programme which might otherwise be perceived as catering only to
law graduates from a limited number of countries and the universities base d therein.
However, similar to any other activity involving the Court, such a mechanism should
be compliant with the requirements of the Statute and Rules of the Court.
Accordingly, the contemplated mechanism should not entail that the Court engages
with individual Member States to mobilize contributions for its Judicial Fellowship
Programme. In addition, the mechanism should not allow States who wish to support
the Programme to offer or to make direct payments to the Court.
14. It is proposed that such a mechanism take the form of the trust fund established
by the Secretary-General at the request of the General Assembly. The regulations of
the trust fund will have to comply with the requirements of independence and
impartiality of the Court in accordance with its Statute, while making it capable of
providing an opportunity to young law graduates, from universities based in
developing countries, to participate in the Programme.
III.

Purpose
15. The purpose of the trust fund is to grant fellowship awards to selected candidates
who are nationals of developing countries from universities based in developing
countries, thereby guaranteeing the geographic and linguistic diversity of the
participants in the Programme.
16. The award will consist of a monthly stipend and will cover travel and health
insurance costs. It should be sufficient to provide for a minimum standard of

4/6

20-17078

Trust fund for the Judicial Fellowship Programme
of the International Court of Justice

A/RES/75/129

accommodation and subsistence in The Hague, in order to ensure that recipients can
fully benefit from their participation in the Programme without the burden of financial
hardship.
IV.

Authority
17. The trust fund will be administered in conformity with the applicable United
Nations financial regulations, rules, policies and procedures.

V.

Contributions to the trust fund
18. Contributions to the trust fund can be made by States, intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, national institutions, bar associations, private
institutions and individuals, and other appropriate entities.
19. Cash contributions to the trust fund may be accepted in fully convertible
currencies. Such contributions will be deposited into the designated bank account.
20. The making of a pledge and its acceptance are to be recorded in an exchange of
letters, and in a more formal agreement if requested by the donor.
21. Any interest income derived from contributions to the trust fund will be credited
to the trust fund.

VI.

Administration
22. The trust fund will be administered by the Secretary-General. The Court may be
associated with the performance of certain administrative functions of a general
nature entailed by the management of the trust fund. However, the modalities for the
administration of the trust fund should not require the Court to directly engage with
individual Member States to mobilize contributions to the trust fund or to be directly
involved in the administration of the financial resources collected.

VII.

Application for the fellowship award
23. Universities based in developing countries that cannot afford to sponsor fe llows
that are nationals of developing countries may apply for a fellowship award for their
candidates when nominating them for the Programme in accordance with the
procedures established by the Court.

VIII.

Selection of the recipients and granting of the fellowship award
24. The Court will draw up and publicize the eligibility criteria for the fellowship
award.
25. The Court will select the recipients of the award from the list of candidates who
meet the standard eligibility criteria for the Programme.
26. The Court will make its final selection taking into account the available
resources in the trust fund and the number of qualified candidates in respect of whom
applications for the award have been made.

IX.

Reporting
27. The Secretary-General will provide an annual financial statement for the trust
fund showing income and expenditures as at 31 December of each y ear and detailing
the funds pledged and received.
28.

20-17078

All accounts and financial statements will be expressed in United States dollars.
5/6

Trust fund for the Judicial Fellowship Programme
of the International Court of Justice

A/RES/75/129

29. The Secretary-General will prepare a substantive progress report on
implementation as required by the General Assembly.
X.

Programme support costs
30. In accordance with the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations,
programme support costs will be charged to the trust fund. In addition, the trust fund
operating reserve will be applied within the cash resources of the trust fund to cover
any delays in payments of contributions and to meet final expenditures of the
activities covered from the trust fund. The trust fund operating reserve is calculated
as a percentage of the estimated annual expenditures.

XI.

Audit
31. The trust fund is exclusively subject to the internal and external auditing
procedures provided for in the United Nations financial regulations, rules and
policies.

XII.

Closure of the trust fund
32. Should it be decided to close the trust fund for any reason, any balances for each
donor remaining at the time the trust fund is terminated will be disposed of in
consultation with the donor, and in a manner consistent with the purpose of the trust
fund and with the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations.

6/6

20-17078
