A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/178
2 March 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 100 (a)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/610/Add.1)]
49/178.

Effective implementation of international instruments
on human rights, including reporting obligations under
international instruments on human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 48/120 of 20 December 1993, as well as other
relevant resolutions,
Reaffirming that the effective implementation of United Nations human
rights instruments is of major importance to the efforts of the Organization,
pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 1/ to promote universal respect for and observance of human
rights and fundamental freedoms,
Conscious of the importance of coordination of human rights promotion
and protection activities of United Nations bodies whose activities deal with
human rights,
Reaffirming its responsibility to ensure the proper functioning of
treaty bodies established pursuant to instruments adopted by the General
Assembly and, in this connection, reaffirming the importance of:
(a)
Ensuring the effective functioning of systems of periodic
reporting by States parties to these instruments;
(b)
Securing sufficient financial and human resources to overcome
existing difficulties with their effective functioning;
(c)
Addressing questions of both reporting obligations and financial
implications whenever elaborating any further instruments on human rights,

1/
95-77047

Resolution 217 A (III).
/...

A/RES/49/178
Page 2

Taking note of the conclusions and recommendations of the fifth meeting
of persons chairing the human rights treaty bodies, held at Geneva from 19 to
23 September 1994, 2/
Noting with appreciation the initiatives taken by a number of treaty
bodies to elaborate early warning measures and urgent procedures with a view
to preventing the occurrence, or recurrence, of serious human rights
violations,
Expressing concern about the increasing backlog of reports on
implementation by States parties to United Nations instruments on human rights
and about delays in the consideration of reports by the treaty bodies,
Expressing concern also about the non-fulfilment by many States parties
of their financial obligations under the relevant United Nations instruments
on human rights,
Recalling the reports of the meetings of persons chairing the human
rights treaty bodies from 1988 to 1993 and the endorsement of the
recommendations aimed at streamlining, rationalizing and otherwise improving
reporting procedures by the General Assembly in its resolution 48/120,
Taking note of the relevant paragraphs of the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action, adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25
June 1993, 3/
Taking note also of the reports of the Secretary-General 4/ on
progress achieved in enhancing the effective functioning of the treaty bodies,
and of the note by the Secretary-General 5/
Welcoming the contribution to the work of the human rights treaty bodies
made by the specialized agencies and other United Nations bodies,
1.
Welcomes the submission of the report of the fifth meeting of
persons chairing the human rights treaty bodies, and takes note of the
conclusions and recommendations in the report; 2/
2.
Welcomes also the continuing efforts by the treaty bodies and the
Secretary-General, within their respective spheres of competence, aimed at
streamlining, rationalizing and otherwise improving reporting procedures;
3.
Again urges States parties to make every effort to meet their
reporting obligations and to contribute, individually and through meetings of
States parties, to identifying and implementing ways of further streamlining
and improving reporting procedures;
4.
Urges the treaty bodies to examine ways of reducing the
duplication of reporting required under the different instruments and of
generally reducing the reporting burden on Member States, including through:

2/

A/49/537, annex, sect. IV.

3/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

4/

A/44/539, A/46/503 and A/48/508 and Corr.1.

5/

A/49/537.
/...

A/RES/49/178
Page 3

(a)

Identifying where cross-referencing can be used in report writing;

(b)
Recommending, where appropriate, the designation of specific
national administrative units to coordinate reports to all treaty bodies;
(c)
Establishing coordination between the treaty bodies and the
International Labour Organization to identify overlap between respective
instruments and conventions;
(d)
Considering the utility of single comprehensive reports and of
replacing periodic reports with specifically tailored reports and thematic
reports;
5.
Welcomes the emphasis placed by the meeting of persons chairing
the human rights treaty bodies and by the Commission on Human Rights on the
importance of technical assistance and advisory services and, further to this
end:
(a)
Requests that the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights report regularly to the Commission on possible technical assistance
projects identified by the treaty bodies;
(b)
Invites the treaty bodies to give priority attention to
identifying such possibilities in the regular course of their work of
reviewing the periodic reports of States parties;
(c)
Invites States parties that have been unable to comply with the
requirements to submit their initial report to avail themselves of technical
assistance;
6.
Urges States parties to address, as a matter of priority, at their
next scheduled meetings, the issue of States parties consistently not
complying with their reporting obligations;
7.
Urges all States parties whose reports have been examined by
treaty bodies to provide adequate follow-up to the observations and final
comments of the treaty bodies on their reports;
8.
Invites the specialized agencies and other United Nations bodies
and the human rights treaty bodies to develop effective means for further
cooperation between them, bearing in mind the responsibilities of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;
9.
Invites the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
consult the human rights treaty bodies in relation to his efforts to promote
cooperation with regional intergovernmental organizations for the promotion
and protection of human rights;
10.
Welcomes the emphasis by the persons chairing the human rights
treaty bodies on the need for the enjoyment of the human rights of women to be
closely monitored by each treaty body within the competence of its mandate,
and endorses the recommendation by the chairpersons that each treaty body
consider amending its reporting guidelines to request gender-specific
information from States parties;
11.
Recognizes the important role played by non-governmental
organizations in the effective implementation of all human rights instruments;
12.
Endorses the recommendations of the meetings of persons chairing
the human rights treaty bodies on the need to ensure financing and adequate
/...

A/RES/49/178
Page 4

staffing resources for the operations of the treaty bodies and, with this in
mind:
(a)
Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General provide adequate
resources in relation to the various treaty bodies;
(b)
Requests that the Secretary-General report on this question to the
Commission on Human Rights at its fifty-first session and to the General
Assembly at its fiftieth session;
13.
Urges States parties to notify the Secretary-General, as
depository of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination 6/ and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 7/ of their acceptance of the
amendments approved by the States parties, and by the General Assembly in its
resolution 48/120;
14.
Calls upon all States parties to fulfil without delay and in full
their financial obligations, including their arrears, under the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment until the amendments enter into force;
15.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take the necessary
measures to ensure that the two committees established under the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment meet as scheduled until the amendments enter into force;
16.
Takes note of the recommendation by the meeting of persons
chairing the human rights treaty bodies that the Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women should be allocated additional meeting time
until the backlog of pending reports has been eliminated, and that the
Secretary-General should allocate sufficient resources from the existing
regular budget of the United Nations to the Committee; 8/
17.
Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
acting within his mandate as set out in General Assembly resolution 48/141 of
20 December 1993, to ensure the preparation of an inventory of all
international human rights standard-setting activities from within existing
resources, in order to facilitate better-informed decision-making;
18.
Welcomes the recommendation by the meeting of persons chairing the
human rights treaty bodies 9/ that treaty bodies should urge the States
parties to translate, publish and make available to the media the full text of
the concluding observations on their reports to the treaty-monitoring
bodies, and requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
ensure that recent reports and the summary records of committee discussions
pertaining to them, as well as concluding observations and final comments of

6/

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

7/

Resolution 39/46, annex.

8/

See A/49/537, annex, paras. 49-51.

9/

Ibid., para. 44.
/...

A/RES/49/178
Page 5

the treaty bodies, are made available in the United Nations information
centres in the countries submitting those reports;
19.
Invites the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat to
publish at the end of each year, from within existing resources, as a separate
volume, a compilation of all concluding observations adopted during that year
by treaty bodies;
20.
Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
ensure, from within existing resources, that the United Nations Manual on
Human Rights Reporting is available in all official languages at the earliest
opportunity and that due regard is paid to the recommendations concerning the
Manual made by the fifth meeting of the persons chairing the human rights
treaty bodies; 10/
21.
Welcomes all appropriate measures the human rights treaty bodies
may take, within their mandates, in response to situations of massive human
rights violations, including bringing those violations to the attention of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as the SecretaryGeneral and the competent bodies of the United Nations in the field of human
rights, and requests the High Commissioner, acting within his mandate, to
coordinate and consult throughout the United Nations system in this regard;
22.
Requests the Secretary-General to take the appropriate steps in
order to finance, as of 1995, annual meetings of persons chairing the human
rights treaty bodies from the available resources of the regular budget of the
United Nations;
23.
Decides to continue giving priority consideration, at its fiftieth
session, to the conclusions and recommendations of the meetings of persons
chairing human rights treaty bodies, in the light of the deliberations of the
Commission on Human Rights, under the item entitled "Human rights questions".
94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994

10/

Ibid., para. 57.
