A/RES/74/275

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
29 May 2020

Seventy-fourth session
Agenda item 117
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 28 May 2020
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/74/L.66 and A/74/L.66/Add.1)]

74/275.

International Day to Protect Education from Attack
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that everyone has the right to education, and recalling in that regard
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 2 the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees, 3 the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949, 4 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, 5 the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 6 the Convention on the Rights of the Child 7 and
the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 8
Reaffirming also its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled
“Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which
it committed to providing inclusive and equitable quality education at all levels – early
childhood, primary, secondary, tertiary, technical and vocational training; all people,
irrespective of sex, age, race or ethnicity, and persons with disabilities, migrants,
indigenous peoples, children and youth, especially those in vulnerable situations,
should have access to lifelong learning opportunities that help them to acquire the
knowledge and skills needed to exploit opportunities and to participate fully in
society,

__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
4
Ibid., vol. 75, No. 973.
5
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
6
Ibid., vol. 660, No. 9464.
7
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
8
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
1
2

20-07227 (E)

020620

*2007227*

A/RES/74/275

International Day to Protect Education from Attack

Recalling its resolution 64/290 of 9 July 2010 on the right to education in
emergency situations, in which it condemned the targeting of civilians as such in
situations of armed conflict, including schoolchildren, students and teachers, as well
as attacks on civilian objects such as educational institutions, where prohibited under
international law, recognized that such acts may constitute grave breaches of the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 9 and, for States parties, war crimes under the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, 10 and reminded all parties to armed
conflict of their obligations under international law to refrain from the use of civilian
objects, including educational institutions, for military purposes and child
recruitment,
Recognizing the importance of ensuring inclusive and equitable quality
education and promoting lifelong learning opportunities for all,
Emphasizing the need to take steps to achieve the full realization of the right to
education for all children and, in particular, to take all feasible measures to protect
schools from attacks, as well as persons entitled to protection in relation to them in
situations of armed conflict, to refrain from actions that impede children’s access to
education, and to facilitate access to education in armed conflict,
Expressing particular concern that many children in armed conflict, in
particular girls, lack access to education owing to attacks against schools, damaged
or destroyed school buildings, mines and unexploded ordnance, insecurity, the
prevalence of violence, including gender-based violence, in and around schools and
loss of documentation,
Noting efforts aimed at promoting and protecting the right to education and
facilitating continuation of education in armed conflict, including the efforts of
Member States that are signatories to the Safe Schools Declaration,
Recalling its resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of
20 December 2006 on the proclamation of international years and Economic and
Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on international years and
anniversaries,
Expressing its dismay at the aggravation of attacks on educational institutions,
their students and staff, in contravention of international humanitarian law,
recognizing the grave impact that such attacks have on the full realization of the right
to education, in particular of women and girls, and reiterating its condemnation in the
strongest terms of all such attacks, 11
Profoundly concerned about the growing number of attacks and threats of
attacks against schools, and recognizing the grave impact of such attacks on children’s
and teachers’ safety, as well as on the full realization of the right to education,
expressing its concern also that the military use of schools in contravention of
applicable international law may also affect the safety of children and teachers and
the right of the child to education, and encouraging all States to strengthen efforts to
prevent the military use of schools in contravention of international law,
Deeply concerned that school-related violence against girls, including sexual
violence and harassment on the way to and from and at school, such as violence
perpetrated by teachers, continues to deter girls’ education and, in many cases, the
transition to and completion of secondary education, and that these risks may
influence parents’ decision to allow girls to attend school,
__________________

Ibid., vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
Ibid., vol. 2187, No. 38544.
11
See resolution 70/137.
9

10

2/3

20-07227

International Day to Protect Education from Attack

A/RES/74/275

Urging all parties to armed conflict to fulfil their applicable oblig ations under
international humanitarian law and international human rights law, including to
respect civilians, including students and educational personnel, and civilian objects
such as educational institutions,
Calling upon all Member States, including donors, and inviting the private
sector and all concerned individuals and institutions to continue to support diverse
humanitarian funding channels and to consider increasing their contributions to
education programmes defined in humanitarian appeals, including humanitarian
consolidated and flash appeals, based on and in proportion to assessed needs, as a
means of ensuring adequate, timely, predictable, flexible and needs-based resources,
Noting the work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict on the six grave violations committed against children
in armed conflict,
1.
Decides to proclaim 9 September the International Day to Protect
Education from Attack;
2.
Reaffirms the right to education for all and the importance of ensuring safe
enabling learning environments in humanitarian emergencies, as well as quality
education at all levels, including for girls, including technical and vocational training
opportunities, where possible, including through adequate funding and infrastructural
investments, for the well-being of all, in this regard recognizes that access to quality
education in humanitarian emergencies can contribute to long-term development
goals and reiterates the need to protect and respect educational facilities in accordance
with international humanitarian law, strongly condemns all attacks directed against
schools and the use of schools for military purposes, when in contravention of
international humanitarian law, and encourages efforts to promote safe and protective
school environments in humanitarian emergencies;
3.
Invites all Member States, organizations of the United Nations system,
other international and regional organizations, the private sector and civil society,
including non-governmental organizations, academic institutions, individuals and
other relevant stakeholders, to observe the International Day to Protect Education
from Attacks in an appropriate manner;
4.
Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the United Nations Children’s Fund to facilitate the observance of
9 September of every year as the International Day to Protect Education from Attack,
mindful of the provisions contained in the annex to Economic and Social Council
resolution 1980/67;
5.
Stresses that the cost of all activities that may arise from th e
implementation of the present resolution should be met from voluntary contributions;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the
attention of all Member States, the organizations of the United Nations system and
other relevant stakeholders for appropriate observance.
28 May 2020

20-07227

3/3
