S/PV.9207

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9207th meeting

Monday, 5 December 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Raguttahalli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Leite Novaes
Mr. Liang Hengzhu
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Bouanga Ayoune
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Brady
Ms. Ndegwa
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Syed
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Al-Ali
Mr. Phipps
Mr. Kelley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 30 November 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2022/897)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-72208 (E)
*2272208*

S/PV.9207

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 30 November 2022 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/897)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/897, which contains the text of a letter
dated 30 November 2022 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I thank Security Council
members for the opportunity to brief them again on
the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), on the
elimination of the chemical weapons programme of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Since the previous consideration of this matter
by the Council (see S/PV.9184), and consistent with
established practice, the Office for Disarmament Affairs
has been in regular contact with its counterparts at the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) on its activities related to resolution 2118
(2013). On 22 November, I held my usual monthly call
with the OPCW Director-General to receive an update
on developments and ascertain his views.
Efforts by the OPCW Declaration Assessment
Team (DAT) to clarify all outstanding issues regarding
the initial declaration and subsequent declarations of
the Syrian Arab Republic have not progressed since the
Council last met on this issue. Unfortunately, all efforts
by the OPCW Technical Secretariat to organize the
2/14

05/12/2022

next round of consultations between the DAT and the
Syrian National Authority continue to be unsuccessful.
As Council members were previously informed, the
OPCW Technical Secretariat has provided the Syrian
Arab Republic with the list of pending declarations
and other documents requested by the DAT since 2019,
with the aim of assisting the Syrian Arab Republic in
resolving the current 20 outstanding issues. However, I
have been advised that the OPCW Technical Secretariat
has not yet received the requested information from the
Syrian Arab Republic.
I have also been advised that, with the aim of
advancing the implementation of the OPCW Technical
Secretariat’s mandate, the Technical Secretariat
proposed to hold a meeting with the Syrian Arab
Republic in Beirut in November to identify limited
in-country activities in line with the plan of activities
agreed in 2019, to receive declarations or documents
it had previously requested and to provide the Syrian
National Authority with the results of the analysis
of samples collected in April 2019, together with an
assessment of an outstanding issue opened in 2016.
However, it is my understanding that efforts by the
OPCW Technical Secretariat to convene that meeting
were unsuccessful. The Technical Secretariat informs
me that it will continue to engage on the matter and
will revert to the Syrian National Authority on
ways to implement the mandate it received from the
policymaking organs.
I note that, in November, the Syrian Arab Republic
submitted to the OPCW Technical Secretariat the
document entitled “The General National Document
Regarding the Cooperation of the Syrian Arab Republic
with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) Between 2013 and 2022”. I have
been advised that the OPCW Technical Secretariat
will circulate that document once it is translated
and analysed.
Full cooperation by the Syrian Arab Republic
with the OPCW Technical Secretariat is essential to
closing all outstanding issues. As has been stressed
on a monthly basis for many years now, due to the
identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies that
remain unresolved, the Technical Secretariat continues
to assess that, at this stage, the declaration submitted
by the Syrian Arab Republic cannot be considered
accurate and complete in accordance with the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
22-72208

05/12/2022

The situation in the Middle East

The OPCW Technical Secretariat remains fully
committed to ensuring the complete implementation
by the Syrian Arab Republic of all its declaration
requirements and to assisting Syria in fulfilling its
obligations under the Convention, OPCW policymaking
organs’ decisions and resolution 2118 (2013). I take this
opportunity to once again reiterate my support for the
integrity, professionalism, impartiality, objectivity and
independence of the work of the OPCW.
With regard to the inspections of the Barzah
and Jamrayah facilities of the Scientific Studies and
Research Centre, I have been advised that the round
of inspections scheduled for December was postponed
due to operational reasons. The OPCW Technical
Secretariat has started planning the next round of
inspections, to be held in 2023.
I regret to inform the Council that the Syrian Arab
Republic has not yet provided sufficient technical
information or explanations that would enable the
OPCW Technical Secretariat to close the issue related
to the detection of a Schedule 2 chemical at the Barzah
facilities of the Scientific Studies and Research Centre in
November 2018. Neither has it received the information
requested from the Syrian Arab Republic regarding the
unauthorized movement of the two cylinders, related to
the chemical-weapon incident that took place in Douma
on 7 April 2018, that were destroyed in an attack on
a chemical-weapon production facility. I call on the
Syrian Arab Republic to respond with urgency to all of
the OPCW Technical Secretariat’s requests.
With regard to the invitation to an in-person
meeting extended by the OPCW’s Director-General to
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the
Syrian Arab Republic, I note that while the Technical
Secretariat was still awaiting a response from the
Syrian Arab Republic on the most recent version of the
agenda, submitted in December 2021, the Syrian Arab
Republic suggested holding a preliminary meeting
in Beirut. Since then, as Council members were
previously informed, communication between the focal
points in charge of the preparations for the meeting
between the Director-General and the Minister has
been reinitiated by the Technical Secretariat, and the
Syrian Arab Republic has responded. With regard to
the tripartite agreement concluded among the OPCW,
the United Nations Office for Project Services and the
Syrian Arab Republic, it is my understanding that all
the parties have agreed to sign a further extension for a
period of six months.

S/PV.9207

As per previous briefings to the Council, the
OPCW Fact-Finding Mission (FFM) is still in the
process of studying all the available information related
to allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the
Syrian Arab Republic. I have been advised that the
FFM was deployed to the Syrian Arab Republic from
6 to 12 November to conduct interviews with witnesses
regarding several of the incidents under review. I
understand that the Investigation and Identification
Team (IIT) is continuing its investigations into incidents
in which the FFM has determined that chemical weapons
were used or likely used in the Syrian Arab Republic.
The IIT will issue further reports in due course.
With regard to the decision entitled “Addressing
the Possession and Use of Chemical Weapons by the
Syrian Arab Republic” (C-25/DEC.9), adopted on
21 April 2021, I have been informed that unfortunately
the Syrian Arab Republic has not yet completed any
of the measures stipulated in paragraph 5 of decision
EC-94/DEC.2. The OPCW Technical Secretariat will
continue to engage with the Syrian Arab Republic with
regard to their completion and to report to the OPCW
Executive Council, as mandated.
The use of chemical weapons anywhere, by
anyone, under any circumstances is intolerable and a
serious violation of international law. There can be no
justification for the use of those abhorrent weapons. We
must remain united and determined in preventing their
use or the threat of their use. It is imperative that those
who use, or have used, chemical weapons be identified
and held accountable. As the Secretary-General
urged on the Day of Remembrance for all Victims of
Chemical Warfare, commemorated on 30 November,
we must honour them and reaffirm our commitment to
achieving a world free from that threat.
The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kelley (United States of America): I thank
High Representative Nakamitsu for her informative
briefing. We appreciate her persistent efforts, as well
as those of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), to provide independent,
thoroughly researched and detailed information
about serious progress, or the lack thereof, towards
Syria’s complete and verifiable elimination of its
chemical-weapons programme.

22-722083/14

S/PV.9207

The situation in the Middle East

As we saw last week at the twenty-seventh
session of the Conference of the States Parties to
the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), the
international community overwhelmingly supports
continuing to hold the Al-Assad regime to account
for its use of chemical weapons against civilians,
including many children. Those efforts must continue.
The OPCW Director-General was quite clear in his
opening statement to the Conference that the Syrian
regime has made no effort to resolve the outstanding
discrepancies with its declaration or taken any steps to
ensure the verified destruction of its chemical-weapons
programme. We were grateful to our French colleagues
for delivering a statement on behalf of 57 countries at
the Conference, reminding Syria of its obligations under
the CWC and rightly admonishing it for its appalling
lack of cooperation with the OPCW. Unfortunately,
obfuscation and delay continue to be the only terms
we can use to describe the Al-Assad regime’s effort to
address its chemical-weapon stockpiles.
Just last month, the regime agreed to a meeting with
the OPCW Technical Secretariat in Beirut to identify
opportunities for the OPCW Declaration Assessment
Team to conduct activities within Syria in the coming
months. Despite initially accepting the invitation,
the Al-Assad regime promptly sank any prospect for
engagement by stating that it would not attend unless
the OPCW Technical Secretariat paid for the travel
of Syrian officials — a request that the regime knew
the OPCW could not fulfil. Such antics have become
typical of the regime’s approach to the OPCW and the
Declaration Assessment Team. That such a meeting
even needed to occur in Beirut, rather than the Team
visiting Syria itself, demonstrates how unnecessarily
difficult the regime has chosen to make the process.
Given Syria’s track record, it has had to amend its
declaration of chemical weapons 17 times at the behest
of the Declaration Assessment Team. The OPCW will
have to corroborate any further Syrian declarations
with on-the-ground follow-up by the OPCW’s impartial
and exceedingly qualified experts. The Al-Assad
regime, however, has prevented any such developments
since 2021 — a clear violation of its obligations under
resolution 2118 (2013), which requires Syria to accept
personal designation by the OPCW and to provide it with
immediate and unfettered access and the right to inspect
any and all sites. The United States reiterates its call on
the regime to immediately and without preconditions
allow the OPCW Declaration Assessment Team back
4/14

05/12/2022

into Syria so that it can resume its important work of
verifying the complete declaration and destruction of
Syria’s chemical-weapons programme. The Al-Assad
regime’s persistent obstruction of the OPCW’s work is an
affront to the OPCW, the Council and the international
community. Yet the regime continues to enjoy the full
support of the Russian Federation as it openly flouts
its international obligations. The regime’s actions pose
real-world threats, undermine our collective security
and make the world less safe.
The OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism and the OPCW’s Investigation and
Identification Team (IIT) have independently
confirmed the regime’s use of chemical weapons on
eight occasions. The IIT’s work is ongoing, and we
look forward to its future reporting. We call on the
regime to end its intransigence and comply with its
obligations under both resolution 2118 (2013) and the
Chemical Weapons Convention. Doing so would be a
positive step towards enhancing our collective security
and would help to ensure that the horrific scenes of
chemical-weapon attacks — which we have too often
witnessed in Syria — are never repeated.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The report presented by Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu on behalf of the Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) (see S/2022/897) again provides no added
value in comparison to previous one (see S/2022/828),
which is not surprising given that there have been no
developments on the ground in relation to the Syrian
chemical dossier. That is the result not of the actions
of Damascus, as our Western colleagues will try to
prove today, but rather of the persistent unwillingness
of the OPCW Technical Secretariat to rectify its biased
anti-Syrian policy. In each new report, the same clichés
and politicized accusations continue to be levelled
against the Syrian authorities, while nothing has been
done to correct the errors that we have repeatedly
pointed out. I am sure that our Syrian colleagues will
address that in greater detail today.
I see no reason to dwell on the content of the
report, and therefore will simply highlight that we
have a number of criticisms to make of the products
of the Technical Secretariat, which continue to become
less and less credible as sources of information on
the Syrian chemical dossier. We do not recognize
the predetermined conclusions of the report of the
Fact-Finding Mission on the Douma incident (see
22-72208

05/12/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/2019/208) or any of the findings of the illegitimate
Investigation and Identification Team, the sole aim of
which is to portray Damascus in a bad light and force
the conclusions to fit the political orders of the United
States and its allies. The connivance of the OPCW
leadership in response to the attempts by the West
to make the OPCW an instrument of its own policies
and implement its opportunistic objectives leads to
the degradation of this Organization, which used to
be a very reputable institution, and causes irreparable
damage to its authority. Such a blatant and very
unflattering situation is further exacerbated by the fact
that the Director-General of the OPCW, Mr. Arias, has
failed yet again to make an appearance at the Security
Council and refuses to speak directly with members of
the Council. It is becoming increasingly obvious that he
has something to hide.
Our regular mechanical discussions of the
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) could take
first place in the rankings of the least productive
meetings of the Security Council. Basically, we waste
two hours every month repeating the same statements
verbatim, simply for the Western capitals to tick a
box for having adhered to the prescribed frequency
of meetings during which they condemn the Syrian
leadership. It is obvious that such an approach devalues
any discussion of the implementation of resolution 2118
(2013) and undermines the authority of the Council,
which instead of pouring from the empty into the
void, as the saying goes, could be discussing far more
dynamic and relevant situations. Rather than reach the
point of absurdity, let us instead optimize the schedule
of Security Council meetings on the implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013).
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I deliver this joint
statement on behalf of the three African members of
the Security Council, namely, Gabon, Kenya and my
own country, Ghana (A3).
We thank the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her briefing
and welcome the participation in this meeting of the
representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic, the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Türkiye.
We take note of the 110th monthly report of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) (see S/2022/897) and welcome the submission
to the OPCW of the 108th report of the Syrian Arab
Republic. We are reminded yet again of the lack of

S/PV.9207

substantive progress in efforts to eliminate the country’s
chemical weapons programme. We also note the Syrian
Arab Republic’s submission to the Technical Secretariat
on 15 November of a document entitled “The General
National Document Regarding the Cooperation of the
Syrian Arab Republic with the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons between 2013 and
2022” and look forward to receiving a copy of it.
However, we are deeply worried about the lack of
tangible progress by the stakeholders to fully address
the issue in accordance with the Chemical Weapons
Convention and resolution 2118 (2013) and bring closure
to the matter. We underscore that the full cooperation
of the Syrian National Authority with the OPCW and
its compliance with all aspects of the decision by the
Executive Council of 27 September 2013 is critical to
the breaking of the current impasse on the elimination
of the country’s chemical weapons programme. To that
end, we regret that the meeting between the Technical
Secretariat of the OPCW and the Syrian Arab Republic
scheduled to be held in Beirut on 15–16 November
this year to deliberate on matters pertaining to the
country’s chemical weapons programme did not take
place as agreed. In that regard, we reiterate our call on
the Syrian National Authority to engage constructively
with the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW in order
to satisfactorily resolve all outstanding issues and
hold the twenty-fifth round of consultations with the
Declaration Assessment Team.
It is our hope that the ongoing communication
between the focal points of the two sides to agree on the
agenda for the proposed high-level meeting will yield
the desired outcome and will ultimately lead to the
establishment of a road map to address the persistent
divergence between the positions of the OPCW and
the Syrian authorities with regard to the outstanding
gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies. The prompt
resolution of the investigation will allow both the
Syrian National Authority and the Security Council the
opportunity to rededicate precious time and resources to
the other existing challenges facing the Syrian people.
We remind the international community that the use of
chemical weapons in Rif Dimashq on 21 August 2013
and the resulting deaths of civilians, which outraged
the world and spurred it into action, should continue to
galvanize us in our quest to completely eliminate the
country’s chemical weapons programme and ensure
justice for the victims.

22-722085/14

S/PV.9207

The situation in the Middle East

Meanwhile, we acknowledge the generous
contributions and pledges by a number of countries
of up to €37 million for the OPCW’s Trust Fund for
Syria Missions, which was established in November
2015 to support the Fact-Finding Mission and other
remaining activities of the OPCW in the country,
including the work of the Declaration Assessment
Team and the Investigation and Identification Team.
We remain committed to the established norms against
the use of chemical weapons and support all efforts
to eliminate their production, storage and use. The
A3 collectively reiterates its position against the use
of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and under
any circumstances.
In conclusion, as we reaffirm our support for
resolution 2118 (2013), we renew our call for enhanced
engagement between the OPCW Technical Secretariat
and the Syrian National Authority to address all
outstanding issues that constrain meaningful progress
on the full implementation of the resolution.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank Mrs. Nakamitsu
for her briefing.
Last week, on 30 November, we commemorated
the Day of Remembrance for all Victims of Chemical
Warfare. We reiterate our full solidarity with all victims
of chemical attacks and reaffirm our solemn resolve
never to use or produce chemical weapons, as well as to
do everything in our power to prevent and punish those
who do. As we heard from the High Representative, the
situation regarding the issue of chemical weapons in
Syria remains unchanged. Syria continues to refuse to
cooperate fully with the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). Its declaration is
incomplete and inconsistent. And we have been unable
to note any progress.
In such a situation, the normal course of the members
of the Security Council would be to take a firm and
united position, avoid repeating ourselves and move
forward. It is deeply regrettable that the issue of the use
of chemical weapons by the Syrian regime against its
own people, which in several instances was confirmed
by the OPCW, continues to divide the Council. It is
deplorable that this organ is unable to ensure full clarity
on the matter and hold to account those who have
repeatedly crossed that red line. It is distressful that,
by doing so, we are in fact shielding one of the most
despicable behaviours. Moreover, this is happening at a
time when 193 members of the OPCW have voluntarily
6/14

05/12/2022

agreed to uphold the absolute prohibition on chemical
weapons. Therefore, making the Council deliberately
unable to deliver on this issue becomes a collective
problem because it means tolerating the intolerable
and accepting the unacceptable, and it might serve as
incitement to other rogue regimes to do the same.
We must not tolerate such depravity — not only
because we have the obligation to uphold the law, but
also because not adopting the right course offends the
victims of this atrocity erodes the non-proliferation
regime and further diminishes the credibility of
the Council. We should not let the division of the
Council become permission for crimes and atrocities
because, as we know, Council inaction always has
deadly consequences.
We strongly support the work of OPCW in
verifying the complete destruction of the biological
weapons programme in Syria and condemn in the
strongest terms the intolerable behaviour of the regime.
We support the impartial and professional work of the
OPCW’s technical teams, which deserve our full and
unconditional support. Equally, we strongly support
the Fact-Finding Mission, which continues its valuable
work in determining the use of chemical weapons in
Syria, as well as that of the Office of the Investigation
and Identification Team, which seeks to identify the
perpetrates of those atrocities. We look forward to
the publication of their reports. We await with equal
interest the report of the ninth round of inspections of
the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities, conducted by the
Technical Secretariat in September.
In conclusion, allow me to highlight that the future
of Syria cannot be built on impunity. It cannot rise on
the graves of innocent victims, including children,
without accountability. If we want to help Syrians
design their future to be different from the nightmare of
the past 11 years, we must do our part and discharge our
responsibilities. That means ending support for delays
and evasive tactics, bringing full clarity to the issue
and taking appropriate action, instead of siding with
those responsible for crimes. Our duty is not to shield
perpetrators, but rather to expose them and hold them
to account. Syria remains a serious test of the resolve of
the Council to act decisively in that respect.
Mr. Leite Novaes (Brazil): At the outset, I
would also like to thank High Representative Izumi
Nakamitsu for her briefing. I also welcome the
representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic, Türkiye
22-72208

05/12/2022

The situation in the Middle East

and the Islamic Republic of Iran. I would also like to
thank the Director-General of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for his
latest report (see S/2022/897).
As in previous months, little seems to have changed
in the situation on the ground or in the relationship
between the Syrian Arab Republic and the organization.
That reinforces our perception that there is a mismatch
in the frequency of these meetings. While the Security
Council should pay close attention to progress in the
elimination of chemical weapons in Syria, holding
monthly meetings when there is little or no relevant
development on the ground does not seem an efficient
use of time or resources.
Brazil welcomes the efforts made to hold a meeting
between representatives of the OPCW and Syrian
authorities in Beirut last month. We regret that the
meeting could not take place. Furthermore, we take
note of the submission by the Syrian Arab Republic of
a document entitled “The General National Document
Regarding the Cooperation of the Syrian Arab
Republic with the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Between 2013 and 2022”,
and we look forward to its circulation by the OPCW
Technical Secretariat.
In the face of the absence of relevant recent
developments on the Syrian chemical-weapons file,
allow me to reaffirm our traditional position on the
matter. Chemical weapons are utterly incompatible
with international humanitarian law, and therefore must
have no place in the practices and doctrines of today’s
world. The use of such weapons violates international
agreements and poses serious threats to international
peace and security. Incidents must be addressed with
transparency and be subject to thorough and impartial
investigations, in accordance with the Chemical
Weapons Convention.

S/PV.9207

are the only way to solve the problem. We welcome the
extension of the tripartite agreement reached by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), the United Nations Office for Project Services
and the Syrian Government on the destruction of Syria’s
chemical weapons until June 2023.
Regarding the meeting between the DirectorGeneral of the OPCW and the Syrian Foreign Minister,
China encourages the Syrian Government and the
Technical Secretariat to strengthen coordination
through the liaison channel and facilitate preparations
for the meeting in the spirit of mutual respect and
cooperation on an equal footing. We also call on the
Technical Secretariat to respond positively to the
issues raised by the countries concerned and remove
obstacles to the holding of the twenty-fifth round of
technical consultations. I would like to stress that the
OPCW’s investigation and attribution of the alleged use
of chemical weapons should be strictly limited to the
framework of the Chemical Weapons Convention, with
compliance procedures, reliable evidence, credible
conclusions and no presumption of guilt. We hope that
the Director-General and the Technical Secretariat
will take practical measures to maintain the technical
attributes of the OPCW.
Lastly, given that the Security Council has limited
resources and a busy schedule, China calls on the
Council to reduce the frequency of its deliberations
on the Syrian issue or consider consolidating the
deliberations on the Syrian issue in order to save
conference resources and improve the efficiency of
the Council.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.

China firmly opposes the use of chemical weapons
by any country, organization or individual under any
circumstances or for any purpose. China sincerely
hopes to see a world free from chemical weapons at an
early date.

The lack of progress is frustrating, but we must
face facts. The sole responsibility lies with the Syrian
regime, which stubbornly refuses to cooperate. As
everyone knows, we are gathered here because the
Syrian regime has used weapons of mass destruction
against its own population. Independent investigations
by the United Nations and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) have
demonstrated that on eight occasions. I recall that
resolution 2118 (2013) was adopted unanimously and
that the reality of the heinous attack on Ghouta in 2013
has never been disputed.

China’s position on the Syrian chemical-weapons
issue remains unchanged. Dialogue and consultation

The Syrian regime initially agreed to a bilateral
meeting on 15 and 16 November, only to later set

Mr. Liang Hengzhu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank High Representative Izumi Nakamitsu for
her briefing.

22-722087/14

S/PV.9207

The situation in the Middle East

conditions that it knows the Technical Secretariat
cannot meet. In the face of such bad faith, the Technical
Secretariat has had to back down once again. We urge
Syria to respond in writing to the Technical Secretariat’s
questions on its initial declaration and to clarify its full
stockpile. It must comply if it is to restore its rights
and privileges. France will pay very close attention
to the conclusions of the forthcoming reports of the
Investigation and Identification Team.
Despite the obstacles, the OPCW Technical
Secretariat continues its investigative work with
tenacity, independence and professionalism. I commend
it once again. The fight against impunity remains our
priority. It is the foundation of the effectiveness and
credibility of the prohibition regime.
Mr. Phipps (United Kingdom): I would like to join
others in thanking High Representative Nakamitsu
for her briefing and the Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), Mr. Arias, for his latest monthly report
(see S/2022/897).
Let us remind ourselves why we continue to discuss
this agenda item. In the early hours of 21 August 2013,
the Syrian regime targeted its own citizens in three
suburbs of Damascus with rockets containing the nerve
agent sarin. As many as 1,500 people died. Following
those attacks, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2118 (2013), which called on Syria
to cooperate fully with the OPCW and eliminate its
chemical weapons programme and stockpile.
As we are reminded every month, Syria’s
initial chemical-weapons declaration, on which the
destruction of its chemical weapons stocks depended,
was and remains inaccurate and incomplete. When
the evidence of Syria’s retention of chemical weapons
has proved too compelling, the regime has changed its
story. It has now amended its declaration 17 times. We
know, by the regime’s own admission, that at least one
chemical-weapons production facility, four laboratories,
five previously undeclared chemical warfare agents,
hundreds of tons of chemicals and thousands of
munitions were omitted from its initial declaration.
These issues are not academic. Independent
investigations have shown that the Syrian regime went
on to use chemical weapons in further attacks against
the Syrian people, even after having claimed it had
given up all of its chemical weapons. Several of those
attacks have involved the use of chlorine dropped onto
8/14

05/12/2022

civilian centres from helicopters, in particular by a
division of the Syrian armed forces known as the Tiger
Forces, under the control of Brigadier General Suhail
Al-Hassan. The OPCW Investigation and Identification
Team found that the Tiger Forces were responsible for a
chlorine attack on Saraqib in February 2018.
But the Al-Assad regime has not limited itself
to chlorine attacks alone. On 4 April 2017, a Syrian
SU-22 aircraft delivered an aerial bomb filled with
sarin into the centre of Khan Shaykhun. The OPCWUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM)
attributed responsibility for the attack to the regime. As
the OPCW reported in April 2020, the attack in Khan
Shaykhun was preceded by two sarin attacks carried
out by the Syrian Arab Air Force in Ltamenah in
March 2017. Sarin, as I am sure we all know, is a nerve
agent that suffocates people to death as their muscles
spasm into paralysis. The chemical profile of the sarin
used in all those attacks bears the unique signature
of the sarin production process declared by Syria in
its declaration.
Those Syrian attacks are all a matter of record,
established by detailed and thorough investigations by
the OPCW and the JIM. The OPCW has found Syria
responsible for multiple chemical-weapon attacks and
other serious failures to meet its obligations as a State
party to the Chemical Weapons Convention. As my
colleague from the United States mentioned, during
last week’s Conference of the States Parties to the
Chemical Weapons Convention, 57 countries joined
a France-led statement unequivocally condemning
Syria’s use of chemical weapons and refusal to live up
to its obligations as a State party. The scale of support
for that statement speaks to the overwhelming desire
of the international community to uphold the collective
progress that we have made in recent decades towards a
world free of chemical weapons.
It is our responsibility as of members of the Council
to continue to support the OPCW as it seeks to resolve
outstanding issues in Syria’s declaration. In addition,
as High Representative Nakamitsu said, we must not
forget the victims of chemical-weapon attacks in Syria.
The United Kingdom continues to stand in solidarity
with them, and we will continue to pursue justice for
them and their families.
Mr. Brady (Ireland): First, I would like to join
others in thanking High Representative Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
22-72208

05/12/2022

The situation in the Middle East

As Ireland looks back at its term on the Security
Council, the lack of progress on the issue of Syrian
chemical weapons is a matter of deep regret. If anything,
the issue has worsened over that period. Over the past
two years, Syria’s cooperation with the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
has diminished to almost nothing. The last round of
consultations with the Declaration Assessment Team
(DAT) took place in February 2021. Syria has sought
to place conditions on those meetings, including by
dictating the composition of the DAT team, in defiance
of resolution 2118 (2013).
The number of chemical-weapon attacks attributed
to the Syrian authorities by the United Nations and
the OPCW has risen to eight, while further incidents
remain under investigation by the OPCW Fact-Finding
Mission and the Investigation and Identification Team.
Moreover, the number of significant issues with Syria’s
declarations to the OPCW has risen to 20. New issues
have emerged with regard to the movement and alleged
destruction of the chlorine cylinders from the Douma
incident. Those are issues of real concern that go to
the heart of the question the Council still needs to
face as to whether Syria continues to use, produce or
retain chemical weapons. Let us be clear. The issues
with Syria’s initial declaration were not disclosed at
Syria’s own initiative; rather, it was only when the
Technical Secretariat discovered new information that
the amendments were made.
Most worrisomely, the OPCW has come under
sustained attack from Syria and Russia, as they actively
attempt to undermine its authority and independence,
in an attempt to mask Syria’s culpability. The Council’s
reaction in the face of that should not be to reduce the
attention it pays to the issue. Regular discussion by
the Council is needed to show Syria that its lack of
cooperation will not go unanswered. The Council laid
out clearly in resolution 2118 (2013) what needs to be
done. It must hold Syria to its obligations under that
resolution and the Chemical Weapons Convention. The
Council must push Syria to engage in a serious, urgent
and meaningful way with the Technical Secretariat in
order to resolve outstanding issues. And the Council
must give its unequivocal backing to the OPCW.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the OPCW and Director-General Arias for their
professionalism, integrity, technical expertise and
flexibility in seeking to assist Syria in meeting its
obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention

S/PV.9207

and resolution 2118 (2013). I would also like to thank
and commend High Representative Nakamitsu and her
team for their handling of this file.
We have been clear over the past two years that
it is Syria’s actions, not its words, that are important.
Syria must end its prevarication and commit to genuine
engagement. That is the only way to enable the OPCW
to provide the necessary assurance that Syria’s chemical
weapons programme is verifiably and definitively a
thing of the past.
Mr. Al-Ali (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu for her
briefing today.
In the context of our meeting on the chemical
weapons dossier in Syria, I would like to reiterate
the United Arab Emirates firm position of explicitly
rejecting and condemning the use of chemical weapons,
under any circumstances, by anyone and anywhere.
Their use constitutes a flagrant violation of the
provisions of the Chemical Weapons Convention and
international law.
My country reaffirms the importance of
constructive dialogue between the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
the Syrian authorities to address outstanding issues.
Communication through written correspondence alone
will not achieve that objective. From that standpoint,
we view the meeting proposed by the OPCW to be held
in Beirut as a compromise. We hope that the Syrian
authorities and the organization will reach consensus
on it. We also hope that the meeting will indeed take
place and pave the way to overcoming the outstanding
issues. We also look forward to the meeting between
Syria’s Foreign Minister and the Director-General of
the OPCW, which we hope will be fruitful.
Before I conclude, I would like to reiterate the need
to use the time and resources of the Security Council
wisely. That means holding meaningful meetings that
go beyond the mere repetition of positions that are
already well-known. It is our collective responsibility to
reconsider the effectiveness of the Council’s meetings.
We reiterate once again that we remain ready to hold
any meeting if necessary.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I would first of all like to thank High
Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing.

22-722089/14

S/PV.9207

The situation in the Middle East

As this is the last time that my country will address
a meeting on chemical weapons in Syria during its
current term on the Security Council, I will make some
general reflections.
In August 2013, Ghouta witnessed one of the
deadliest chemical-weapon attacks on record in Syria.
It is estimated that nearly 1,400 people died, including
a significant number of children. In September of the
same year, in contrast to the current polarization, the
Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2118
(2013). Shortly afterwards, Syria applied for accession
to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
As was mentioned, the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic collected evidence of 38 chemical-weapon
attacks between March 2011 and December 2020.
Non-governmental organizations estimate that more
than 350 attacks took place. Many of those acts were
carried out indiscriminately against civilians and, in
some cases, essential infrastructure, such as hospitals.
Almost 10 years after the first incident, it has still
not been possible to bring those responsible for such
atrocities to justice or provide reparations to the victims
and their families.
Unfortunately, during the two years in which
Mexico has participated in the Security Council
discussions on the issue before us, there has been
practically no progress, and, in some cases, there have
even been setbacks. Let me cite a few examples.
First, it has not been possible to finalize the
initial Syrian declaration. As of December 2020, 19
discrepancies were identified and, to date, there are
even more, giving a total of 20 outstanding issues.
Secondly, despite numerous requests, since
November 2018, the origin of the chemical residue
detected at the Barzah facilities of the Scientific Studies
and Research Centre has not been clarified.
Thirdly, the latest round of consultations between
the Declaration Assessment Team and the Syrian
authorities took place in February 2021. The Syrian
authorities have not granted visas to all members of the
Team, and therefore, 22 months later, it has not been
possible to resume those consultations.
Fourthly, explanations for the unauthorized transfer
of chlorine cylinders linked to the 2018 Douma incident
have been awaited since July 2021.
10/14

05/12/2022

Fifthly and lastly, although the timetable for
the meeting between the Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and the Syrian Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Expatriates was agreed a year ago, it has not yet
been possible to set a date for the meeting.
In such circumstances, the Security Council has
been limited to discussing month after month logistical
and administrative issues, such as the granting of visas,
the organization of meeting agendas and the exchange
of communications. In line with that trend, the latest
report (see S/2022/897) draws our attention to the
request for the OPCW to cover the expenses of the
Syrian delegation to the technical meeting in Beirut as
a prerequisite for convening it.
The lack of substantive progress is more than
evident. The current climate has taken us away from
substantive discussions, and it does not contribute to
effective accountability for the use of chemical weapons
in Syria. In our view, the Security Council’s efforts and
time should be focused on making substantive progress
on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). As
Council members, we have the obligation to demonstrate
that the use of chemical weapons is unacceptable
to the international community and that those who
violate their obligations in that regard should be held
accountable for their actions.
I once again reiterate the full support of my
country, Mexico, for the OPCW Technical Secretariat
and its technical teams, which carry out their work
professionally, independently and impartially and in
accordance with the highest international standards.
I conclude by reaffirming Mexico’s strong
condemnation of the use of chemical weapons by any
actor and under any circumstances.
Ms. Syed (Norway): Let me also start by thanking
High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Despite the regrettable lack of progress on this
dossier overall, let me start by highlighting the few
positive elements during Norway’s soon-to-be two-year
tenure on the Security Council.
We applaud the important work undertaken by
the Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) and
the Fact-Finding Mission (FFM) of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
amid the challenges posed by the global pandemic.
In the past two years, we saw them release several
22-72208

05/12/2022

The situation in the Middle East

reports. Norway will continue to support the OPCW’s
important investigative efforts, which are crucial to
ensuring accountability. It is positive that the IIT and
the FFM have continued to fulfil their engagement with
the Syrian authorities, including the FFM’s most recent
deployment last month.
Norway also commends the Technical Secretariat
for continuing its biannual inspections of the Barzah
and Jamrayah facilities, as mandated by the Council. In
addition, we highlight the tripartite agreement among
the OPCW, the United Nations Office for Project
Services and Syria as another vital component of the
Technical Secretariat’s activities. We welcome the
recent agreement on an extension.
However, it is with great disappointment that we
witnessed the breakdown in engagement between the
Syrian authorities and the Declaration Assessment
Team due to persistent delays in the issuing of visas.
That undermines the priority of ensuring consistent
cooperation, exchanges of information and technical
assistance to Syria.
Norway again urges Syria to fully cooperate with
the OPCW and provide sufficient technical information
or explanations to close the 20 outstanding issues,
which have remained outstanding for far too long.
The Syrian Arab Republic must fulfil its obligations
in accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention
and resolution 2118 (2013). That resolution explicitly
mentions Syria’s obligation to accept personnel
designated by the OPCW and to provide those personnel
with immediate and unfettered access and the right to
inspect any and all sites. Norway also reiterates its call
on Syria to complete the necessary measures to lift the
suspension of its rights and privileges as a State party
to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Let me conclude by underlining that accountability
for those responsible for the use of chemical weapons
must be ensured. Norway supports the work of
Director-General Arias and the Technical Secretariat
of the OPCW and their commitment to ensuring that
the international prohibition against the use of chemical
weapons is upheld.
Norway strongly condemns any use of chemical
weapons under any circumstances and by anyone. It
is an abhorrent crime and a violation of the Chemical
Weapons Convention, which should be addressed
seriously by the Council. We will remain steadfast

S/PV.9207

in our support to ensure accountability and prevent
future use.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of India.
Let me thank the Under-Secretary-General
and High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her update. I also welcome
the participation of the representatives of the Syrian
Arab Republic, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Türkiye
in today’s meeting.
India attaches high importance to the Chemical
Weapons Convention and stands for its full, effective
and non-discriminatory implementation. India is
against the use of chemical weapons by anybody,
anywhere, at any time and under any circumstances.
India has consistently maintained that any investigation
into the use of chemical weapons must be impartial,
credible and objective. We continue to caution against
the possibility of terrorist entities and individuals
gaining access to chemical weapons, including in the
region. Therefore, any allegation of the use of chemical
weapons needs to be dealt with the utmost attention.
We note with regret that the recent communication
between the focal points of Syria and the OPCW
Technical Secretariat concerning a possible meeting
has not been fruitful.
We continue to encourage sustained engagement
between Syria and the OPCW Technical Secretariat
to resolve all outstanding issues. We believe that
discussions on Syria and chemical weapons should
reflect progress on the ground. However there has been
no forward momentum on the issue for several months.
As a result, Security Council members often continue
to repeat their well-known positions.
In conclusion, India continues to believe that
progress on all tracks would help in facilitating the
overall political peace process in Syria, as advocated in
resolution 2254 (2015).
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Dandy (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I would also like to

22-7220811/14

S/PV.9207

The situation in the Middle East

thank your predecessor, the Permanent Representative
of Ghana, for his work during his country’s presidency
of the Council last month.
As with previous meetings, we are meeting today
without any developments that would require the
Council’s deliberations. However, certain Western
countries persist in wasting the Council’s resources
and time instead of discussing other important issues
related to the maintenance of international peace and
security and to upholding the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.
The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic rejects
the false accusations levelled by certain Western
countries against my country, which are based on
unprofessional and non-objective reports resulting
from the political pressure exerted by those countries
on the Technical Secretariat of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and its
various teams. Furthermore, my delegation reiterates
its call for realigning the work of the OPCW, ending
the politicization of its technical work and maintaining
professional and impartial principles of work.
The Syrian Arab Republic reiterates its categorical
condemnation of the use of chemical weapons by anyone,
anytime, anywhere and under any circumstances. My
country stresses that it voluntarily joined the Chemical
Weapons Convention and honoured its obligations
pursuant to the Convention. We destroyed all our
stockpiles of chemical weapons and their production
facilities in record time. From the time we joined the
Convention to this very day, we have continued to
cooperate with the OPCW and its Technical Secretariat.
In that regard, I would like to refer to certain aspects of
cooperation between Syria and the OPCW.
First, the Syrian Arab Republic has presented to the
Director-General of the OPCW its 108th report number,
dated 15 November 2022, which covers the activities
carried out by Syria during the reporting period.
Secondly, the Syrian Arab Republic has agreed to
extend the tripartite agreement among Syria, the OPCW
and the United Nations Office for Project Services
(UNOPS) for six months, until 30 June 2023.
Thirdly, the Fact-Finding Mission visited Syria from
6 to 12 November and was provided with all the facilities
necessary to succeed in its mission. Regrettably, that
constructive cooperation is not reflected in the report
of the Technical Secretariat (see S/2022/897). In that
12/14

05/12/2022

regard, I would reiterate that we still expect the Mission
to issue its reports on the incidents reported by the
Syrian Republic since 2017. Those reports have been
much delayed under groundless pretexts.
Fourthly, the Syrian Arab Republic reiterates that
it is keen on holding a high-level meeting between
the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Expatriates, the
Head of the Syrian National Authority and the OPCW
Director-General as soon as possible, according to an
agenda to be agreed by both parties that contributes to
resolving the outstanding issues. In that regard, I note
that the Syrian National Authority has responded to the
proposed agenda by the Technical Secretariat, and we
have put forward certain substantial proposals that will
ensure the success of that meeting. We looked forward
to discussing all those issues during the meeting that
was supposed to be held between both parties.
Fifthly, my delegation regrets that the Technical
Secretariat has refused to cover the expenses related
to the participation by the Syrian party in the meeting
that was proposed to be held in Beirut to discuss a
number of issues. The meeting was therefore not held,
notwithstanding the fact that the Technical Secretariat
had been covering the participation expenses related
to such meetings since we began cooperation between
Syria and the OPCW. They have enough money to
cover the expenses of such meetings. The economic
hardships facing Syria resulting from the unilateral
coercive measures must be taken into consideration.
Those measures are illegitimate and imposed on Syria
by well-known countries, knowing that the Technical
Secretariat did not agree to meet with the Syrian
National Authority in Damascus.
The Syrian Arab Republic reiterates its position
regarding the illegitimacy of the Investigation and
Identification Team, as the agreement does not provide
for the OPCW Technical Secretariat to conduct
investigations on identifying responsibility for using
chemical weapons. We also believe that granting
that illegitimate mandate to the Team was authorized
through flagrant violation by certain States putting
pressure on and blackmailing Member States in service
of its hostile agendas against Syria. Consequently,
my delegation reiterates its categorical rejection
of acknowledging the Team and its erroneous and
unprofessional working methods, which will eventually
lead to false conclusions.
22-72208

05/12/2022

The situation in the Middle East

The Security Council recently renewed resolution
1540 (2004), which aims to prevent non-State actors
from possessing weapons of mass destruction and the
means for producing and delivering them, including
chemical weapons. My country strongly supports
that resolution. We have always provided the 1540
Committee and the Secretariat with information on the
possession and use by certain terrorist organizations of
toxic chemical weapons or the fabrication of chemical
incidents in Syria, which unfortunately are not dealt
with properly. That is why my country looks forward to
the implementation of all the aspects of that resolution
in a more effective manner, according to its mandate
and in cooperation with Member States.
In conclusion, my delegation calls on the Security
Council to reconsider its approach with regard to
discussing this topic by addressing all relevant
developments objectively and preserving its technical
nature, free from any politicization or exertion of
pressure on the OPCW Technical Secretariat.
Before I conclude my statement, allow me to refer
to what was said by my colleague the representative of
Ireland — that Syria wants to impose its opinion with
regard to the composition of the team. I would like to
tell my colleague that that is inaccurate. Rather, it is
erroneous, because Syria does not want to impose its
views regarding the composition of the Team. However,
Syria has the right to accept or reject whoever it deals
with, especially if Syria has compelling evidence
of the partiality and nonobjectivity of one of the
Team’s experts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Keçeli (Türkiye): We thank High
Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing. We also
commend the independence, impartiality and utmost
professionalism that the Technical Secretariat of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) continues to uphold.
The most recent report of the OPCW DirectorGeneral (see S/2022/897) shows that the outstanding
issues in relation to the Syrian regime’s initial and
subsequent declarations persist. The OPCW still cannot
consider those declarations accurate and complete.
Moreover, the regime is obstructing the work of the
Declaration Assessment Team in Syria by not issuing
visas and by placing conditions on meeting with it in
Beirut. Furthermore, the OPCW Technical Secretariat

S/PV.9207

is still awaiting responses to its inquiries regarding the
regime’s chemical-weapon production facilities and
the unauthorized movement of chlorine cylinders used
in the attack in Douma in 2018. We call on the Syrian
regime to fully cooperate with the Technical Secretariat
and provide the necessary information, in line with its
obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention.
The current investigations by the OPCW’s Fact-Finding
Mission and Investigation and Identification Team will
be critical if we are to establish the truth about the use
of chemical weapons in Syria. We look forward to the
completion of the ongoing investigations, in particular
the Investigation and Identification Team’s next report
on the Douma attack of 2018.
Last Wednesday, 30 November, was the Day of
Remembrance for all Victims of Chemical Warfare.
It was a day to honour the innocent lives lost due to
repeated chemical-weapon attacks. It is our collective
responsibility not only to remember the victims but
to know how many victims there are, ensure that
there will be no more victims and pave the way for
accountability for the use of chemical weapons in
Syria. The use of chemical weapons is unacceptable in
any circumstances. Impunity for those who deployed
chemical weapons is unacceptable.
The lack of progress on the file underlines the
Security Council’s failure to fulfil its mandate.
Questioning the cycle of these meetings will not bring
justice or accountability. The OPCW needs the support
of the Council, not discouragement. Moreover, we must
bear in mind that the monthly meetings serve not only
as an opportunity for the Security Council to receive
updates on the file, but to send a message every month
to the families of the victims that the United Nations
has not forgotten them and that it will do everything
in its power to ensure accountability for the crimes
committed, which is a prerequisite for meaningful and
lasting peace in Syria. As one of Syria’s neighbours,
we therefore believe that the Council’s continued
regular consideration of the Syrian chemical-weapons
programme is a crucial item on the monthly calendar.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Jalil Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
congratulate India on its assumption of the presidency
of the Council in December and Ghana on its successful
presidency in November.

22-7220813/14

S/PV.9207

The situation in the Middle East

Iran’s position on chemical weapons is clear. Their
use is a flagrant violation of international law, and as
a main victim of such weapons of mass destruction,
Iran strongly condemns their use by anyone, anywhere,
under any circumstances. On the Syrian file, Iran
supports the resolution of outstanding issues on their
own technical track within the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), through
dialogue and constructive cooperation between Syria
and the OPCW. To that end, any investigation must be
impartial, professional, credible and objective and must
fully comply with the requirements and procedures of
the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). It is equally
important to ensure that the Convention is implemented
fully, effectively and without discrimination.
Politicizing its application and exploiting the OPCW for
political reasons therefore only endanger the credibility
of the organization and the Convention.
We commend the Syrian Arab Republic for its
positive engagement with the OPCW and believe it
merits recognition. Syria regularly submits its monthly
reports to the OPCW Director-General. The most
recent report was submitted on 15 November and
included a thorough account of the country’s efforts
to destroy chemical weapons and their manufacturing
facilities. Syria made it possible for the OPCW FactFinding Mission to visit between 6 and 12 November
and fully supported the completion of its mission. Syria
has also consented to an additional six-month extension
of the tripartite agreement among Syria, the OPCW and
the United Nations Office for Project Services, using
written correspondence to reach an understanding.

14/14

05/12/2022

While promoting dialogue and engagement between
the parties, we consider it essential to address the Syrian
Government’s legitimate concerns in that regard, such as
its position on the illegal establishment of the so-called
Investigation and Identification Team. According to
Syria, the CWC does not mandate the OPCW Technical
Secretariat to conduct investigations into the use of
chemical weapons, which makes its mandate unlawful.
That implies a flaw in the implementation of the CWC
and a disregard for its provisions that can only infuriate
Syria, as a State party to the Convention.
We hope that the high-level meeting between the
OPCW Director-General and the Foreign Minister of
Syria will take place and pave the way for the parties to
settle their unresolved concerns. We once again agree
that the recurring meetings on this file are costly in
terms both of United Nations resources and Security
Council members’ time. Furthermore, considering
that the Syrian Arab Republic has complied with the
Convention’s requirements and cooperated with the
OPCW, addressing the issue in a political or unfair way
will serve only to detract from the technical nature of
the discussions.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I shall now adjourn the meeting so that the
Council can continue its discussion on the subject in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

22-72208
