United Nations

S/PV.6238

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6238th meeting
Monday, 14 December 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kafando. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Burkina Faso)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Shalgham
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-64650 (E)

*0964650*

S/PV.6238

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ambassador Le Luong Minh, Permanent
Representative of Viet Nam and Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1132 (1997) concerning Sierra Leone;
Ambassador Ranko Vilović, Permanent Representative
of Croatia and Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism and of the
Working Group established pursuant to resolution 1566
(2004); Ambassador Abdurrahman Mohamed Shalgham,
Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1521
(2003) concerning Liberia; Ambassador Jorge Urbina,
Permanent Representative of Costa Rica and Chairman
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004); and by myself, as
Permanent Representative of Burkina Faso and
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1518 (2003) and of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1636 (2005).
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Ambassador Le Luong Minh, Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1132 (1997) concerning Sierra Leone.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): In my capacity
as Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1132 (1997)
concerning Sierra Leone, I would like to report to the
Council on the work of the Committee during the
period of 2008-2009 and share my assessment on the
way forward.
Since the adoption of resolution 1132 (1997),
Sierra Leone has achieved tangible progress in the
course of peace consolidation, socio-economic

2

reconstruction and international reintegration. Despite
the still fragile security situation, which requires
sustained attention, the parties in Sierra Leone remain
committed to a cessation of all acts of political
violence and to a bipartisan consensus on important
national policies. The Government has proceeded with
its Agenda for Change, and incremental results have
been achieved in the areas of combating corruption,
reforming the security sector, creating jobs and
empowering youth. The cooperation between Sierra
Leone and the United Nations country team, the
Peacebuilding Commission and other development
partners has been further strengthened within the
framework of the United Nations peacebuilding
strategy for Sierra Leone and the Joint Vision of the
United Nations family for Sierra Leone.
However, Sierra Leone today is facing the
emerging threats of piracy, drug trafficking, illegal
trade in natural resources, uncontrolled migration to
urban centres and other adverse effects of the global
financial downturn, all of which have the potential to
create an environment conducive to violence and
instability.
It is in that context that the relevant functions and
activities of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1132 (1997) concerning Sierra Leone have
evolved. The Council originally mandated the
Committee to oversee the implementation of the
sanctions measures set out in that resolution, which
consist of an arms embargo on non-governmental forces
in Sierra Leone and travel restrictions on members of
the former military junta and of the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF). The Committee was assigned
amended mandates in resolution 1171 (1998) and then
adapted its work with the lifting of the ban on the
export of diamonds from Sierra Leone since 2003.
As of December 2009, the work of the Committee
has been confined to tasks related to the embargo on the
export of weapons to non-State actors in Sierra Leone
and the travel ban imposed on individuals included on
the Committee’s list, who currently number six. Unlike
some other sanctions bodies, the Committee has neither
a panel of experts nor a monitoring group.
During the time of Viet Nam’s chairmanship,
while there have been no violations of the sanctions
regime, a number of notifications of arms exports to
Sierra Leone were brought to the attention of the
Committee in a timely manner, in accordance with

09-64650

S/PV.6238

paragraph 4 of resolution 1171 (1998). In a letter dated
7 January 2008, the Chairman of the Committee
informed the Registrar of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone of the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 1793 (2007), whereby the Council decided
to exempt from the travel restrictions the travel of any
witnesses whose presence at trial before the Court is
required. In the same letter, the Chairman sought the
agreement of the Court on notification procedures for
the travel of listed individuals, which would be
modelled upon those agreed between the Court and the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1521 (2003) concerning Liberia.
In June 2008, upon the request of the Government
of Sierra Leone and in light of overall developments in
the country, the Committee held informal consultations
to remove the names of 24 individuals from the list of
those affected by the travel ban restrictions imposed by
paragraph 5 of resolution 1171 (1998). The Chairman
of the Committee addressed a letter to the Permanent
Representative of Sierra Leone to the United Nations
informing him of the Committee’s decision, and then
conveyed the latter’s letter of request to the President
of the Security Council for the attention and
appropriate action of the Council.
In 2009, although no meetings were held, the
Committee continued to maintain positive cooperation
with the Special Court of Sierra Leone and issued a
waiver of the travel ban against five former members
of the RUF convicted by the Court so that they might
serve their sentences in Rwanda.
Sierra Leone is now at a critical juncture of postconflict peacebuilding, with many challenges ahead.
The United Nations, regional organizations and
Member States have a role to play in helping Sierra
Leone to better fulfil its responsibilities under relevant
Security Council resolutions, taking into due account
the fundamental principles of respect for the political
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Sierra Leone. I maintain, however, that the spirit of
targeted sanctions should be fully preserved so as to
avoid adverse impacts on the livelihoods of civilians
and that all sanctions regimes be reviewed and
ultimately lifted once the underlying reasons for the
imposition of such sanctions are no longer valid. Given
the prevailing trend of peace and reconciliation in
Sierra Leone, the Council may wish to initiate such a
process and dialogue after the trials of Charles Taylor.

09-64650

In conclusion, I wish to thank all members of the
Council for their support and cooperation in helping us
to fulfil our duty. I also express my appreciation to the
Security Council Subsidiary Organs Branch in the
Department of Political Affairs, in particular Mr. Kiho
Cha, for their untiring assistance to the work of the
Committee and the Chairman.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Le Luong Minh for his briefing.
I now give the floor the Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism and of the
Working Group established pursuant to resolution
1566 (2004).
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the opportunity to speak today in my
capacity as the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. I have had the honour to preside over that
important Committee in the second part of this year, so
the comments I am about to make are my personal
observations based on my experience. They are not
attributable to any other delegation, nor should they be
seen as a record of the work of that subsidiary organ.
For a factual account of the work achieved over the
past two years, I refer to the biannual briefings by the
Chairman to the Security Council, the most recent of
which was delivered on 13 November (see S/PV.6217).
I am pleased to note that Croatia has inherited the
Committee in good standing from previous Chairs. Our
basic approach to the new function was to keep the
momentum going and to focus on achieving concrete
results and fulfilling realistic objectives. We have
benefited from the constructive atmosphere in the
Committee. Any positive accomplishment is the result
of all 15 members’ working together. In the same vein,
fulfilling our mandate would not have been possible
without continued support and cooperation of Member
States. In addition, we have established close working
relationships with the Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and his expert team, as well as with the
Secretariat, and I take this opportunity to express my
gratitude for their valuable assistance.
When the Croatian Permanent Representative
took on the chairmanship in January 2008, she did so
in the wake of the adoption of resolution 1787 (2007),
which postponed the review of the mandate of CTED
due to the appointment of the new Executive Director,

3

S/PV.6238

Mr. Mike Smith. In January 2008, he presented to the
Committee a revised organizational plan for CTED,
which included several welcome innovations, such as
more consistency in CTED’s assessments, the
establishment of five cross-cutting functional groups, a
proposal to carry out flexible visits, stronger linkages
with donors and enhanced cooperation with other
Security Council subsidiary bodies as well as within
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force. The
implementation of those initiatives has brought new
energy and focus to the operations of the Committee
and CTED.
The organizational plan charted the way forward
for CTED and served as a necessary element of
Security Council resolution 1805 (2008). The
resolution not only extended the mandate of CTED
until the end of 2010, but also set the direction for the
Committee for the next few years. Among other things,
the resolution encouraged informal briefings for all
interested Member States on the work of the Committee.
Since we strongly believe that transparency is one of
the guiding principles in our work, we have heeded this
call of the Council and organized such briefings at
regular intervals. I wish to inform the Council that I
will give the final informal briefing, together with
Mr. Smith, this coming Wednesday.
Over the past two years, the Committee has
devoted a significant part of its operations to analysing
and adopting, through its subcommittees chaired by
France, the Russian Federation and Viet Nam, the
Preliminary Implementation Assessments (PIAs). This
new tool has greatly enhanced the dialogue with
Member States on the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). It also serves as the basis for two major
initiatives, namely, the stocktaking of the implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001) and the drafting of the report
of the Committee on the survey of the implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001) by Member States.
Stocktaking may be best described as the
Committee’s second reading of the PIAs after it has
received responses from Member States to the original
documents. It has proved to be a complex and lengthy
exercise, which is putting to the test the Committee’s
and CTED’s resources, especially at the subcommittee
level. I would like to commend all those involved in
this effort. Having said that, I believe that the
cooperation of Member States is essential, and I call on
them to remain committed to the dialogue with the
Committee and CTED in this ongoing process.

4

Regarding the survey, allow me to stress that I am
particularly pleased that it was during the Croatian
chairmanship that the Committee adopted that report,
the first of its kind since its establishment in 2001. The
second, updated version has recently been approved,
and the Council will hold consultations on that issue
immediately after this morning’s meetings. I believe
that the survey should become the principal outcome of
the Committee’s work, useful for its outreach not only
to counter-terrorism practitioners, but also to the wider
public.
We have tried to keep the work of the Committee
more relevant and interactive by organizing, on the
basis of a CTED proposal, a series of thematic
discussions of all major areas of implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), as well as by intensifying its
dialogue with international, regional and subregional
organizations. Since the beginning of 2008, the
Committee has heard briefings by a dozen relevant
organizations and United Nations bodies, including, for
example, the European Union, NATO, the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the South
American Financial Action Task Force on Money
Laundering, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. At our last meeting,
which will be held on Thursday, 17 December 2009, a
representative of the Council of Europe will brief the
Committee on the major developments in the counterterrorism field in that partner organization.
Furthermore, I would like to report that the
Committee is currently testing a new paperless
document distribution system, based on the self-service
work space designed for team collaboration already in
use in most Main Committees of the General Assembly.
Before concluding, allow me to express my
appreciation to the delegation of France, which assumed
the function of Acting Chairman of the Committee and
played a crucial role in preparing the interim review of
the work of CTED.
Finally, regarding the Working Group established
pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004), I can report that the
Group has neither held any meetings nor submitted any
documents to the Council in the past two years.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Vilović for his briefing.

09-64650

S/PV.6238

I shall now deliver the report of Burkina Faso on
the Security Council Committees established pursuant
to resolution 1518 (2003) and 1636 (2005).
I have the honour of addressing the Council first
on the activities of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1518 (2003), which I
chaired in 2008 and 2009. I would like to thank the
delegations of Japan and of Belgium for having
effectively fulfilled the functions the Vice-Chairmanship
of the Committee.
Established on 24 November 2003 as the successor
to the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 661 (1990) concerning the situation
between Iraq and Kuwait, the 1518 Committee is
charged with continuing to identify, in compliance with
paragraphs 19 and 23 of resolution 1483 (2003),
individuals and entities whose funds or other financial
assets or economic resources shall be frozen and
transferred to the Development Fund for Iraq.
Under paragraph 23 of resolution 1483 (2003),
that freeze and transfer apply to the funds, other
financial assets and economic resources of individuals
and of entities associated with the former Iraqi regime,
that is, funds, other financial assets and economic
resources removed from Iraq or acquired by Saddam
Hussein or other senior officials of the former Iraqi
regime or their immediate family members, including
entities owned by those individuals or by other persons
acting on their behalf or at their direction or controlled
directly or indirectly by them, as well as funds,
financial assets and economic resources of the former
Iraqi Government or bodies, corporations or State
institutions located outside Iraq.
In resolution 1518 (2003), the Security Council
also decided that the Committee’s mandate would be
kept under review and that the Committee would
establish whether Member States fulfilled the
obligations incumbent upon them with respect to the
arms embargo against Iraq, as reaffirmed in paragraph
10 of resolution 1483 (2003).
Since the beginning of our mandate in 2008, the
Committee has actively monitored actions regarding
the issue of the repatriation of certain Iraqi funds. In a
note verbale dated 23 May 2008, the Permanent
Mission of the Republic of Iraq to the United Nations
confirmed to the Committee the third transfer of funds
to the Central Bank of Iraq.

09-64650

Although not having believed it necessary to hold
meetings, the members of the Committee have
continually consulted among themselves and considered
several relevant issues brought to the Committee’s
attention, in particular with respect to requests for the
de-listing of individuals and entities targeted by the
freeze and the transfer of assets, transmitted by the
focal point established under resolution 1730 (2006),
as well as to be informed of the communications of
States with regard to two de-listing requests submitted
for an individual and an entity, respectively. Through
the focal point, the Committee strove to provide the
relevant information on its rules of procedure. After
considering those requests, the Committee decided to
keep that individual and that entity on the list, which
now comprises 89 individuals and 208 entities.
In 2009, the Committee received a communication
from a Permanent Mission expressing its concern about
the difficulties encountered by its country in
implementing the Security Council’s resolutions, as
well as a letter from a Permanent Mission requesting
information on the decisions taken by the 661
Committee, whose work was terminated by paragraph
19 of resolution 1483 (2003). Although the latter
request did not fall under its purview, the Chairman of
the Committee contributed to providing follow-up by
working with the Secretariat. I note nevertheless that
one request for listing and one for de-listing have
remained pending since 2007. As Chairman of the
Committee, I have initiated informal steps vis-à-vis the
members involved in order to address that question,
which could happen in the near future.
With respect to the arms embargo imposed under
paragraph 10 of resolution 1483 (2003), it remains
ineffective because of the new context in which Iraq
finds itself and the lack of a monitoring mechanism
within the Committee. We therefore recommend that
consideration be given to the Committee’s mandate,
despite the fact that resolution 1546 (2004) reminds
States of the need to comply with their obligations in
that regard, and the Government of Iraq to ensure
implementation of the measures.
To conclude, I thank the members of the
Committee for their constructive contribution to its
work and for the quality of their cooperation. Allow me
also to commend all the relevant parties for their
understanding and cooperation. Lastly, I would like to
thank the Secretariat for its tireless and diligent support
to the Committee.

5

S/PV.6238

On behalf of the delegation of Burkina Faso, I
wish every success to the next Chairman of the
Committee, whose work contributes significantly, as I
said, to Iraq’s reconstruction.
The second report is on the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1636
(2005). The 1636 Committee is charged with listing,
under the travel ban and asset freeze measures
provided for in paragraph 3 (a) of that resolution,
individuals designated by the International Independent
Investigation Commission or the Lebanese Government
as being suspected of involvement in the terrorist bomb
attack of 14 February 2005 in Beirut, which claimed
the lives of the former Lebanese Prime Minister, Rafiq
Hariri, and of 22 other people.
In the same resolution, the Council also decided
that the Committee would approve case by case
requests for exemptions from the travel ban and the
asset freeze measures, and the de-listing of an
individual so that they are no longer affected by the
travel ban and the asset freeze measures. It also
decided to inform all Member States of the identity of
individuals subject to those measures.
On 1 January 2008, when Burkina Faso assumed
the chairmanship, the Committee had not listed any
individual.
Similarly,
during
Burkina
Faso’s
chairmanship, the Committee held no meetings, given
that, as affirmed in its reports to the Security Council,
the International Independent Investigation Commission
and the Lebanese Government had designated no
individual subject to the measures provided for in
paragraph 3 (a) of resolution 1636 (2005).
We believe that the administration of justice in
the Hariri case will be an important element in
consolidating peace in Lebanon. That is why we
continue to believe that with the successful transfer of
confidential information on this case between the
International Investigation Commission and the Special
Tribunal, the 1636 Committee will surely be called upon
to play a more significant role in the future, in particular
when the investigations and judicial procedures relating
to the terrorist attack of 14 February 2005 enter a
decisive phase.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

6

I give the floor to Ambassador Urbina as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004).
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): At
this time, as Costa Rica is about to conclude its term as
an elected member of the Security Council, and thus as
I conclude my work as Chair of the 1540 Committee, I
take special satisfaction in addressing the Council to
share some ideas and opinions arise from my
management of that Committee.
I am aware that my main responsibility today as
outgoing Chair of the Committee is not to review the
achievements, which will be reflected in pending
reports, but instead to share with the Council the
conclusions I have reached after these two years and
thus to contribute to the decisions that should be
adopted in the future in order to attain the objectives of
the resolution.
The most important and urgent recommendation
that I can make, as obvious as it may seem, is that if
the Security Council really wants to achieve the
objective of preventing the possibility that weapons of
mass destruction could fall into the hands of non-State
actors and be used by them, it is absolutely necessary
to devote greater energy and greater resources to
guaranteeing the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).
The international community should no longer be
satisfied to hear again and again that the implementation
of the resolution is a process that will take many years.
I believe it is necessary to summon the will in the
Council, and in the Organization as a whole, to
invigorate the instruments that contribute to the
implementation of the resolution.
In my opinion, the five years that have passed
since the adoption of the resolution have not allowed
the progress we had hoped for as a direct consequence
of the resolution. Certainly, better results could have
been achieved. But what is important now is not what
we have not achieved, but what we have been able to
learn in order to improve the work of the Committee
and to increase its efficacy.
The Committee’s mandate was amended twice in
five years, through resolutions 1673 (2006) and 1810
(2008), changes that significantly increased the
workload but did not provide the new tools or
resources to carry it out. Moreover, all the components

09-64650

S/PV.6238

of that mandate involve a large number of specific
tasks that overburden the Committee and exhaust the
availability and capacities of the team of experts that
supports its work.
The Committee, which began as an instrument to
inform the Council about the implementation of the
resolution by Member States in its first two years, was
later entrusted with working on outreach and dialogue
with Member States and international, regional and
subregional organizations, and with acting as a catalyst
for the process of sharing experiences and lessons
learned. The Committee was also asked to establish
relevant technical assistance capacities and to match
the needs for and availability of such capacities. The
Council also invited the Committee to pause its work
and consider undertaking a comprehensive review on
the status of the implementation of the resolution.
I cannot conclude this review without mentioning
that representing the Committee in meetings around the
world takes up the time of the Committee’s members
and experts, as well as a large part of its resources,
which could be better spent.
The Committee has attempted to deal with the
workload by creating three subcommittees and four
working groups. However, the members, consultant
experts and the Committee as a whole are not able to
carry out all the tasks for which they are responsible. It
is essential that the Security Council pay particular
attention to the 1540 Committee and give it sufficient
means to carry out the tasks entrusted to it.
The comprehensive review of the status of
implementation produced several ideas that could
strengthen the capacity of the Committee to better
fulfil its mandate.
In my opinion, the Committee should not build a
much more extensive structure, nor should it become a
direct provider of technical assistance. Rather, the
Committee should have the means to become the centre
of a network that shares the general purpose of the
resolution. I have worked in this direction through
working visits to the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the World Customs Organization and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
I have also met with regional organizations and many
non-governmental organizations which have resources
and expertise at their disposal to collaborate in the
strengthening of global security.

09-64650

This network is possible, but the Council would
have to give the Committee the means to make it a
reality. In my opinion, the building of such a network,
the design of the relevant shared tools that would
enable joint work and the negotiation and
implementation of agreements to foster cooperation all
justify expanding the number of experts supporting the
Committee to ten. That increase should also take into
account the other recommendations I will make later.
In my view, the expert capacity of the Committee,
once it has been expanded, should focus primarily on
dialogue with States, specialized bodies and regional
and subregional organizations in order to build a
network responsible for designing and implementing
differentiated strategies for accelerating the process of
implementation. An indispensable component of any
strategy to strengthen the Committee is mechanisms to
facilitate the voluntary financing of activities to speed
up its implementation.
I should now like to set out some observations
and recommendations on the expertise that supports the
Committee and how it might be reinforced. I believe
that such reinforcement must take into account the
quantitative aspect that I have already mentioned: the
number of experts must be increased in order to fulfil
the mandated tasks. But I believe that the legitimacy of
the Committee must also be reinforced through the
assurance that such expertise be delivered by United
Nations staff members, observing the Organization’s
regular procedures. The consultants of the 1540
Committee are the only experts supporting a subsidiary
body of the Council that are not selected by the
Secretariat. During the process of appointing three of
the experts, that led to situations that I, as a
representative of a Member State of this Organization,
consider extremely irregular.
I am pleased to recognize the work,
professionalism and dedication of the Group of Experts,
but I believe the interests of the Committee would be
better served if the Office for Disarmament Affairs were
to be in charge of providing the substantive support
that is currently provided by this group of consultants.
I am also pleased to confirm that the questions that
were initially posed regarding the legitimacy of the
resolution seem to have disappeared, as have the initial
doubts on the need for the Committee. This represents
a concrete achievement by the Committee and the
Group of Experts that supports it.

7

S/PV.6238

It is now up to the Security Council to contribute
to consolidating the perception of the Committee as a
body that promotes global security by adopting
decisions that further favour ownership of the process
of implementing the resolution and the exercise of
responsibility by every Member State.

First, the Security Council should instruct the
1540 Committee to focus its efforts on building and
making operational a worldwide cooperation network
involving specialized, regional, subregional and civil
society organizations, as well as the private sector and
academia.

I conclude by offering a few considerations on
the general implementation strategy. I regret that the
comprehensive review of the status of implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) did not provide all the
answers it was supposed to. Identifying the evolving
risks and threats is still a pending issue. Perhaps the
need for compromise on the scope of the exercise
prevented the Committee from having the instruments
necessary to obtain the desired information.

Secondly, the Security Council should increase to
10 the number of experts supporting the work of the
Committee.

However, the comprehensive review did offer
alternative approaches to facilitating the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). For example, it affirmed the
enormous potential of regional and subregional
organizations to support the purpose of the resolution
and the work of the Committee. In my opinion, it is
imperative to break with the approach according to
which one single strategy can guarantee results in all
situations. The nature of resolution 1540 (2004),
unprecedented for the Security Council, justifies very
close cooperation with the aforementioned international
organizations.
It is thus a question of promoting the adoption of
new legislation in all countries, the implementation of
new measures, the establishment of new controls, and
their guaranteed effective enforcement. Such an
ambitious undertaking cannot be achieved without a
broad process of international cooperation that
necessarily includes regional and subregional
organizations.
There are already a few examples of successful
regional cooperation that with time will prove to be
efficient instruments in achieving specific goals, such
as the inclusion of implementation as a national
priority, the widespread creation of local focal points,
the broader use of national implementation plans,
requests for assistance and, generally, the establishment
of higher-quality dialogue between the Committee and
Member States.
Finally, as I leave the chairmanship of the 1540
Committee, I respectfully urge the Council to discuss
the following suggestions.

8

Thirdly, the Council should take the necessary
steps to ensure that the expertise supporting the
Committee’s work is delivered through established
United Nations procedure through the Office for
Disarmament Affairs.
Fourthly, the Council should instruct the
Committee to design and implement additional
mechanisms for the voluntary financing of its
activities.
Fifthly, the Council should assess and monitor the
evolving risks and threats concerning the possibility of
weapons of mass destruction falling into the hands of
non-State actors.
Sixthly, the Council should instruct the Committee
to strengthen its cooperation with regional and
subregional bodies in the joint design and application
of differentiated implementation strategies.
Personally, and on behalf of my country, I am
grateful for the opportunity to have served on the 1540
Committee and urge Council members to promptly
review those suggestions whose only intention is to
transform our ongoing movement into genuine action.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Urbina for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Chairman of the
Security Council resolution 1521 (2003) concerning
Liberia.
Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): Permit me to take this opportunity to share
with the Council some observations relating to the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1521 (2003) on Liberia and the relevant
sanctions regime. Libya has had the honour to chair the
Committee over the past two years.
We are all aware of the sensitive situation in
Liberia following a period of instability, war,

09-64650

S/PV.6238

confrontation and destruction. In May, we visited the
United Nations forces in Liberia and witnessed firsthand the difficulties, changes and challenges they are
facing. The Group of Experts entrusted to follow up on
the sanctions on Liberia specified a number of tracks to
assess and monitor: the diamond trade, the arms
embargo, forestry, trade and investment, frozen assets
and the movement of persons.
The Group created an accurate position and
framework of reference for all those tracks. With
regard to forestry, for example, there has been progress
in the bidding on thousands of hectares of lumber and
rubber for investment. There is some discrepancy in the
numbers, but it does not represent a significant problem.
We are all aware of the situation in the region.
The neighbouring States Côte d’Ivoire and Guinea
remain unstable and subject to the movement of illicit
arms initiated not by Governments but by individuals.
With regard to certain frozen assets, I can say that
they are generally under control, while the Committee
has effectively followed up and monitored the
movement of persons. I can also say that the team of
experts has gathered accurate information in that regard.
The Committee’s report notes that while the
Government is trying to achieve a considerable level of
transparency in exports, imports and taxation, it is
facing logistical difficulties that it cannot fully overcome.

09-64650

The report of the Group of Experts contains
recommendations that I consider to be practical, and we
call on the members of the Council and the Committee
to voice their opinions on these recommendations. I
believe the report’s recommendations to be objective
and operable.
The report is comprehensive, long and detailed,
and we have transmitted it to the President for
distribution. I wish to thank him and all the members
of the Council for the confidence they have shown in
my country by inviting it to chair the 1521 Committee.
I also wish to thank the Secretariat for its assistance to
us. I wish our successors on the Committee great
success. In conclusion, I reiterate my thanks to you,
Sir, and the other members of the Council.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Shalgham for his briefing.
I would like to take this opportunity, on behalf of
the Security Council, to express appreciation to the
outgoing Chairmen for the manner in which they have
discharged the important responsibilities entrusted to
them by the Council.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

9
