UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

2539’”

MEETING:

y+&J/sjji;(J333=EON
11 MAY

19 4

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2539). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionofthe

1

agenda.................................................

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16514). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SIPV.2539

.
j >:.

:

,. :

:,
:

*:
1.

NOTE
-..
.
,
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Ojj%ial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2539th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 11 May 1984, at 7.40 p.m.
Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

President:

Mr. Ce’sar (Czechoslovakia),
Mr. Albornoz (Ecuador),
Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic), Mr. Karran
(Guyana), Mr. R&cz (Hungary), Mr. Carr (Jamaica),
Mr. Zain (Malaysia), Mr. Erdenechuluun (Mongolia),
Mrs. Noriega (Panama), Mr. St. Aim&e (Saint Lucia),
Mr. Wijewardane (Sri Lanka), Mr. Al-Atassi (Syrian
Arab Republic), Mr. Le Kim Chung (Viet Nam) and
Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.

2. The PRESIDENT [interpretation from Russian]:
The Security Council will now resume its consideration
of the item on its agenda. Members of the Council have
before them document S/16550,which contains the text
of a draft resolution submitted by India, Nicaragua,
Upper Volta and Zimbabwe.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2539)
1. Adoption of the agenda

2. The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16514)
The meeting

3. Mr. LIANG Yufan (China) [interpretation from
Chinese]: First of all, Sir, I should like, on behalf of the
Chinese delegation, to extend our congratulations to
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month. Your outstanding diplomatic skill will undoubtedly ensure that the Council will
smoothly fulfil its mission. The Chinese delegation also
wishes to take this occasion to express its appreciation
for the excellent manner in which Mr. Kravets, the
President last month, performed his duties.

was called to order at 7.55 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/16514)

4. We have listened attentivelv to the statement made
by Mr. Kyprianou, President of the Republic of Cyprus [2531st meeting], and to the statements made by
Mr. DenktaS and other representatives. The Chinese
delegation also wishes briefly to reiterate the position of
the Chinese Government on the question of Cyprus.

1. The PRESIDENT [interpretation .from Russian]:
In accordance with the decisions taken at previous
‘meetings on this item [253lst to 2538th meetings],
I invite the representatives of Cyprus, Greece and
Turkey to take places at the Council table; I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and
Barbuda, Australia, Bangladesh, Bulgaria, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Ecuador, the German Democratic Republic, Guyana, Hungary, Jamaica, Malaysia,
Mongolia, Panama, Saint Lucia, Sri Lanka, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Viet Nam and Yugoslavia to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

5. The Chinese Government steadfastly supports the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Cyprus, as well as its non-aligned status. The Chinese
Government and people are deeply concerned about
the fact that the Cyprus question has remained unsolved for so long, and they’have deep sympathy for the
Cypriot people, which has suffered so much from this
state of affairs. The recent deterioration of the situation
in Cyprus has increased their anxiety.
6. It is the hope of the Chinese Government that the
Cyprus question will be solved through intercommunal
negotiations. The Chinese delegation maintains that the
Cyprus question is a complicated one; while having its
own historical background, it is also being affected by
present-day factors. It will take some time before a
solution can be reached.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zacovou (Cyprus), Mr. Dountas (Greece) and Mr. Kirca (Turkey)
took places at the Council table; Mr. Zarif (Afghanistan), Mr. Sahnoun (Algeria), Mr. Jacobs (Antigua
and Barbuda), Mr. Woolcott (Australia), Mr. Wasiuddin (Bangladesh), Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria), Mr. Zumbado Jime’nez (Costa Rica), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba),
1

partition. We also listened carefully to the other statements at Council meetings by the representatives of the
parties directly interested.

7. At the same time, we consistently believe that the
two Cypriot communities share the same fundamental
interests and that their differences can be solved. We
are glad to hear from the current debate such statements as “the Turkish Cypriot community constitutes a
precious and inseparable part of the people of our country” and the assurance not to seek the partition of
Cyprus. We sincerely hope that, for the prosperity of
Cyprus, the two Cypriot communities will set store by
their overall interests, act in a spirit of mutual understanding and mutual accommodation
and avoid taking
any action that might further complicate and magnify
the Cyprus question. Efforts should be made for the
creation of an atmosphere of mutual trust so that the bicommunal negotiations can soon be resumed and the
Cyprus question solved at an early date. We believe
that this is not just the ardent hope of the Chinese
people but the common aspiration of all peoples
throughout the world.

12. In November last year the Security Council considered the situation that had arisen as a result of the
fact that the leaders of the Turkish community of Cyprus had proclaimed the establishment of a so-called
“independent
State” in the part of the island under
foreign occupation. This secessionist action was condemned by the Security Council in its resolution 541
(1983), for which the Soviet,Union
voted.
13. As members are aware, at that time the Council
called upon all States and both communities in Cyprus
to refrain from any actions that might exacerbate the
situation. Despite that appeal, the Turkish community
took steps recently to consolidate the so-called “independent State” in part of the territory of the Republic of
Cyprus. This cannot be seen as anything other than a
flagrant violation of the decisions of the Security Council and an attempt to create new&its accomplis.

8. The Chinese Government supports the SecretaryGeneral’s mission of good offices. The international
community has been deeply concerned about the question of Cyprus. In the past 20 years and more both the
General Assembly and the Security. Council have considered this question on many occasions and adopted
numerous resolutions pertaining to it. Mandated by the
Security Council, the Secretary-General
has over a
long period of time tried to use his good offices to
help bring about, a reasonable solution to the question.
Although his mediation efforts have not yet yielded due
results, they are helpful for maintaining contacts and
promoting the process of negotiations.
The :Chinese
delegation has always appreciated and supported his
efforts. In his report [S/16519] the Secretary-General
stated that he is prepared, if the Security Council so
decides, to continue to discharge to the best of his
ability the mission of good offices entrusted to him by
the Council. The Chinese delegation will continue to
co-operate with him in this regard and we hope that all
the parties concerned will continue to render him cooperation and support in his endeavours.

14. These actions seriously undermine the basis for a
just political settlement of the problem of Cyprus that
would take properly into account the lawful interests of
both communities
on the island. They are causing a
dangerous exacerbation of the situation both in that
country and in the adjacent region. In the interest of
peace and calm in the region, as well as in the long-term
interests of Cypriots-Greek
and Turkish-it
is important that the leaders of the Turkish Cypriot community
revoke those decisions, which were designed to split
Cyprus and which contravene the repeated decisions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council.
15. The Soviet delegation draws attention to the fact
that the declaration of the so-called “independent
State” was made at a time when the international situation was worsening. As was noted on 28 April this year
at a meeting of the General Secretary of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union
and President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Mr. Constantine Chemenko,
with the General Secretary of the
Communist Party of Greece, Mr. Florakis, this action
“was a direct consequence of the actions of the imperialist forces, led by the United States, which -are
stirring up hotbeds of conflict in various parts of the
world.”

9. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as representative of the UNION
OF SOVIET
SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS.
10. The Soviet Union is seriously concerned about
the worsening state of affairs in Cyprus, where a further
exacerbation of the situation fraught with dangerous
consequences is taking place. It is from this standpoint
that we approach the present discussion of the question,
of Cyprus in the Security Council.

16. In the present conditions, in the view of the Soviet
delegation, the Security Council must condemn any
secessionist action designed to split the Cypriot
State. We agree with those who argue that the Council
should demand implementation
of its former decisions,
including resolution 541 (1983), and support the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus. The Council
must state its support for a continuance of the Secretary-General’s
efforts to bring about a settlement of
the question of Cyprus.

11. The Soviet delegation listened carefully to the
statement of the President of the Republic of-Cyprus,
Mr. Spyros Kyprianou, and we can well understand the
emotion with which he spoke about the threat to
the sovereignty and unity of Cyprus resulting from the
continuing interference from outside in the internal
affairs of that State and the attempts to bring about its
2

17. The present situation once again confirms how
important it is that all parties should show true political
far-sightedness and refrain from any actions that might
in the end only inflame the situation and create new
obstacles to a mutually acceptable solution of the
Cypriot problem. It is also important to continue to try
to break prevailing trends and to direct the .development of events on the island towards normalization.

conviction, deriving from the past and contemporary
history of the events in Cyprus, was that the accumulated problems of the island could only be resolved
by predicating its independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity within the framework of a bicommunal, bi-zonal federal system. It was also our
conviction that such a consummation
of events could
have been brought about only through the promotion of
intercommunal
talks and reconciliation
and unstinted
support and encouragement
for the initiative of the
Secretary-General.
We opposed resolution 541 (1983)
precisely because it lacked these essential attributes.

18. In this connection we continue to attach .great
importance to the mission of good offices of the Secretary-General, which has been renewed repeatedly by
the Security Council. The Secretary-General’s
activities are a source of satisfaction to those who are in
favour of the preservation of the independence, territorial integrity and non-aligned status of the Republic
of Cyprus. We hope that the Secretary-General
will, as
in the past, be able to use his authority to break the
deadlock on the Cypriot problem and bring about the
resumption of the intercommunal
dialogue and progress towards a just and lasting settlement. His efforts
have always had and will continue to have the support
of the Soviet Union.

25. We do not like to sit in judgement of the authors of
resolution 541(1983), who promoted it, no doubt, with
the best of intentions. However, even the best of intentions do not necessarily ensure a journey to salvation if
they do not originate in realism or if they neglect historical imperatives. As all members know, resolution 541
(1983) has remained moribund because one of the two
recognized principal parties to the Cyprus .problem;
namely the Turkish Cypriot community, found it totally
unacceptable. Thus it failed to promote its intended
objectives and only resulted in the further disenchantment of the Turkish Cypriot community, as reflected in
its recent actions, which have been the subject of the
current debate in the Security Council.

19. The Soviet Union, for its part, will continue to
promote the early achievement by peaceful means of a
just settlement in Cyprus, without outside interference
and through constructive negotiations.
We will persistently and consistently adhere to the policy that Cyprus should be an independent non-aligned State with
territorial integrity and free from the presence of foreign troops and military bases. We are decisively
against any kind of partition of the Republic of Cyprus
and its absorption by any country, which has been
directly forbidden by the Security Council in its resolution 367 (1975). The Soviet Union is consistently guided
by this position of principle in its contacts in connection
with the Cypriot problem with all the interested States
and parties.
20. I now resume my duties as PRESIDENT
Council.

26. During the Council’s deliberations this time, we
emphasized that the Council had an opportunity to turn
the course of events on the island in the right direction.
We did not look at the situation in a hopeless vein; we
saw a silver lining in the clearly stated desire of both
sides to maintain’the
unity and territorial integrity of
Cyprus. What was required was to. move away from
resolution 541 (1983) and to mount a constructive and
positive effort by giving an open mandate to the Secretary-General to bring about conciliation between the
two communities and to put back on the rails the hitherto interrupted
intercommunal
negotiations,
which
remain the only credible process for a just settlement of
the Cyprus problem.

of the

21. It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. If
I hear no objection, I shall now put the draft resolution
to the vote.
22. I call upon the representative of-Pakistan,
wishes to make a statement before the vote.

27. Little can be accomplished through yet another
censure of the actions resorted to by the Turkish
Cypriots, who for 20 years have felt deprived of their
legitimate national rights guaranteed to them as a cofounder community
under the 1960 Constitution,
the
bedrock of the independence of the island. I may recall
the words of the representative of the United Kingdom,
who this morning said that no party to the Cyprus
problem has the monopoly of virtue. All parties have
made mistakes, all parties have acted in contravention
of agreements. Accordingly, a fresh approach needs to
be built on the positive and promising elements which
still survive in the situation and in the attitudes of the
two Cypriot communities.

who

23. Mr. SHAH NAWAZ (Pakistan): My delegation
deeply regrets that, as in the case of resolution 541
(1983) on 18 November 1983, we have little choice but
to cast a negative vote on the draft resolution in document S/16550.
24. We opposed resolution 541(1983) because in our
judgement it fell short of the minimum requirements of
a document expected to serve as a basis for promoting a
fair solution of the Cyprus problem and preserving the
unity and territorial integrity of the island State. Our

28. An appropriate resolution, in our view, would
reaffirm the independence,
sovereignty,
territorial
integrity and unity of Cyprus, call for the resumption of
the intercommunal
talks on the basis of the high-level
3

agreements of 1977and 1979, which envisaged aunited
Cyprus within a bicommunal, bi-zonal federal framework. It would renew the Secretary-General’s mission
of good offices to reactivate efforts in the search.for a
settlement of the Cyprus problem through the resumption of intercommunal talks and would call on the parties to co-operate with the Secretary-General in his
mission of good offices and to refrain from any action
which might frustrate the fulfilment of his mandate.
29. The draft resolution in document S/16550does not
accord with our perception of the issue or what we
consider to be an appropriate response to the delicate
situation in Cyprus. In most of its aspects, this draft
resolution is cast in the image of resolution 541(1983),
only it is harsher in tone. It makes no reference to the
resumption of intercommunal talks or the high-level
agreements of 1977and 1979,which are fundamental to
any search for ajust settlement of the Cyprus problem.
In ourjudgement the draft resolution is likely to become
yet another obstacle rather than a milestone of progress
on the difficult road to intercommunal reconciliation.
It may indeed intensify beyond retrieve the divisive
tendencies which are currently asserting themselves on
the island.
30. Besides being one-sided in character, the draft
resolution attempts to redefine the mandate of the Secretary-General to entrust him with what could be a
“mission impossible”. The Secretary-General is being
requested to undertake new efforts to attain a solution
of the Cyprus problem in conformity with the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the pertinent
United Nations resolutions, including Security Council resolution 541 (1983) and the present draft resolution. Efforts based on such a mandate could have little
chance of success.

Against:
Abstaining:

Pakistan.
United States of America.

The draft resolution was adopted by 13 votes to 1,
with 1 abstention [resolution 550 (2984)].

33. The PRESIDENT [interpretationfrom
Russian]:
I shall now call upon those members who wish to speak
after the vote.
34. Mr. CLARK (United States of America): We wish
sincerely to congratulate you personally, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
*month.
35. We have already said, and we wish to reiterate
now, that the United States condemns the so-called
exchange of ambassadors between Turkey and the
Turkish Cypriot leadership, as well as other announced
actions which seek to reinforce the declaration of
the Turkish Cypriot authorities of 15 November 1983.
Additionally, we agree that the Council cannot accept
faits accomplis contrary to its resolutions. We agree
that these actions are without legal merit and hinder
efforts to find a solution to the grave problems confronting Cyprus.
36. Despite these agreements with the draft resolution, however, we have abstained because we also
recognize that strong feelings exist among the parties
to this issue, and in view of this we seek to avoid
any possible exacerbation, even if unintended, of the
conflict.
37. We will continue to give the strongest possible
support to the continuing good offices mission of the
Secretary-General, and we earnestly hope that the parties concerned will do the same.

31. However, we are not entirely despondent; we
have trust in the personality and prestige of the Secretary-General and the confidence the two sides repose in
him. We hope that despite the complications inherent in
the flawed mandate he will be able to renew his contacts
with the leadership of the Cypriot communities and
present comprehensive proposals which could promote
a negotiated settlement of the Cyprus problem. We also
have confidence in the good senseof the leaders of the
two communities to refrain from any further actions
which would irrevocably frustrate the objective of a
united Cyprus.

38. Sir John THOMSON (United Kingdom): My delegation voted in favour of the resolution which the
Council hasjust adopted. We did so because wrong has
been done and it is important for the Council to condemn it. In its resolution 541 (1983) of last November,
the Council deplored the declaration by the Turkish
Cypriot authorities of the purported secessionof part of
the Republic of Cyprus. That wrong has now been
compounded by the purported exchange of ambassadors, and that the Council has now rightly condemned.

32. The PRESIDENT [interpretationfrom
Russian]:
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution in document S/16550.

39. Although we voted for the resolution we do not
regard it as ideal. It has several drawbacks, which I will
come to in a moment.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

Infavour: China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Upper
Volta, Zimbabwe.

40. First, however, I must re-emphasize the main
points I made in my intervention in the debate this
morning. The fundamental and long-term aspectsof the
situation in Cyprus are complicated. We shall not make
them simpler or easier of solution by over-emphasizing
the particular wrongdoing which we are now condemning. No party to the dispute, as I said earlier, has a

monopoly of virtue. All parties have made mistakes; all
parties have acted in contravention
of agreements. If
actions or threats of actions of this sort persist, it inevitably means a serious worsening of the situation. The
downward spiral of events towards catastrophe must be
halted.

has some good things in it. We wish to make it very
plain that the adoption of this resolution is not to be
taken as an excuse for further wrongs, nor for the
adoption of intransigent positions on any side. The
message we intend to convey through this resolution is
that the future of both communities in Cyprus is at risk
and that the way for them to support their own future
security and well-being is to co-operate with the Secretary-General in the exercise of his good offices. Those
who do not will lose friends.

41. Indeed, it must be reversed. We must create an
upward spiral. The way to do this is first and foremost through the Secretary-General’s
good offices. We
applaud that part of our present resolution which calls
on all parties to support this. We will judge the merits
and the degree of support which is due to each party by
the extent to which they obey this injunction. We are
confident that the Secretary-General
understands the
problem in all its complexities
and we expect him to
strive his utmost to secure agreement, but he cannot do
this without the co-operation of the parties. We have a
proverb in English that while you can bring a horse to
water, you cannot make him drink. It is essential that
the parties to the dispute should express their readiness
to drink. I would observe in parentheses that the consequences of not drinking are drastic. If the parties
would put aside passion and think of their own future in
realistic and unemotional terms, we believe that they
will find acceptable and indeed sensible the principles
which I enunciated at the end of my statement this
morning.
42. I now turn to the drawbacks
present resolution.

47. Mr. van der STOEL (Netherlands):
During the
Council’s debate this morning on the question of Cyprus, I said that the Netherlands would extend its full
co-operation to any effort by the Council that would
strengthen the mission of good offices of the SecretaryGeneral and provide him with the necessary political
support. I also said that the recent developments have
made it necessary for us to reaffirm forcefully and in
accordance with Security Council resolution 541(1983)
the Council’s opposition to and non-recognition
of the
November 1983 unilateral declaration of independence
by the Turkish Cypriot authorities. However, we also
recognize, as the representative of the United Kingdom
pointed out this morning with great clarity, that it is
necessary to make a distinction between the immediate
problem of the purported exchange of ambassadors and
the more fundamental long-term problem of the situation in Cyprus.

we found in the
48. Having listened to the debate and taken into
account the long and difficult history of the Cyprus
problem, we felt that it would not be an easy task for
the Council to give due consideration to the immediate
and more long-term aspects of the situation in Cyprus
and to agree on a constructive course of action which,
while rejecting the regrettable recent developments,
would at the same time have promoted conciliation,
understanding, confidence and trust between the two
separate communities,
thereby reviving the hope for a
peaceful and just solution to the Cyprus problem. Confronted with ‘the present resolution, we would have
liked to have seen these aims more fully reflected in its
text.

43. The first is that it seems either to go too far or not
to go far enough. There is a certain confusion between
the short term and the long term. We regret that it does
not say some of the things contained in my speech this
morning. We regret that it looks forward in some respects and not in others.
44. We are not sure that in a practical sense it is
politically
helpful to include in this resolution paragraphs 5 and 6. We also have reservations about paragraph 10.
45. As for paragraph 8, we regard its correct interpretation as of crucial importance. We are much concerned that misinterpretation
of it might worsen the
situation. I have voted in favour of the resolution on the
understanding derived from the co-sponsors that paragraph 8 means that the Secretary-General’s
mandate
set out in Security Council resolution 367 (1975) remains wholly valid. It is our understanding that the
Secretary-General
has a free hand. He will of course
take account of the principles of the Charter and of
relevant resolutions, but that is all. The Secretary-General is as free after this resolution as he has always been
in the past. The latter part of this operative paragraph is
meant to relate to the eventual overall solution of the
Cyprus problem, not to the Secretary-General’s
mandate.

49. In voting in favour of this resolution, which also
contains many elements withwhich we wholeheartedly
agree, my delegation wishes to express some reservations as to the wording of the resolution, in particular
paragraph 10.
50. As far as paragraph 8 is concerned, we consider
the language of this paragraph as in no way restricting
the freedom of action of the Secretary-General
in initiating any new efforts he might deem appropriate to
revive the intercommunal
dialogue within the framework of the existing mandate of his mission of good
offices, as entrusted to him by the Council.
51. In conclusion, we earnestly hope that all parties
directly concerned will heed the call expressed in paragraph 9 to co-operate with the Secretary-General in his
mission of good offices.

46. On these understandings
and without believing
that the resolution is perfect, we support it, because it
5

60. Resolution
541 (1983) was counterproductive
from the point of view of peace, and I told the Council
with deference last time why we could not accept it.
The Council has based the present resolution on it, and
therefore we cannot accept today’s resolution.

52. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
Mr. Rauf Denktav, whom the Security Council under
its rules of procedure has invited to take part in its
meetings, has asked to be allowed to speak. With the
agreement of the Council, I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

61. The Council declares the exchange of ambassadors illegal and invalid. We have taken notice of its
views. We do not agree with them, because the Council
has not taken cognisance of the true facts of the Cyprus
case, because members are bound by directives from
their centres, which have not heard the realities of
Cyprus and which for years have been misled with
misinformation.

53. Mr. DENKTAS:
My belief in. the powers and
intentions of this body is that it can make enslaved,
colonized people free, but it cannot make free people
enslaved or colonized.
54. The resolution, in the way in which it will be
interpreted by the Greek Cypriot leadershipand
we
know them well-will
become a tool for the harassment
of my community and for the destruction of its bicommunality. I wish it were not so, but it will be so used.
Therefore, I shall not take much of the Council’s time.

62. The Council, in the resolution just adopted, calls
upon all States “not to recognize the purported State of
the ‘Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus’ set up by
secessionist acts” and “not to facilitate or in any way
assist the aforesaid secessionist entity”. I thank the
Council. It has decided that my people, because they
are fighting for their liberty and do not accept colonization by the Greek Cypriots, should be isolated in
this world like lepers. I thank it for this, and I am
sure history will record how a community fighting for
nothing but its liberty has been treated by this body.

55. The resolution, which refers to the Republic of
Cyprus, or to the Cyprus Government, without regard
at all to the co-founder, partnership status of my people
and the fact that we have been rejected and ejected from
the partnership State, looking at those who have occupied the seat of government by force of arms for
20 years, those who have denied my people all its
natural rights and liberties, cannot be accepted by us as
helpful to the solution of the problem.

63. In any case, for 20 years all our economic activities were stopped. We were under a blockade by the
Greek Cypriot side, because they regarded themselves
as the legitimate Government of Cyprus. Now, on their
behalf, you are asking them to squeeze us out economically. We have lived on bread, on onions, on beans,
for years. We shall continue to do so if necessary, but
we shall not accept those who occupy by force the seat
of Government as the Government of Cyprus.

56. I know from my contacts with some members of
the Council that their Governments’
decisions bind
them. I hope that in time their Goveinments
will see
that we do not want to be a pawn between two or more
Powers; that we are a people fighting for our independence and liberty; that we are, with our sacrifices, the
party which has maintained the independence and nonalignment of Cyprus.

64. The Council “Calls upon all States to respect the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity, unity
and nonalignment
of the Republic of Cyprus”. I hope
Greek Cypriot leaders are also bound by this demand,
because it is they who attacked independence in the
name of enosis; it is they who divided the territory of
Cyprus by trying to destroy us; it is they who destroyed
unity by ejecting us from the Government; it is they, not
we, who used and continue to use non-alignment for the
purpose of hellenising Cyprus.

57. Representatives have said that they have listened
to the statement of the President of the Republic of
Cyprus. I have heard the statement of the President of
southern Cyprus, and I have pointed out to the Council
how he uses his powers and his authority against us.
58. I deny, and shall continue to deny, that we have
seceded from our State. We were thrown out of it by a
violent act and not allowed back in. I reject any suggestion of the idea of secession. I deny it, and shall continue to deny it, for and on behalf of my people, who are
living as part of Cyprus, but separately, because they
managed to stop the attacking forces at the right time
and saved themselves from annihilation.

65. The Council “Considers attempts to settle any
part of Varosha by people other than its inhabitants as
inadmissible and calls for the transfer of that area to the
administration
of the United Nations”.
I am sorry to
say that the Council does not even know what Varosha
means, what it is. The Secretary-General
knows it;
I know it. We have exchanged documents and maps on
it, and I undertook in my offers of 2 January to talk
about this part of the town with him. With this resolution the Council makes it extremely difficult for me to
keep my promise and continue to do so.

59. I have made no “threats for settlement of Varosha”. I made an offer on 2 January this year about
Varosha [see S/16246, annex]. Varosha is part of my
State. I have said within the offers I have made that I am
prepared to discuss it with the Secretary-General.
It
is regrettable that the Security Council, the highest
authority on earth for settling international issues, has
seen tit to dwell upon a small quarter in Cyprus without
regard to the properties abandoned by my people for
years and years.

66. In spite of my statement this morning about
the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus
6

(UNFICYP),
that matter also has been incorporated in
the resolution. We shall deal with this matter when
the time comes for the mandate in the spirit in which
I spoke this morning, hoping that nothing will be done in
the mean time by the enforced so-called Government of
Cyprus to stop us pursuing that course.

of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and to its
Government,
I shall be in touch with the SecretaryGeneral.
73. For over a week the Security Council has devoted
its time to the Cyprus question. I thank the members for
that. Although the decision lacks our support, we are
sure of their good intentions, and we look upon the
Council as the body that will help to ensure the settlement of all international conflicts by peaceful means.

67. Then the Secretary-General
is requested “to promote the urgent implementation
of Security Council
resolution 541 (1983)“. I trust that the Secretary-General will find a way parallel to this request and will not
attempt to comply with it, because that would kill the
intercommunal
talks and any prospect of negotiations.

74. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The representative of Turkey has asked to speak, and
I now call on him.

68. We are not a herd of animals; we are a people with
a history, with 20 years of struggle for our rights behind
us; we are a people entitled to the same consideration as
the Greek Cypriots. We cannot accept a position in
which we are disregarded in this fashion.

75. Mr. KIRCA
(Turkey)
[interpretation
from
French]: Turkey is sorry that it has been obliged once
again to reject a Security Council resolution on the
question of Cyprus. We must state that once again we
are faced with a text that by no means satisfies the
criteria of impartiality,
historical objectivity and a desire to uphold the supremacy of the rule of law. This
text does not serve the cause of reconciliation
and
understanding
between the two communities
of
Cyprus. Therefore Turkey rejects the resolution in its
entirety because it is based on resolution 541 (1983),
which we have already rejected in toto. Resolution 550
(1984), adopted today, is based on a fundamentally
erroneous concept. It recognizes as the Government of
the Republic of Cyprus a team of usurpers who can
claim only to represent the Greek Cypriot community.
Fortunately,
that team does not govern the island’s
Turkish community, even by violence. It has no authority to represent it. It resulted from a coup d’e’tut against
the unalterable Basic Articles of the Cypriot Constitution of 16 August 1960, which was put into effect and
guaranteed by international
treaties of the same date
duly concluded and implemented.

69. In paragraph 8 the Council reaffirms the good
offices mandate, but ties it to resolution 541 (1983).
Thus it is giving the Secretary-General a duty which has
nothing to do with good offrices. If the Secretary-General is unable to find a parallel way of approaching us
and comes to us under paragraph 8 it is this Council that
will have closed all avenues to a negotiated settlement.
I regret to say that this will be the result of this resolution, which I look upon as an utterly Greek Cypriot
resolution, supported by people who do not even know
where Cyprus is. Members voted on it in good will;
I have nothing to say about that, but they have done a
disservice to the negotiating process.
70. The Council then calls upon all parties to cooperate with the Secretary-General
in his mission of
good offices. If that refers to the powers given to him in
paragraph 6 of Council resolution 367 (1975)--which is
how I understand it-and if the Secretary-General
can
satisfy me and my people when I see him in a few days
that that, and nothing else, is the meaning of his good
offices, then, of course, we shall all try to help the
Secretary-General
as much as we can. We shall consider it our duty to do so, because we too believe that
the Cyprus problem can be settled only through intercommunal negotiations.

76. The Security Council, instead of bolstering the
illegal and illegitimate
claims of that team, might have
chosen to adopt a more just, more balanced position,
more in.keeping with the principles of the inviolability
of treaties and the primacy of the rule of law. Turkey
repeats this once again today. It hopes that circumstances will not compel it to repeat it yet again.

71, Paragraph 10 is unacceptable to us. I must point
out that there is no mention at all there of summit
agreements or high-level agreements, in spite of the fact
that today I forced out of the representative of the
Greek Cypriot side that he is all for those agreements
-or at least he had to pay lip-service to them. Why,
then, behind closed doors, did they object to a wording
which would have put us at ease?

77. I should like now to make some comments
on certain paragraphs of the resolution. On 3 May
[2532nd meeting] I had occasion to explain my Govemment’s point of view on the acts and actions referred to
in the sixth preambular paragraph and in paragraph 2,
and I shall not repeat it. Moreover, we have on several
occasions explained that the Turkish armed forces in
Cyprus are not occupation troops but protective forces
present on the basis of the 1960 Treaty of Guarantee.’
We cannot, therefore, subscribe to the content of these
two paragraphs.

72. So again, it is up to the Secretary-General
to satisfy us that the agreed procedure and formula, the summit agreements and the Secretary-General’s
1980 and
1981 efforts are in effect, and that the aim is a bi-zonal,
federal solution. If we are satisfied, after we have reported the whole affair to my people, to the Parliament

78. It is difficult for those who are thoroughly conversant with the situation concerning Varosha to understand the meaning of the seventh preambular para7

graph and paragraph 5. The comprehensive
Turkish
Cypriot proposals of 5 August 1981 and the proposals of
Mr. Rauf Denktas concerning Varosha, in particular
those of 2 January [see S/16%6, annex] and 18 April
1984 [S/16529, unnex Iv], are still under discussion
between His Excellency and the Secretary-General and
the authorities of the Turkish Republic of Northern
Cyprus. Thus, Turkey has great difficulty in understanding why these paragraphs appear in the text. In
our view, this constitutes improper interference by the
Council in the search for a solution, which is the exclusive responsibility of the two communities of the island.
That interference also creates an unfortunate precedent. Is the Council going to intervene every time it is
asked to do so by one of the parties, when it is dissatisfied with one or another position taken by the other
party on a particular point in the intercommunal
negotiations or in the talks between the other party and
the Secretary-General?
It is obvious that such a practice is unacceptable. That is why Turkey rejects that
precedent.

resolution 367 (1975) and that the resumption of the
intercommunal
talks under his auspices can be considered only on the basis of that same paragraph, a basis
that exists and that has been mutually agreed to, as
the Secretary-General has stated-on the basis, that is,
of the high-level agreements of 12 February 1977 [see
S/12323, para. 51 and 19 May 1979 [see S/13369,
para. 511, the opening statement of the Secretary-General of 9 August 1980 [S/14200, annex] and the United
Nations “evaluation’*
paper of 18 November
1981.
There exists an enormous opportunity, but only in that
framework.
85. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cyprus, upon whom I now call.
86. Mr. IACOVOU
(Cyprus): It is rather late,
Mr. President, and you have had a long day. You must
be tired by now. I only want to express my gratitude to
the members of the Security Council for the adoption of
this resolution. In particular I should like to express
our appreciation for the most constructive and effective role which the members of the Movement of NonAligned Countries played in preparing and presenting
to the Council a resolution which contains the elements
necessary to proceed to a just and principled solution of
the problem of Cyprus.

79. Turkey also rejects paragraph 3, which is no more
than an expression of policy of ostracism that certain
circles wish to apply against the Turkish community of
Cyprus. That policy is neither just nor realistic, and
it can only have consequences incompatible
with the
quest for ultimate reconciliation between the two communities on the island.

87. The grave dangers which prompted my Govemment to have recourse to the Council are clear and
current, and it is my earnest hope that this resolution
will remedy the situation, contributing at the same time
to assisting the Secretary-General
to undertake new
efforts to attain an overall solution to the problem of
Cyprus in conformity with the principles of the Charter
and the provisions laid down in the pertinent United
Nations resolutions, including resolution 541(1983) and
the present resolution.

80. This morning Mr. Denktag reiterated the position
of his Government vis-d-vis UNFICYP.
That position
is undeniably positive, welcoming and co-operative.
Turkey does not therefore understand the reason for
the inclusion of paragraph 6.
81. With regard to paragraph 10, it has no meaning. It
has no legal basis in the Charter of the United Nations.
82. Paragraph 8 is quite unacceptable to Turkey. That
paragraph is not only untimely,
but dangerous. It
is obviously going to make the Secretary-General’s
efforts, as well as the resumption of the intercommunal
talks, extremely difficult. I listened with close attention
to the comments made by Pakistan, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands on this subject.

88. Resolution 541 (1983) and the present resolution
contain all the essential elements for, and are a sure
way to achieve, progress towards a just and lasting
solution. They are a direct and natural result of the fact
that the Council has appreciated the dangers to Cyprus
emanating from recent illegalities. The Government of
the Republic of Cyprus will do its utmost to promote an
atmosphere conducive to the success of the efforts of
the Secretary-General
and to promote the implementation of the resolution the Council has just adopted,
thereby opening the road to a just settlement of the
problem of Cyprus not only in the interests of the people of Cyprus as a whole but in the interests of international peace and security.

83. Mr. Denktas offtcially stated in the Council that
the Turkish Cypriot community will not allow the continuation of the good offrces of the Secretary-General
on the basis of this paragraph and that the intercommunal negotiations cannot resume on that basis. The
good offtces of the Secretary-General
cannot be linked
to Security Council resolution 541 (1983), and the
Council has no right to set aside the high-level agreements already concluded between the two communities .

89. We feel that the Council should, as warranted by
the gravity of the situation in my country, consider
urgent measures, in accordance with the Charter, for
the implementation
of all provisions of resolution 541
(1983) and of the present resolution if the need arises
-and I sincerely hope that it will not arise. In the first
place, it is necessary for all Member States to exert

84. Mr. Denktas has unambiguously
stated that the
pursuit of the Secretary-General’s
mission of good offtces will be acceptable to the Turkish Cypriot community only on the basis of paragraph 6 of Security Council
8

90. I should be remiss were I not to express our deepest appreciation and gratitude to yew, Mr. President, for
the skillful and effective manner irs which you have
conducted our very difficult and hzq debate.
The meeting rose at 4 p.m.

influence on Turkey for the withdrawal of the secessionist declaration. It is also imperative to impress upon
Turkey that it must abandon its designs against the
unity, independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus, so essential for a peaceful, just and lasting settlement of the problem of Cyprus. It is our hope that the Turkish Government will
demonstrate a positive and constructive attitude with a
view to putting an end, as soon as possible, to the
tragedy of the people of Cyprus.

NOTE
I United Nations, Treaty

9

Series,

vol.

3C

?r’o. 5475.

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans la librairies et les agences dcpositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Genew.
IZAK

JIO.-I.Y’CHTh

NSAAHHH

OPrAHNBAI[LIH

OKI.E;~MHEHHhtX

HAlCUR

Oprauuaauun
06~enu~euuhrs
Hauuif
luloxoio tcynnrb
B roi~mktbtx
SaraJWHLX H aremcreax
BO BC~X pafiortax
slwpa. Harronuee
cnpaexu
06 ~anan~nx
B
aautesr KHI~KROM neat-aatnre W~H nutuure
no anpecy : OprannaauuR
06%e~tnneuubrx
Hauwii.
C~KUHR no nponawte nananrrH.
HLIO-Moprt
HIGH Xeueea.
R3na~m

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas panes del mundo. Cons&e
a su librero o ditijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccibn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

00300

96613134anuay

-1993-2.050
