United Nations

S/PV.6077

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6077th meeting
Tuesday, 27 January 2009, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ripert . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ebner
Mr. Koudougou
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Jurica
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Rugunda
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Wolff
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-22116 (E)

*0922116*

S/PV.6077

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.

colleagues were able to achieve in the recent fighting,
during extremely difficult and dangerous circumstances.

Adoption of the agenda

I visited the area from 21 to 25 January to discuss
the way forward with Palestinian Authority
representatives,
the
Israeli
Government
and
representatives of Israeli and Palestinian civil society.
In Cairo I met with Mrs. Mubarak, in her capacity as
President of the Egyptian Red Crescent, and with
Government representatives and the League of Arab
States. I visited Gaza itself five days after the ceasefire,
with the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Robert Serry, to launch the humanitarian
needs assessment. I expected a distressing situation,
but was nevertheless shocked by the human suffering
and destruction I saw.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in French): I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. John Holmes, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Holmes to take a seat at the Council
table.
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Karen Koning
AbuZayd, Commissioner-General of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.
It is so decided.
I invite Ms. Koning AbuZayd to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, and Ms. Karen Koning AbuZayd,
Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
I now give the floor to Under-Secretary-General
Holmes.
Mr. Holmes: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council.
Let me take advantage of the presence of the
Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) to straightaway express my profound
admiration for what Karen AbuZayd and her UNRWA

2

According to the Palestinian Ministry of Health,
whose figures have not been seriously challenged,
around 1,300 Palestinians were killed and more than
5,300 were injured. Thirty-four per cent of these were
children. In short, 1 out of 215 Gazans was either
killed or injured during the three weeks of this conflict.
While some areas I saw were relatively
untouched, in others virtually every building was
destroyed or full of holes. Twenty-one thousand homes
were destroyed or badly damaged altogether, according
to the Palestinian Bureau of Statistics. At the height of
the fighting, over 50,000 people were displaced in
UNRWA structures, with tens of thousands more
sheltering with families and friends. Widespread
destruction was caused to Gaza’s economic and civil
infrastructure. I saw, for example, an entire industrial
and residential area in East Jabalia that had been
systematically bulldozed — an area of at least one
square kilometre. One of the best schools in Gaza had
been reduced to rubble and much of the Al-Quds
hospital in Gaza City burned out. The International
Committee of the Red Cross reports that in Jabalia
between one and two thousand households are now
living in the rubble of their houses. Damage to power,
water, sanitation, medical, education and agricultural
infrastructure was widely visible. I saw a flood of
sewage coming from one bomb-damaged major pipe,
forming a lake on residential and agricultural land,
though thankfully this has now been fixed.
Conversations with a range of Gazans revealed
the psychological trauma, as civilians cowered for
three weeks with nowhere safe in Gaza and nowhere to
flee to, and parents became horribly aware of their
inability to protect their children.

09-22116

S/PV.6077

In addition to UNRWA, I want to recognize the
extraordinary efforts of Gazan medical teams and first
responders and the national and international staff of
other United Nations agencies, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and the International Red Cross
and Red Crescent Movement, despite tremendous risks.
Thirteen local medical staff and six United Nations
staff were killed. Thirty-four health facilities were
damaged or destroyed. Aid workers and premises came
under direct fire on far too many occasions. I saw the
UNRWA compound warehouse still smouldering, and
the OCHA office in the compound of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, where my own staff used to work, damaged
beyond use.
The reckless and cynical use of civilian
installations by Hamas and the indiscriminate firing of
rockets against civilian populations are clear violations
of international humanitarian law. However, even
taking into account Israel’s security concerns regarding
the protection of its own civilian population, it is clear
that there are major questions to be asked about the
failure of the Israeli Defense Forces to protect
effectively civilians and humanitarian workers in Gaza.
Given the scale and nature of the damage and loss of
life, there are also obvious concerns about a lack of
wider respect for international humanitarian law,
particularly the principles of distinction and
proportionality. There must be accountability.
But it is also critical to look forward to what must
be done to bring urgent relief. After eighteen months of
closure, which steadily weakened health, livelihoods
and infrastructure, the humanitarian situation in Gaza
before 27 December last year was already very
worrying. My own observation and the preliminary
findings of the assessment suggest that a massive
humanitarian effort is now needed in areas such as
food security, nutrition, water and sanitation, shelter,
essential repairs of power, roads and other basic
infrastructure, rebuilding the health system, rubble
removal, unexploded ordnance and psychosocial care.
As only one example, 1.3 million Gazans — almost 90
per cent of the population — now need food aid.
I will launch a flash appeal on 2 February, as a
prioritized plan for urgent needs. I hope that at least
part of the generosity we saw during the fighting in
provision of food and medical supplies and large
pledges for future reconstruction can be channelled
into flexible financial contributions to this multilateral

09-22116

appeal. But two basic conditions need to be met for us
to do our work.
The first is much freer access for goods and staff.
Israel allowed increased shipments of basic
commodities during the fighting, and has continued
this since. This is welcome. On good days, 120
truckloads of goods get into Gaza. But the normal daily
requirement, including commercial traffic, is a
minimum of 500. Many humanitarian workers,
including most international NGOs, continue to be
refused regular entry.
Moreover, returning to the kind of access
restrictions which were in force before the hostilities
will be neither acceptable nor workable. If aid workers
continue to face rigid limits on their movement and if
essential items such as construction materials, pipes,
electrical wires and transformers, key equipment and
spare parts continue to be effectively banned or only
allowed in infrequently after endless haggling, the lives
of the Gazan people cannot significantly improve. The
power plant, for example, needs almost 500,000 litres
of fuel per day to operate normally. Even under current
arrangements, the average flow is less than half that.
We already see relief goods piling up in Egypt for
lack of ready access. And the wider problems of the
fragile situation were tragically illustrated today.
Following an incident in south Gaza, when an Israeli
patrol was attacked and a farmer killed, all Gaza
crossings were shut down. That stopped today’s aid
shipments from going in and stranded part of our
assessment team.
Commercial goods must also be allowed in, and
out, and, most urgently, the cash needed for normal
activity. Gazans do not want or deserve to be ever more
dependent on outside aid. They must be able to work
and trade, to rebuild their economy, to use their
manifest skills, energy and talent and to create hope for
the future, not the despair that can only breed more
violence and extremism.
There are important principles at stake here too,
as the Security Council itself clearly recognized in
resolution 1860 (2009), which paid particular attention
to the unimpeded provision and distribution of
humanitarian assistance. Free and full access for goods
and humanitarian staff is something for which we have
battled long and hard in other contexts, such as Darfur
and in Myanmar after Cyclone Nargis. Moreover, Israel
has a particular responsibility as the occupying Power

3

S/PV.6077

in this context, because of its control of its borders
with Gaza, to respect the relevant provisions of
international humanitarian law. It is therefore critical
that new steps are taken immediately by the Israeli
authorities to move to the sustained reopening of
crossing points on the basis of the 2005 IsraeliPalestinian Agreement on Movement and Access.
Many countries support that. The crossings have to be
opened up not because Hamas wants it or might benefit
from it, but because the Gazans need it.
The Israeli Minister of Social Welfare,
Mr. Herzog, who coordinates Israel’s facilitation of
humanitarian assistance, assured me of the Israeli
Government’s commitment to work with the United
Nations agencies and the rest of the humanitarian
community to provide emergency assistance to the
people of Gaza. We have agreed to put in place new
coordination arrangements to this end. However, the
Minister also suggested that many categories of items
capable of dual use will raise continuing security
concerns.
Let me emphasize again here the unacceptability
of the status quo ante, with a limited trickle of items
into Gaza continuing the effective collective
punishment of the civilian population, the resultant
counter-productive reliance on tunnels for daily
essentials and further build-up of frustration and anger.
Israel’s security worries are understood, but I am
confident that the passage of goods can be arranged in
a way that will meet reasonable security concerns.
The second condition for a successful emergency
relief operation is that we be able to work effectively
with the Israeli authorities, cooperate closely with the
Palestinian Authority and deal practically with those in
control on the ground, without any of the parties trying
to exert political control over humanitarian operations.
For example, Hamas must refrain from any
interference with the movement or distribution of
humanitarian goods. I was encouraged that Prime
Minister Fayyad of the Palestinian Authority made it
clear that meeting immediate needs should be kept
separate from politics, and that the United Nations and
its partners had a unique role to play in this respect.
Clearly the best context for the facilitation of
relief and recovery activities, and the only reliable
basis for long-term reconstruction, is Palestinian
reconciliation, which the United Nations strongly
supports, as the Secretary-General has made clear. In
the meantime, the United Nations will be working

4

closely with the Palestinian Authority in planning for
longer-term recovery and reconstruction.
After my first visit to the area, I warned of the
growing disconnect between the situation on the
ground, particularly but not only in Gaza, and the
peace process. A year later, the people of Gaza have
continued to exist in what is effectively a giant openair prison, without normality or dignity. Their lives
have been put at risk recklessly by indiscriminate
rocket attacks from their midst, which have also killed,
injured and traumatized Israeli civilians in southern
Israel. They have now endured a terrifying assault and
must live with its devastating aftermath.
This is not sustainable or acceptable. It can only
lead to more despair, suffering, death and destruction
in the coming years, and perhaps fatally undermine the
two-State solution we all seek. It must therefore be in
the long-term interests of all parties, including Israel,
to ease conditions for the people of Gaza by opening
the crossings, facilitating the provision of assistance
and allowing them to live, work and hope again.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Holmes for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Koning AbuZayd.
Ms. Koning AbuZayd: At the outset, I should
like to thank members for their kind invitation to
address them today on the humanitarian situation in
Gaza. I am honoured to be the first CommissionerGeneral of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) to have been given that privilege. I also
want to express my appreciation for the amount of
attention that the Council has devoted to the Gaza
conflict and its aftermath. The strong expressions of
support heard from many members for the work of the
United Nations on the ground have been very
gratifying to all of us there.
I come to the Council from UNRWA headquarters
in Gaza, where I spent the first week of the recent war
and the first week after the ceasefire. I bring with me
perspectives from our 60-year-old humanitarian and
human development agency, whose mandate is to assist
and protect a population of 4.6 million Palestine
refugees in Jordan, Syria, Lebanon and the occupied
Palestinian territory. I come to share with members
what UNRWA and the refugees whom we serve are
thinking and feeling at this time of distress. I hope I

09-22116

S/PV.6077

can convey compellingly our — and their — messages
to the Council this afternoon.
In my tours around Gaza since the ceasefire of
18 January, I have been deeply saddened to see what
appears to have been systematic destruction to schools,
universities, residential buildings, factories, shops and
farms. I have observed the atmosphere of shock and
sorrow among the people of Gaza. Every Gazan
projects a sense of having stared death in the face.
Every Gazan has a tale of profound grief to tell.
There is rage against the attackers for often failing to
distinguish between military targets and civilians, and
there is also resentment against the international
community for having allowed first the siege and then
the war to go on for so long.
Yet, my interaction with Palestinians in Gaza has
also evinced their fortitude, their determination to
overcome the pain of loss and their belief in the
possibilities of rebuilding their lives. I hope that the
international community will respond with urgency and
resolve to take advantage of the opportunities to
generate recovery and renewal in Gaza.
To seize those opportunities, political action is
needed to create the conditions that will allow
humanitarian and human development activities to
have maximum impact on Palestinian lives. The
priority for early recovery is to attend to basic human
needs and basic rights such as education, health care
and the right to work. In the simplest terms, the way
forward is to help restore normal life to Gaza.
UNRWA’s early-recovery activities are already
under way. Two hundred thousand refugee children
were assisted to return to school last Saturday, while
the 50,000 displaced Palestinians who took refuge in
UNRWA classrooms are being helped to rebuild their
lives at home or in alternative accommodations. We
have prepared a quick-response plan whose main
components include restoring and strengthening
primary education and primary health care;
establishing emergency food aid, cash assistance and
job creation programmes; repairing civilian homes and
UNRWA facilities; supporting community-based
organizations; providing environmental health services
in alliance with municipal authorities; and offering
psycho-social support to the most traumatized Gazans,
including children in UNRWA schools. Surveys have
shown that the majority of Gazans suffer from shock
and are clinically depressed.

09-22116

All of this work is made possible by the
extraordinarily generous donor response to our flash
appeal, including substantial pledges from the Arab
world. Given UNRWA’s recurrent financial shortfalls,
particularly in its General Fund, those strong levels of
support are most appreciated.
Beyond UNRWA’s focus on refugees, a
coordinated inter-agency response is central to the
success of the recovery process. This will harness the
varied capabilities of the United Nations system,
working in partnership with the Palestinian Authority,
the World Bank and donor countries. UNRWA’s own
approach to recovery and reconstruction is incremental,
service-driven and designed to build on the substantial
human development investments that the international
community has made in Gaza over the years. We
consider that approach the most effective route to
making normal life possible for Palestinians in Gaza.
The surest path to calm and stability is the creation of
social and economic conditions in which Palestinians
can sustain themselves and their families in dignity.
There are challenges, however, that go well
beyond the humanitarian realm; they lie in the province
of political action. For that reason, it is on the Security
Council and its members that part of the burden of
restoring normalcy to Gaza rests. That burden is a
heavy one, but it is far from insurmountable if we act
in concert in the following well-known areas.
First, law and order needs to be re-established in
Gaza. That will permit the identification of reliable
local interlocutors to ensure security for humanitarian
personnel and operations and an environment that
safeguards the protection of civilians.
Secondly, all of Gaza’s borders — including
those at Karni, Sofa, Nahal Oz, Kerem Shalom, Erez
and Rafah — must be opened and kept open
continuously to allow two-way freedom of movement
for people, goods and cash.
Thirdly, negotiations to end the occupation and
peacefully resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict are
now more vital than ever — negotiations that are
inclusive
and
balanced,
allow
for
refugee
representation and address, along with other final
status matters, the question of Palestine refugees in a
manner consistent with their rights.
Fourthly, moves to investigate apparent
contraventions of international law, including direct
attacks on United Nations personnel and facilities —

5

S/PV.6077

such as UNRWA’s own headquarters, five of its schools
and the Office of the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process — and
accountability under law where breaches are
established, must be pursued.
And finally, none of these is achievable without
reconciliation among Palestinians and restoration of
the integrity of the occupied Palestinian territory.
From UNRWA’s operational vantage point,
addressing these issues is fundamental to the success of
early recovery and human development work.
Recovery requires the free flow of humanitarian and
commercial supplies. Reconstruction demands open
borders that permit the importation of construction
materials and the export of products and goods from
Gaza. Job creation programmes will be fruitless
without a self-sustaining employment market. And our
plans to strengthen primary education will be
undermined if we fail to offer the children of Gaza a
horizon of hope for a future free from fear, free from
poverty and full of promise.
Throughout these days of violence, the
humanitarian work of the United Nations persevered,
illustrating in concrete and often heroic ways
commitment to the principles of humanity on which the
United Nations Charter is based. UNRWA staff ran the
gauntlet of shelling, aerial bombardments and smallarms fire to attend to the injured and to deliver food
and fuel to hospitals, municipalities and the people of
Gaza. It is a matter of deep regret that four UNRWA
staff — two of them while on duty — lost their lives in
this conflict. The United Nations can be proud, as I am
proud, that during the conflict, courage and dedication
to service — hallmarks of UNRWA staff performance
for six decades — were very much in evidence.
As to the broader implications of the recent
experience in Gaza, it is worth recalling that for more
than 60 years the Security Council has wrestled with
the issues of Palestinians and Palestine refugees as
classic questions of international peace and security.
What we witnessed in Gaza seared the global
conscience with harrowing images of broken bodies
and shattered homes, of thousands of Palestinian and
tens of Israeli civilians — men, women and children —
wounded, dying and fleeing from indiscriminate
violence. The guns have fallen silent, but the images
linger, reminding us of the futility of seeking military
solutions to political problems and the perils of
political inaction.

6

Those images and the human suffering they
represent are a result of our failure to protect those
who have no part and no stake in armed conflict. And I
am afraid that this war will be remembered for the
absence of restraint among the combatants and for the
disregard for principles of humanity and the sanctity of
human life.
Equally disturbing is that, besides the devastating
impact on civilian lives and infrastructure, the conflict
has placed in further jeopardy the authority of
international law in the Middle East. It has raised hard
questions about the ability of the community of States
to be effective in its role as the custodian of
international legality in this particular regional context.
Finally, there are the ultimate challenges
highlighted by this conflict, namely, the need to tackle
the long-unfinished business of ensuring a just and
lasting solution to the plight of Palestine refugees and
to redouble efforts to establish a viable Palestinian
State, living in peace and security with Israel.
We in UNRWA will persist in our devotion to the
service of Palestine refugees. We will continue to
discharge our mandate in a manner that promotes the
inherent dignity and worth of the Palestinians we serve.
Yet that dignity and worth are not ours alone to
promote. Palestinians and Palestine refugees are
assured of UNRWA’s help, but their greater need is to
have the demonstrated support of the international
community, as represented by the Security Council. In
the months to come, as we build on the fragile
ceasefire achieved following the passage of resolution
1860 (2009), continued engagement by the Security
Council will be of utmost importance.
UNRWA appeals to the Council as the body that
sits at the pinnacle of multilateral power, to exercise its
authority in ways that transform into reality the shared
dream of both Israelis and Palestinians for a secure,
peaceful and prosperous tomorrow.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Commissioner-General for her briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I now invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

09-22116
