United Nations

S/PV.5564

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5564th meeting
Thursday, 9 November 2006, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Voto-Bernales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Gayama
Ms. Løj
Mr. De La Sablière
Nana Effah-Apenteng
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Shinyo
Mr. Al-Bader
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Matulay
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Taj
Mr. Bolton

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
Letter dated 6 November 2006 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Qatar to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2006/868)
Letter dated 7 November 2006 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Azerbaijan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2006/869)
Letter dated 8 November 2006 from the Permanent Representative of Cuba to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2006/871)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-60930 (E)

*0660930*

S/PV.5564

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
Letter dated 6 November 2006 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Qatar to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2006/868)
Letter dated 7 November 2006 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Azerbaijan to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council
(S/2006/869)
Letter dated 8 November 2006 from the
Permanent Representative of Cuba to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2006/871)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Algeria, Azerbaijan, Cuba,
Egypt, Finland, Israel, Lebanon, Malaysia, Morocco,
Norway, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Spain, Sudan, Tunisia
and Yemen, requesting to be invited to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Carmon
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
8 November 2006 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2006/873, and which reads as follows:

2

“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council being held
on Thursday, 9 November 2006, regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should also
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter
dated 8 November 2006 from the representative of
Senegal, which reads as follows:
“Under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council, I have the
honour to request to be invited, as Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, to participate in
the debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.”
In accordance with past practice in this matter, I
propose that the Council extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite His Excellency Mr. Paul Badji to take the
seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Ms.
Angela Kane, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

06-60930

S/PV.5564

The Security Council is meeting in response to
the requests contained in letters dated 6, 7 and 8
November 2006 from the representatives of Qatar,
Azerbaijan and Cuba addressed to the President of the
Security Council and circulated as documents
S/2006/868, 869 and 871, respectively.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ms. Angela Kane, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs.
I now give her the floor.
Ms. Kane (Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs): Yesterday morning, Wednesday
8 November, at approximately 5.30 a.m., Israeli forces
fired 12 to 15 shells into north-west Beit Hanoun in the
northern Gaza Strip. Shelling continued for 30 minutes
and a house was destroyed. At least 18 Palestinians
were killed, including eight children and seven women.
A further 55 people were injured.
This incident followed a weeklong military
operation undertaken by the Israel Defense Forces
(IDF) in northern Gaza. The operation, code-named
Autumn Clouds, began in the early hours of
Wednesday 1 November, when the IDF entered Beit
Hanoun in tanks and armoured vehicles. Israeli forces
remained for a week and conducted arrests, door-todoor searches and military operations. During this
period, the IDF controlled all movement in and out of
Beit Hanoun and imposed a strict curfew on its
inhabitants. According to the IDF, the operation was
intended, “to prevent and disrupt the launching of
rockets at Israel and to damage the terror infrastructure
in the Beit Hanoun area”. The IDF withdrew from Beit
Hanoun on Tuesday 7 November.
According to the World Health Organization, 82
Palestinians were killed during the operations in Gaza
between 1 and 8 November. Of those killed, 21 were
children, 12 were women and 49 were men. A further
260 Palestinians were injured. According to the IDF, 57
of those killed in Gaza this week were “armed
terrorists”. The IDF also recovered a large number of
weapons. One Israeli soldier was killed and at least one
other was injured during the military operations in
Gaza.
Palestinian militants continued to fire rockets into
Israel during the week. According to the Government
of Israel, 52 rockets and mortars were fired towards
Israel between 31 October and 6 November, of which

06-60930

35 detonated in Israel, notably in the cities of Sderot
and Ashkelon. At least four Israeli civilians were
injured by these rockets. At least three rockets landed
today, but no one was hurt.
The humanitarian situation in Beit Hanoun
deteriorated over the course of the week. Most areas of
the town were without electricity and water, and there
has been extensive infrastructure damage. At least 18
homes, a mosque and non-governmental organization
offices were demolished, and a further 150 homes and
nine commercial properties were damaged. The
hospital continued to function, but primary health care
services ceased to operate, as health staff were unable
to leave their homes.
United Nations agencies and the International
Committee of the Red Cross were able to provide food,
water, powdered milk, fuel and hygiene kits on three
occasions during the week, when the IDF lifted the
curfew briefly to allow humanitarian access. On 3
November, two volunteer paramedics of the Palestinian
Red Crescent Society died following IDF fire received
in Beit Lahiya while performing their emergency
medical duties. The individuals concerned and their
means of transport were clearly marked with a
distinctive emblem conferring the protection of the
Geneva Conventions.
Since the launching of the IDF operation on 1
November, the United Nations has been in contact with
the Israeli Government at the highest levels to express
concern about the situation in Gaza. The Prime
Minister of Israel gave assurances to the SecretaryGeneral over the weekend that no operation would be
launched that was not essential to stop the firing of
rockets by militants. On Tuesday, the IDF announced
that the Beit Hanoun incursion was concluding.
Yesterday, however, the Israeli artillery continued
attacks.
The United Nations was in contact with members
of the Israeli Government again yesterday to reiterate
the call for restraint and the urgent need to protect
civilians.
The Secretary-General publicly expressed his
shock to learn about yesterday’s incident and extended
his condolences to the families of the victims. His
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Alvaro de Soto, also issued a statement the same day.
Prime Minister Olmert and Defense Minister Peres
yesterday expressed their regret over the deaths of

3

S/PV.5564

Palestinian civilians. Prime Minister Olmert also
announced the suspension of IDF artillery fire pending
an investigation of the circumstances of this latest
incident.
Yesterday, Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas
and Prime Minister Ismael Haniyeh postponed their
talks on the establishment of a new Palestinian
Government “until further notice”. The talks had been
intense during the past week, and the Prime Minister
and the President had agreed in principle on Monday to
a formula for the composition and programme of a new
Government.
In the meantime, in Damascus, Khaled Mashaal,
the exiled leader of Hamas, called for renewed attacks
on Israel. He urged other militant groups to join the
struggle.
The incident that occurred in Beit Hanoun on
Wednesday is shocking. Men, women and children who
posed no threat were killed as they slept in their home.
While this incident is unusual in scale, it is, however,
not the first time that an Israeli military operation in
the occupied Palestinian territory has resulted in a high
number of civilian casualties.
The Secretary-General has repeatedly expressed
his deep concern about the rising death toll caused by
the Israeli military operation in northern Gaza, given
that such operations inevitably cause civilian
casualties. The Secretary-General has reminded both
sides of their obligations under international
humanitarian law regarding the protection of civilians
in armed conflict and reiterated his call to the Israeli
Government to cease its military operations in Gaza
without delay.
The Secretary-General took note of the reported
announcement by the Israeli Government of a full
investigation into this latest incident and looks forward
to its early results. We see the investigation as an
opportunity for Israel to reflect not only on the obvious
military and operational implications, but also on the
policy of military pressure as a whole, which is quite
clearly not producing the desired goal of stopping
rocket attacks. The Palestinians need, more than ever, a
respite from the siege to which they are subjected so
that they can see on the horizon a credible, negotiated
way out.
The United Nations has repeatedly condemned
Palestinian rocket fire. We do so again today, as we

4

note that a large number of rockets have been fired by
Palestinian militants into Israel during the past week. It
is of critical importance that responsible Palestinian
forces should join in action to make sure that militant
attacks are stopped. This is one of the reasons why the
United Nations and its partners in the Quartet continue
to encourage the efforts of President Abbas to bring
about a national unity Government. Such a new
Government is the best way for the Palestinians to
tackle the problem of law and order.
We hope that both Israelis and Palestinians will,
in the wake of yesterday’s tragedy in Beit Hanoun,
pause and reflect on the fact that the conflict between
them will not be resolved by force and that ways must
be found to bring about negotiations. We therefore
reiterate our call for a return to dialogue as the only
way out of this spiral of violence.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Mr. President, at the
outset, allow me to congratulate you upon the
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We are certain that, under your able
leadership, the Council will spare no effort to address
the many critical issues before it at this time. We would
also like to congratulate the Ambassador of Japan for
his stewardship of the Council for the month of
October. I would also like to thank Ms. Kane for her
briefing.
Before proceeding with my statement, I would
also like to thank the members of the Arab Group, the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), the Organization of
the Islamic Conference (OIC) and others for their
request to convene this timely meeting of the Security
Council. The number of members in these groups
represents the overwhelming majority of the countries
of the United Nations who are counting on the Security
Council to uphold its responsibilities, in accordance
with the United Nations Charter.
Over the past week, Israel, the occupying Power,
has continued and intensified its barbaric military
aggression against the Palestinian people in the
occupied Palestinian territory, especially in the Gaza
Strip. Flagrant violations and grave breaches of
international law — war crimes — are being
committed by the occupying Power against the
Palestinian civilian population every single day,
including at this very moment. I believe it is necessary

06-60930

S/PV.5564

to recall before the Council that wilful killing is
causing great suffering and serious injury to body and
health, and that the extensive destruction and
appropriation of property, not justified by military
necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly, are
among those acts considered to constitute grave
breaches of the Fourth Geneva Convention.
In this regard, in grave breach of the Convention,
which governs military occupation, and in serious
violation of other relevant provisions of international
law, Israel continues to use excessive and
indiscriminate force against Palestinian civilians,
killing men, women and children, and wantonly
destroying Palestinian homes and properties in the
occupied Palestinian territory, particularly in the Gaza
Strip. Defenceless and unprotected by the international
community, the Palestinian people continue to suffer
the wrath of Israel’s violent and lethal occupation
policies and practices.
Yesterday’s massacre of innocent Palestinian
civilians by the Israeli occupying forces in Beit
Hanoun in the northern Gaza Strip is the most recent
and the most telling illustration of the vicious and
barbaric behaviour and actions of the occupying Power.
As unprotected victims slept in their beds, Israeli tanks
unleashed a barrage of tank fire, shelling the residential
neighbourhood of Al-Kafaraneh. This massacre took
the lives of 19 Palestinian civilians, including 16
members of one family — the Al-Athamneh family.
Among the victims were a one-month-old infant, a
one-year-old baby, seven children and six women. The
survivors of the attack woke up to the gruesome scenes
of blood and body parts scattered across their
neighbourhood.
Until now, Palestinian medical personnel have
been unable to identify several of the victims because
the amount and non-conventional nature of the
explosives used by the occupying Power have left most
of the murdered with severe burns and shattered and
distorted body parts. Doctors in the Gaza Strip insist
that these kinds of severe injuries are caused by the
most vicious types of weapons that Israel, the
occupying Power, has been unleashing against the
besieged Gaza population for the past six months.
This is terrorism. This is State terrorism. These
are war crimes for which the perpetrators must be held
accountable under international law. What we have
seen today, and in recent days and months — the blood

06-60930

of Palestinian civilians flowing in the streets, the
demolition of their homes, and their constant
humiliation, suffering and collective punishment — is
exactly what the Palestinian people have been
subjected to under nearly 39 years of Israeli
belligerence. There has been a constant barrage of war
crimes, State terrorism and systematic human rights
violations, for which the international community must
hold this occupying Power responsible. The
lawlessness and impunity of Israel must be brought to
an end, and the Palestinian people must be accorded
their rights under international law, including their
right to protection as a civilian population under
occupation.
The latest massacre in Beit Hanoun took place
less than 24 hours after the Israeli occupying forces
declared an end to their aggression in the area, which
has been carried out since 1 November 2006. Families
and lives are being destroyed by the occupying Power
on a wholesale basis, as it continues launching military
assaults.
In the past eight days alone, Israeli occupying
forces have killed over 100 and have injured over 350
Palestinians. Since the end of June more than 450
Palestinians have been killed in the Gaza Strip, making
death, mourning and grief a nearly daily ritual for the
population of Gaza. Indeed, the bloodshed and loss
caused by the occupying Power has been great, because
Israel has breached every single one of its obligations
as an occupying Power under international law. It has
blatantly violated all norms and standards of
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law.
To be frank, one of the most regrettable aspects
of what is taking place in Gaza is the fact that Palestine
has sent countless letters to all members of the Security
Council, and the Council has done nothing. In those
letters, we have described the dreadful situation under
which the Palestinian people are forced to live as a
result of the occupying Power’s brutal actions. We
have also warned that the absence of a clear and strong
position by the international community to demand an
immediate cessation of Israel’s military aggression
would result in further carnage among the Palestinian
people.
That warning has also come from President
Mahmoud Abbas who has repeatedly called on the
Security Council and the international community to

5

S/PV.5564

shoulder its responsibilities and to stop Israel’s brutal
crimes. Despite that, the Security Council has failed to
act, it has failed to uphold international peace and
security and it has failed to protect the lives of
hundreds of Palestinian civilians. The sanctioning of
savage acts committed by the occupying Power creates
a culture of impunity among the Israelis.
It should be highlighted that all of this has been
occurring while President Mahmoud Abbas has been
exerting all efforts to secure agreement among all
Palestinian parties for national unity and to promote
calm. President Abbas continues to call for diplomacy
to be given a chance, in order to save many lives on the
Palestinian side as well as on the Israeli side. However,
the way Israel has reciprocated is by inflicting more
suffering and loss among the Palestinian people and
further destabilizing the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory and beyond, in the region as a
whole, clearly making this a matter of international
peace and security.
It must be said that we do not accept the repulsive
repeated statements by Israeli officials expressing their
“regret” or their “apology” for committing these
atrocities against our people. Of course it regrets the
loss of civilian lives, especially children. What
civilized nation would not? Israel is always quick to
respond with a forked tongue. However, in the same
vein, its occupying forces continue to commit crime
after crime with a culture of impunity. When a criminal
is facing charges before a court, he often pleads before
the judge, expressing his deepest regret. But in a real
justice system, the judge will tell him, “Sorry is not
enough, and you will have to be punished”. That is
why the perpetrators must be brought to justice.
As I said at the beginning of my statement, the
wilful killing and injury of civilians constitutes a grave
breach of international law — a war crime. Without a
doubt, therefore, Israel is repeatedly committing war
crimes against the Palestinian people. As such, the time
has come for urgent action on the part of the Security
Council. Failure to act at this time will seriously
damage the Council’s credibility. How many more
Palestinians will have to be killed before the Security
Council acts? How many Palestinian families will
suffer complete annihilation by the occupying Power?
Enough is enough, and the Security Council
cannot continue to remain silent and inactive when it
comes to the lives of the Palestinian people. If the

6

Security Council fails to uphold its obligations and to
bring a halt to Israeli aggression, it will only bolster
the occupying Power’s impunity and that will only
come at the cost of more innocent Palestinian lives. We
trust that this is not the intention of the members of the
Security Council.
Again, we call on the international community to
voice its strong condemnation of the ongoing
aggression and the massacre in Beit Hanoun. We are
calling for the immediate cessation of this aggression
and the immediate withdrawal of the occupying forces
to the positions they held prior to 28 June 2006.
Moreover, we call for an investigation of the massacre
as well as a mutual ceasefire, and for a United Nations
observer force to monitor and observe the ceasefire.
The international community, in particular the
Security Council, must hold the Israeli Government
accountable before its legal and political obligations
under international law; it must ensure that Israel
abides by the principles of the Fourth Geneva
Convention and brings its military aggression in the
occupied Palestinian territory, in particular the Gaza
Strip, to a complete halt. The Palestinian people — the
Palestinian children — are awaiting the Council’s
response.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Carmon (Israel): What brings us here today
is the escalation of the situation in Gaza, following the
ongoing terrorist attacks against Israel and my
country’s response in self-defence. In the course of the
operation, a tragic event occurred, the accidental
killing of civilians in Beit Hanoun. Despite the doubts
we have heard just minutes ago from the PLO Observer
on our public reaction to the event, I would like to
assure you, Sir, and the members of the Council of the
Israeli Government’s and people’s deep sorrow and
regret over the deaths of innocent civilians. We are
deeply saddened by that heartbreaking occurrence.
Urgent humanitarian assistance and immediate medical
care for the wounded has been offered to the
Palestinian Authority, and an immediate investigation
and halt of the artillery fire has also been ordered. Let
me assure the Council that Israel is doing its utmost to
make sure that such tragedies do not happen again.
Although the Palestinian civilians killed in this
incident may have been killed by Israeli fire, they are
in fact the victims of Hamas terrorism. In the course of

06-60930

S/PV.5564

war — and let there be no mistake, the difficult times
we are living in indeed constitute a time of war, a war
against terror — there are regrettable incidents. But if
Palestinian terror did not continue to assault Israelis, if
Qassam rockets and mortar shells stopped sailing out
of Gaza into Israel, the incident in Beit Hanoun would
never have happened. A single decision is needed: the
Palestinian Authority Government must decide to stop
using terrorism as a means to achieve its goals.
When Israel left Gaza more than one year ago,
we, together with the international community, waited
to see how the Palestinians would take advantage of
that historic occasion. Would they take charge of their
destiny and seize the moment to improve their lives?
Would they march towards the creation of an
independent Palestinian State, living side by side, in
peace and security, with Israel as their neighbour?
Unfortunately, reality has proved to be tragically
different: Gaza has become a command centre for
terror organizations; Gaza has become a launching pad
for terrorist attacks; Gaza has become a cog in the
terror machine of its puppeteering masters.
Since Israel left Gaza, more than 1,000 Qassam
rockets and mortar shells have been fired at Israeli
communities in the south — this, I repeat, since Israel
left Gaza. The smuggling of weapons through tunnels
dug deep in the ground also continues. Corporal Gilad
Shalit remains abducted and in the hands of terrorists.
The Hamas Government is refusing to embrace
the three principles outlined by the Quartet and
adopted by the international community: to recognize
Israel, to renounce violence and to abide by previous
agreements.
But Hamas’ insolence is worse than its disregard
of obligations. Listen carefully to the words of the
Palestinian Prime Minister, Ismail Haniyeh, who said:
“The language of blood is my language, and there
is nothing but blood. I have shut my mouth to the
art of speech, and let the machine gun do the
talking.”
Or what about the Hamas Foreign Minister, Mahmoud
Zahar, who said:
“Neither the liberation of the Gaza Strip nor the
liberation of the West Bank or even Jerusalem
will suffice us. Hamas will pursue the armed
struggle until the liberation of all our lands. We

06-60930

don’t recognize the State of Israel and its right to
hold on to one inch of Palestine.”
Israel, too, has protested to the Security Council
and its members for weeks now, alerting and warning
them about the rising dangers in Gaza and the
escalation in terrorist activity — all in vain.
Israel has been asked repeatedly to show
restraint. We were told that we must give the moderates
within the Palestinian leadership time and space to
enable them to contain Hamas and other terrorist
organizations. But let me ask the Council: what is
enough time? When is it okay to say “No more”? After
1,000 rockets? After 2,000 rockets? When is enough
enough?
If we have learned one thing since we disengaged
from Gaza, it is that lengthy deliberations, public
statements to the press and even resolutions cannot
change the reality in Gaza today; only actions can.
That begins, first and foremost, with renouncing terror
and ending the violence against Israel.
The Palestinian leadership cannot demand
national rights while refusing to fulfil its national
responsibility. They cannot base their policy on hatred,
and they cannot endorse terrorism. The Palestinian
Authority must be held accountable for what happens
in its territory and among its population.
Once again, it must be made clear to all: Israel
does not target civilians. Israel’s enemy is not the
Palestinian people. Our enemy is the terrorists who
attack our citizens. The equation is simple: if the
terrorist attacks from Gaza stop, Israel will have no
need for self-defence.
Hope, promise and an urgently needed change in
reality can come only from those who understand the
cost of terror and value the rewards of peace. It starts
with a renewal of commitments to the two-State
solution and an acceptance of the basic principle that
each people’s rights are to be realized in their own
homeland.
The international community must reject the
terrorist elements within the Palestinian Authority and
the Palestinian leadership. At the same time, it cannot
allow the moderates to hide behind the terrorists. It
should call upon the moderate leadership to exercise its
mandate and take control. It may be unpleasant, and
even somewhat dangerous, to dismantle and outlaw
terrorist groups. But that is what national leadership

7

S/PV.5564

means, and that is what national leaders do. If you
want national rights, you must take responsibility:
recognize Israel, renounce violence and abide by
previous agreements.
Permitting the status quo to continue and
allowing terrorism to go savagely unchecked are not
merely acts of neglect; they constitute reckless
endangerment of the prospects for peace, our regional
future and the very foundations of human dignity and
right to life.
In Lebanon, there is ample cause to be optimistic.
Now, nearly three months after resolution 1701 (2006)
was adopted by the Council, we have seen positive
developments in southern Lebanon. Resolution 1701
(2006) sent a clear and unambiguous message that the
international community will not tolerate a State within
a State, be it Hizbollah or any other terrorist
organization. The strength of that conviction and that
resolution are a test for the Council. Trilateral meetings
and basic coordination are beginning to get off the
ground. We have witnessed the historic occurrence of
the Lebanese army’s deployment over all of its
territory. Today, there is one, unequivocal address in
Lebanon, and it is the Government of Lebanon.
Success, however, cannot be prematurely
declared. Success will be determined only to the extent
to which resolution 1701 (2006) is fully implemented.
First and foremost is the immediate and unconditional
release of our kidnapped soldiers, Udi Goldwasser and
Eldad Regev. We have with us this morning, here in the
Council Chamber, Mrs. Karnit Goldwasser, wife of Udi
Goldwasser. She is here to remind Council members
that, in voting for resolution 1701 (2006), they pledged
to do their utmost to see our kidnapped soldiers
released. This is a humanitarian crisis of the greatest
urgency, and we ask the Council to make good on those
pledges and to ensure their freedom.
Secondly, we must ensure the strength and
effectiveness of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon and see to it that the Lebanese army continues
and remains deployed throughout its territory.
Thirdly, there is reason to be concerned about the
smuggling of arms across the border between Lebanon
and Syria. Hizbollah’s rearming not only violates the
essence and strength of resolution 1701 (2006); it
places the entire region in immediate peril. There can
be no ambiguity in policy here. The embargo must be
enforced, and its violators must be held accountable.

8

Those are matters of concern that we hope the
Council will continue to monitor.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached among Council
members, I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I am
taking the floor in my capacity as Chairman of the
Group of Arab States for the current month.
Permit me at the outset, on behalf of the Arab
Group, to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
urgent Security Council meeting to consider the
repeated Israeli aggressions in the Gaza Strip, in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem. The Arab Group requested this meeting
following Israel’s serious escalation of its military
operations in the occupied Palestinian territory at the
beginning of this month.
The latest Israeli aggression has led to the deaths
of more than 50 civilians and the injury of hundreds in
the Gaza Strip and the West Bank in one week. It has
destroyed vital infrastructure, in grave violation of
international humanitarian law and international human
rights. In particular, it represents a grave violation of
the relevant provisions of the 1949 Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilians in
Time of War. It also contravenes relevant Security
Council resolutions.
The consequences of Israel’s military operations
affect many areas of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank.
Gaza has become a vast prison in which the people
have been shorn of their basic needs and their freedom
of movement, leading to a further deterioration of their
living conditions.
The excessive and unbalanced use of armed force
and other illegal practices of the occupation forces,
along with the targeting of civilian women during a
peaceful demonstration in Beit Hanoun, are proof that
the military campaign has exceeded its declared
objective. It falls within the context of policies of
killing, suppression, intimidation and collective
punishment implemented by Israel, the occupying
Power, against the Palestinian people. In seeking to

06-60930

S/PV.5564

defend its civilians, Israel has no reason to resort to
such illegal and excessive practices or to act in
violation of humanitarian law, thereby hindering the
peace process.
It is truly confounding that the international
community should remain silent in the face of the
occupying Power’s blatant and disproportionate
aggression against defenceless Palestinians. That
silence can only encourage Israel to commit further
offences against the Palestinian people, culminating in
the grave crime committed yesterday against civilians
in the sight of the entire world, in which artillery shells
were fired on a residential neighbourhood, killing
nearly 20 people and injuring more than 40, most of
them women and children, in continuation of the
violations repeatedly committed by the occupying
Power in the occupied territories, which have killed
more than 100 Palestinian children since the beginning
of the year.
Israel’s ongoing flagrant violations of and
disregard for international law and the resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council erode
the credibility of the Organization and instil frustration
and a sense of hopelessness that do not serve the
purposes of peace and stability in the Middle East. The
Council must therefore assume its responsibilities for
the maintenance of international peace and security and
urgently stem the violence in the occupied territories.
We also call on the Secretary-General to prepare a
report, to be submitted to the Security Council, on
Israel’s ongoing aggression in the occupied Palestinian
territories. We further call for an immediate ceasefire
in the occupied territories and the dispatch of an
international observer force. Moreover, we ask the
Security Council to take definitive and concrete action
to revive the stagnant Middle East peace process on all
tracks, in accordance with the agreements reached to
date and in the light of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Arab peace initiative, the road map and
other terms of reference. We also call for full
guarantees and incentives for all parties to implement
those agreements and for the removal of all obstacles
to efforts to reach a lasting and comprehensive peace.
Finally, we would ask the Council to give serious
consideration to the draft resolution we have submitted
in that regard.
I now wish to speak in my national capacity and
to make a statement on behalf of the delegation of
Qatar.

06-60930

At a time when the Palestinian people are
suffering a grave deterioration in their humanitarian
situation resulting from the blockade imposed upon
them by the Israeli occupation authorities, which have
failed to observe the most basic human rights, the
Israeli Government has escalated its military
operations in the Palestinian territories since the
beginning of this month, particularly in the Gaza Strip,
and in a manner that exceeds all expectations.
It has transformed the Gaza Strip into a virtual
battlefield and exposed its defenceless inhabitants,
including women, children and the elderly, to grave
danger, culminating yesterday in a massacre of
innocent civilians. Nearly 21 people were killed and
more than 55 injured, most of them women, children
and the elderly, in Beit Hanoun, in violation of
international law and norms, including international
humanitarian law and the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilians in Time of War.
The Council must address this acute crisis and
assume its responsibilities for the maintenance of
international peace and security and the protection of
civilians from murder, devastation and the violation of
their human rights. It is incumbent upon the Council to
accord this question the attention it merits in
comparison with others. We would never have
imagined that the Council would stand idly by before
such a serious escalation without lifting a finger to put
an end to the violence and promote the peace process.
It is paradoxical that the Council should address less
pressing questions with greater attention, while
ignoring a critical question that may have grave
international
and
regional
repercussions
and
implications.
The last century witnessed the outbreak of
numerous conflicts that the Council addressed in all
earnestness. However, in the Middle East, the volcano
of conflict has erupted and has yet to subside. Today,
the crisis in our region has been exacerbated more than
ever before and, while the blood of innocents continues
to be shed unabated, the temperature of the peace
process rises and falls with the political climate
prevailing in certain capitals. The pace of that peace
process has ranged between stalling and a complete
standstill, thus eroding popular confidence in the
process, which, in turn has led to widespread
frustration and despair. We must therefore pause and
reflect deeply on the reasons behind the current failure

9

S/PV.5564

and stagnation of the peace process, which perpetuate
the spiral of violence and counter-violence.
All acts of violence, provocation, instigation and
destruction warrant condemnation, no matter who
perpetrates them. The shedding of people’s blood, be
they Arab, Israeli or other, is taboo. In such tragic
conditions, there is a manifest need to accelerate the
resumption of efforts to find a peaceful, comprehensive
and lasting settlement to the crisis in the Middle East
and, at its core, the question of Palestine, in accordance
with international terms of reference, relevant Security
Council resolutions and the road map. At the same
time, we must understand that it is impossible to fight
an idea with a bomb. Experience has proven that
armies and separation walls are no longer sufficient to
provide security for the citizens of our age, especially
in a region like the Middle East. We must, therefore,
seek effective means to achieve security, while
recognizing that the Middle East crisis cannot be
resolved by force, but rather through dialogue and
common sense.
In conclusion, I would like to raise the following
question before the Security Council. Why does the
Council address questions of lesser importance and
seriousness with great earnestness and resolve while
this grave question — the Arab-Israeli conflict, which
endangers the security of the entire region — does not
enjoy such attention, in particular when the Middle
East region as a whole is experiencing grave and
critical conditions that are known to everyone? I look
forward to receiving an answer to that question.
If there is an attempt to usurp the will of a
people, we do not accept that as the will of the
Council. We will work towards the adoption of the
draft resolution that we have circulated to members of
the Council as soon as possible. We look forward to the
Council taking a united and sincere approach to this
serious issue.

population. In the latest attack, carried out on
Wednesday, 8 November, 18 Palestinians, including
8 children and 7 women, were reported killed, with as
many as 40 persons wounded in Beit Hanoun, in the
northern Gaza Strip. We condemn that attack and
express our profound shock at the loss of life and
damage to property. We extend our heartfelt
sympathies and condolences to President Abbas, the
Palestinian Authority and the bereaved families of the
victims.
The disastrous outcome of that latest military
operation, and others in the past, has shown that it is
impossible to conduct such attacks in a populated area
like Gaza without causing death and injury to innocent
civilians and collateral damage to property. We have
taken note of the regret expressed by the Israeli
Government over the incident and look forward to the
early release of the findings of the investigations
promised by the Israeli Government into this tragedy.
Attacks of this nature have in the past led to
reprisals that have caused more havoc and fuelled the
conflict between Palestine and Israel, without an end to
the provocative cycle of violence that persists in the
region. We would, therefore, like to take this
opportunity to appeal to the Palestinian people to
exercise maximum restraint and to avoid any revenge
attacks against Israel.
It should now be apparent to both Palestine and
Israel that the firing of rockets and the execution of
military operations have not achieved the desired
objective of preventing further attacks into one
another’s territory. Those actions have further escalated
hostilities and worsened the plight of their people. In
that regard, my delegation wishes to remind both sides
of their obligations under international humanitarian
law regarding the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): At the outset,
allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this meeting, and to express my appreciation to
Assistant Secretary-General Angela Kane for her
briefing on the latest developments in the occupied
Palestinian territory.

Given the highly charged atmosphere in the
Middle East, the Security Council must act with
dispatch and request the cessation of Israeli military
operations in the occupied Palestinian territory. In that
respect, we also expect the Council to call on
Palestinians to halt the firing of rockets against Israeli
targets, which invariably attracts military strikes.

The week-long Israeli military operation in the
occupied Palestinian territory — ostensibly to stop the
firing of rockets into Israel — has, like other similar
incursions, resulted in casualties among the Palestinian

We share the view that violence is not a solution
to the conflict in the Middle East, at the heart of which
is the Palestinian question. Effective action by the
Security Council to achieve the immediate cessation of

10

06-60930

S/PV.5564

hostilities will be an important step in the search for a
solution to this problem. We do not believe that the
international community has devoted enough attention
of late to this long-festering conflict. The Security
Council must henceforth resolve to work assiduously
towards the resolution of the Palestinian question on
the basis of its own resolutions and in accordance with
the Road Map and the Arab peace initiative and to
implement the two-State solution that entails an
independent Palestinian State living side by side with
Israel within internationally recognized borders.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Ms. Angela Kane for her briefing. I
also wish to associate myself with the statement to be
delivered shortly by the representative of Finland on
behalf of the European Union.
I would first like to express my country’s sorrow
at the news of the terrible events of recent days that
have taken the lives of so many Palestinians in the
Gaza Strip, especially yesterday’s occurrence at Beit
Hanoun. On behalf of the Government of France, I
wish to extend our heartfelt condolences to the families
of the Palestinian victims. France would like to see
light shed on the circumstances surrounding that attack
as possible. It will be up to the Secretary-General to set
out the parameters for an eventual independent inquiry.
We join the Secretary-General in calling on Israel to
immediately put an end to its military operations in the
Gaza Strip.
More generally speaking, France would like to
reiterate its condemnation of indiscriminate Israeli
artillery fire into populated areas. Those actions, which
endanger civilian populations and constitute a violation
of international humanitarian law, especially the
Geneva Conventions, must end. Israel’s legitimate
right to self-defence on behalf of its citizens must be
exercised in full respect for international humanitarian
law.
France also condemns the firing of rockets into
Israeli territory, as well as the appeal of certain armed
Palestinian groups for a resumption of suicide attacks.
The Palestinian Authority has the duty to maintain law
and order and combat terrorism. We would like to
reiterate our support for the efforts of President Abbas
to strengthen national Palestinian consensus and to
form a Government whose political platform would
reflect the principles of the Quartet and of the peace
process.

06-60930

As the Minister for Foreign Affairs said here in
September, there is no military solution to the ArabIsraeli conflict. Violence only feeds frustration,
resentment and hatred. It also runs the risk of dragging
the entire region into a new dangerous escalation.
Today more than ever, the two parties must
demonstrate a spirit of responsibility and abstain from
any action that could further complicate efforts to
arrive at a political solution at a time when peace and
dialogue should be everyone’s objective.
The international community — and the Quartet
first and foremost — must become involved without
delay in resolving this conflict, which remains central
to the region. The tragic escalation of recent days
underscores the need for an urgent meeting of the
Quartet to follow up the commitments undertaken in
New York in September, with a view to reinvigorating
the prospects for peace. There is no alternative to the
establishment of a viable, democratic and sovereign
Palestinian State living in peace and security with
Israel.
Given the worrisome growing number of civilian
victims in recent months, we wonder about the
possibility of possibly putting in place a mechanism to
protect the civilian population. We believe that, in
collaboration with the Secretary-General, we should
collectively consider potential options in that regard.
The next meeting of the Quartet may provide an
opportunity for that. France, along with its European
Union partners, will continue to work towards a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution based on
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid Conference
terms of reference, the principle of land for peace and
the Arab peace initiative.
Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to join previous speakers in thanking Assistant
Secretary-General Ms. Angela Kane for her briefing
and update on the current situation in Gaza, and you,
Mr. President, for organizing and chairing this meeting
to discuss, in a constructive manner, recent
developments in the region.
Slovakia aligns itself with the statement that will
be delivered shortly by the Permanent Representative
of Finland on behalf of the European Union. I will
therefore limit my statement to the following remarks.
Slovakia is deeply concerned at the increased
violence that has recently been taking place in Gaza
and especially at yesterday’s shocking Israeli military

11

S/PV.5564

operation which resulted in the death and injury of
dozens of Palestinian civilians. We strongly deplore
any action that causes such appalling civilian casualties
and call on Israel to undertake serious efforts to
investigate that tragic event. Concrete results are
urgently needed.
Although we believe Israel has the right of selfdefence against terrorism and its perpetrators, its
response must always be proportionate, and everything
possible must be done to avert the loss of innocent
lives. In that regard, we call on Israel to take every
possible measure to protect the lives of the civilian
population, in keeping with international humanitarian
law.
We also urge the Palestinian Authority to
undertake all necessary measures and make every
effort to find and release the kidnapped Israeli soldier,
as well as prevent further military and terrorist attacks
on Israel, notably the launching of rockets against
Israeli population centres. We support the leadership
and efforts of President Mahmoud Abbas to achieve
that goal and to foster national unity among the
Palestinians. We hope that the Palestinian Government
will cooperate towards that end.
We also note and support the many efforts made
by President Abbas to form a Government of national
unity. We expect that such a Government will be
committed to the Quartet principles and that its
political platform will enable early engagement as well
as the continuation of dialogue aimed at finding a
solution to the Middle East conflict.
We take this opportunity to reaffirm our support
for a just, comprehensive and lasting settlement to the
Middle East conflict based on all relevant Security
Council resolutions and negotiations between the two
sides. Slovakia fully supports the two-State solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In order to make
progress in implementing the vision of two democratic
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security, both parties have to accept previous
agreements and obligations, return to constructive
dialogue and take concrete actions aimed at building
and strengthening mutual confidence and trust.
We are convinced that the Quartet represents the
most appropriate mechanism for advancing the peace
process and that the road map, possibly in an updated
form reflecting recent developments on the ground, is

12

the most efficient plan for achieving a lasting peace
settlement to the conflict.
In conclusion, I would like to stress once again
that there is no military solution to the IsraeliPalestinian dispute. The only way to achieve a
comprehensive and lasting settlement to the conflict is
through peaceful negotiations.
The international community, including the
Security Council, must remain actively engaged in the
peace process in the Middle East. Both parties to the
conflict, however, must do more and demonstrate clear
political will and a commitment to ending this
protracted conflict, which has threatened global peace
and security for more than half a century.
I would therefore reiterate our commonly shared
belief that there is a need to reinvigorate the peace
process. In spite of the latest wave of violence and
hostilities, we continue to believe that there a window
of opportunity still exists for the Israelis and the
Palestinians to put the peace process on the right track.
That window of opportunity must be taken advantage
of through concrete and immediate action leading from
mutual recognition of the right to exist to the mutual
peaceful coexistence of two viable States.
Mrs. Taj (United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, I wish to thank you for having organized
this meeting. We join others in thanking Ms. Angela
Kane for her briefing, and we thank the Palestinian
observer and the Israeli representative for their
statements.
Tanzania has been following with deep concern
the disastrous course of events between Israel and its
neighbours, and in particular the grave situation in
northern Gaza caused by the recent major Israeli
military operation. We condemn the encirclement of
the town of Beit Hanoun, which resulted in many
civilian casualties, including innocent women and
children, which constitutes a grave violation of
international humanitarian law.
The killing yesterday morning of 19 civilians in
Gaza is profoundly shocking. We offer our condolences
to the families of the victims. Israel should not use the
pretext of self-defence in targeting innocent civilians.
The killing of civilians, including children and women,
is unjustifiable and intolerable. It is evident that Israeli
military policies in the Palestinian territories have gone
too far and must not be allowed to continue. The

06-60930

S/PV.5564

international community and the Security Council must
respond.

There is no question that Israel has a right to defend
itself and the lives of its citizens.

Once again, we urge Israel to cease its aggression
against the Palestinians, withdraw its forces from Gaza
and exercise utmost restraint, including taking every
step possible to protect civilians. We have noted the
Israeli Government’s regret and its decision to conduct
an investigation, and we look forward to its early
conclusion and to appropriate action. We also support
the call for an independent investigation.

On 7 November, Israeli forces withdrew from
much of Gaza, and almost immediately Palestinian
terrorists resumed firing rockets into Israel targeted at
civilians.

Tanzania again calls on the Palestinian militants
to cease firing rockets against Israeli civilian targets.
The current spate of violence comes at a time
when there were hopes that an agreement would be
reached on the formation of a Palestinian Government
that could end the current stalemate and build a climate
of trust in which the political process could be
rekindled. The people of Gaza have not enjoyed peace
in a long time, but their situation has worsened
following the Israeli military assaults and the current
economic paralysis.
We reiterate our call for concerted and deliberate
efforts to ensure that there is no further destruction of
Palestinian infrastructure and property and that
emergency humanitarian assistance is provided as a
matter of urgency.
Both Israel and Palestine must realize that the
endless violence is complicating the quest for a lasting
peace in the area. They should give dialogue a chance.
We also urge President Abbas and the Hamas
leadership to resume their talks on the formation of a
Government of national unity.
We call on the international community, including
the Quartet, to continue to assist the parties to return to
a negotiated two-State solution, on the basis of land for
peace, to end the conflict, as provided for in numerous
United Nations resolutions and in the road map.
In conclusion, we thank the delegation of Qatar
for the draft resolution it has circulated, which we are
ready to discuss with a view to its early adoption.
Mr. Bolton (United States of America): Despite
all of the emotion in the air, we must have an honest
and even-handed discussion of recent events in Gaza.
In Gaza and adjacent areas of Israel, the Hamasled Palestinian Authority Government has continued to
play a role in perpetuating instability and violence.

06-60930

We deeply regret the injuries and loss of life in
Gaza on November 8 in and around Beit Hanoun. We
have seen the Israeli Government’s apology and
understand that an investigation has begun. We hope
that it will be completed quickly and that appropriate
steps will be taken to avoid a repetition of this tragic
incident. We call on all parties to act with restraint in
order to avoid causing any harm to innocent civilians.
We also call again for the immediate and
unconditional release of Corporal Shalit as well as that
of the two Israel Defense Forces (IDF) soldiers —
Eldad Regev and Ehud Goldwasser — kidnapped on
12 July by Hizbollah during its terrorist attacks across
the Blue Line.
It is the responsibility of the Hamas-led
Palestinian Authority Government to prevent terror and
take the necessary steps to stop attacks from within
Gaza. Progress towards peace needs a Palestinian
Government that disavows terror and violence. We call
on Hamas to accept the Quartet principles:
renunciation of terror, recognition of Israel and
acceptance of previous agreements.
Statements by the Hamas leadership that the truce
with Israel is over and that armed struggle can resume
are alarming, and calls by the military wing of Hamas
to Muslims worldwide to strike American targets and
interests should be condemned by the international
community.
More terror, whether directed at Israel, the United
States or the European Union Office in Gaza City, is
not the solution. Nor will it enable the Palestinian
people to achieve their aspirations. In fact, the opposite
is the case.
It is the responsibility of the Hamas-led
Palestinian Authority Government to prevent terror and
take the necessary steps to stop attacks and dismantle
the terrorist infrastructure.
The Road Map and the principles contained
therein remain the only agreed international basis upon
which to move forward towards the two-State goal.

13

S/PV.5564

The Quartet has welcomed efforts by Palestinian
Authority President Abbas to form a Government
explicitly committed to Quartet principles, and the
United States stands ready to renew engagement and
assistance to a Palestinian Authority committed to
peace and the Quartet principles.
We support diplomatic efforts to engage
responsible leaders, help the Palestinians strengthen
and reform their security sector and assist Israel and
Palestinian leaders in their efforts to come together to
resolve their differences.
The United States is acutely aware of the
economic and humanitarian needs of the Palestinian
people. We continue to work with the Israeli
Government and Palestinian Authority President Abbas
to help meet critical humanitarian needs in the West
Bank and Gaza, where humanitarian conditions have
deteriorated as a result of the Hamas-led Palestinian
Authority Government’s refusal to govern responsibly.
Progress requires a commitment to peace from
both sides of the conflict. Since assuming control of
the Palestinian Authority Government last winter,
Hamas has failed utterly in this regard. We urge the
Palestinian Authority Government to renounce terror,
accept the Quartet principles and become a legitimate
partner for peace.
Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this debate on the situation in the
Middle East — a situation that has seriously
deteriorated in recent days, as has been rightly pointed
out by the countries and organizations that formally
requested the holding of this meeting, in particular the
League of Arab States, the Non-Aligned Movement,
the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People. My delegation also endorses the
statement to be made later by Cuba on behalf of the
Non Aligned Movement.
The deaths of 18 people, including seven women
and eight children, on 8 November as a result of an
Israeli military operation in Beit Hanoun, and the
destruction of vital infrastructure and property in the
Gaza Strip, constitute an intolerable escalation of the
situation.
Strangely enough, those extremely serious events
occurred after Israel announced that it would withdraw

14

its forces from Beit Hanoun, where the most recent
excessive — as we see it — disproportionate and
indiscriminate Israeli military operations took place, in
response to the firing of rockets into Israel by
Palestinian militias.
My delegation firmly condemns such military
actions, which have led to considerable loss of life
among civilians, particularly women and children. We
call for an independent inquiry to determine who was
responsible for those heinous acts.
Of course, we recognize once again that Israel
has a right to defend itself and to protect its people
from attack, but that right does not free it from its
obligations and responsibilities under international
humanitarian law, in particular the 1949 Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War. We call upon Israel to show
the greatest restraint in carrying out military actions in
densely populated areas.
My delegation is particularly concerned, because
such actions clearly erode efforts aimed at establishing
confidence-building measures between the two parties
to the conflict. It also notes that these developments
are taking place at a time when efforts are under way to
give the Palestinian Authority a national unity
Government made up of professionals — a
Government that could meet the requirements tied to
the recognition of Israel’s right to exist, the
renunciation of violence and the acceptance of
agreements previously entered into, in particular the
Road Map.
My delegation also notes that these dangerous
developments, which we regret, are taking place while
efforts are under way to secure the release of Corporal
Gilad Shalit, who is being held by Palestinian militias.
We hardly need recall that military actions in the
Middle East are always counterproductive. We
therefore steadfastly reaffirm that only negotiations
between the two parties, on the basis of existing
mechanisms, including the Arab Peace Initiative and
relevant United Nations resolutions, will lead to the
achievement of the goal of two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security.
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Greece fully associates
itself with the statement to be delivered later by the
representative of Finland on behalf of the European
Union. My statement will therefore be brief.

06-60930

S/PV.5564

Recent tragic events in the occupied Palestinian
territories made today’s meeting of the Security
Council imperative. Over the past few months, we have
witnessed an alarming deterioration in the situation in
Gaza and the West Bank. The abhorrent events in Beit
Hanoun are the latest in a vicious circle of spiralling
violence, which has — as is unfortunately too often the
case in these circumstances — cost the lives of many
innocent civilians, including women and children.
While recognizing Israel’s duty to protect its
citizens, we nevertheless wish to underline that its
actions in this regard must not be disproportionate or
contrary to international law, including international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
We are all observing the gradual return of the Middle
East to a time that we had all hoped had been left
behind; we had hoped that the progress that had been
made was irreversible. By all accounts, it appears that
this is, unfortunately, not the case.
Lasting peace in the Middle East seems to be
based on the most delicate and fragile of premises,
namely, the behaviour of the parties themselves. The
respective responsibilities of the parties are clear; so,
too, are the respective responsibilities of the
international community. It is up to all of us to find an
appropriate and effective way to fulfil those
responsibilities.
I wish to reiterate the comments of my Foreign
Minister when she addressed the Council in September:
we should spare no effort, we should leave no option
unexplored and we should exhaust all possibilities in
pursuing and, ultimately, in achieving, a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East.
Tragedies such as the one in Beit Hanoun make this
responsibility painfully apparent. We must urgently
seek to examine in depth what options are available to
us, what steps we must take in order to put the peace
process back on track so that those in the region who
genuinely aspire to peace are given a tangible, practical
and, not least, credible advantage over those who seek
to obstruct all prospects for peace.

their increasing sense of desperation. And yet again,
the outlook seems increasingly discouraging.
Denmark was shocked at yesterday’s news that 19
Palestinian civilians — 11 of them children — were
killed when Israeli artillery hit a housing block in Beit
Hanoun. I offer the deepest condolences of the Danish
Government and people to the victims’ families and to
President Abbas.
We welcome Israel’s official recognition that the
attack was a tragic mistake and its pledge for a full
investigation. We urge Israeli authorities to complete
the inquiry promptly and to make the results public.
Yesterday’s tragedy was the culmination of days
of intense military action in Gaza, causing the loss of
many civilian lives and great damage to houses and
civilian infrastructure. Denmark is deeply concerned
about the continued escalation of violence and deplores
the fact that Israeli military operations have taken a
heavy toll in civilian lives.
The right of a State to defend itself against
terrorist threats does not justify disproportionate or
indiscriminate action or use of force. Disproportionate
use of force is contrary to international humanitarian
law and tends to undermine the very political purpose
it is supposed to serve by fuelling further hatred and
conflict.
The solution is not more violence. All sides must
cease the use of force for political purposes. That
requires an immediate halt to attacks on Israel. The
continued rocket attacks from the Palestinian territory
into Israel are unacceptable and must be condemned.
The Palestinian Government must take action to ensure
that such attacks are stopped. At the same time, Israel
must ensure that its short-term measures designed to
improve the security of Israeli civilians conform to the
requirements of international law and do not hamper
the achievement of a lasting solution to the conflict.

Ms. Løj (Denmark): Denmark aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by Finland on behalf of
the European Union.

But to pave the way for progress, the kidnapped
Israeli soldier must be released immediately. Likewise,
the Palestinian ministers and legislators in Israeli
custody must be freed promptly. Regional players
should do everything they can to support efforts that
can lead to the resumption of the peace process.

Yet again, we are called to this Chamber by the
tragic loss of civilian life in Gaza. Yet again, we are
called upon to consider how we can restore hope to the
people of the Middle East and how we can overcome

The challenge is to support and strengthen those
forces which are committed to a political solution. That
is the only way out of the current stalemate of
violence. We must keep alive the vision of two

06-60930

15

S/PV.5564

independent States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace within recognized borders. Indeed, this
vision is a core principle of the Road Map. Certainly,
the violence that brings us here today is leading us in a
wrong and worrisome direction.
Increasingly, the collapse of the Palestinian
Authority and chaos in the territory both seem
imminent. It is a social, economic as well as political
collapse that is about to become a grim reality. Clashes
among Palestinian factions only aggravate the human
suffering and desperation. They run counter to the
interest of the Palestinian people.
Thus, we support President Abbas’ attempt to
build national unity and establish a credible Palestinian
Government with a platform that reflects the principles
laid down by the Quartet. A functioning Palestinian
Government is essential for governing the Palestinian
territories and as a viable partner for the international
community in its efforts to alleviate the dire
humanitarian situation in Palestine, breathe life into the
Palestinian economy, and relaunch the peace process.
The international community stands ready to support
such a Government.
Israel has a crucial role to play in improving
Palestinian economic prospects. The tax and customs
revenues now being withheld should be released
immediately. These revenues can be channelled
through the temporary international mechanism, which
has proven itself valuable in channelling aid directly to
the Palestinian people. Moreover, the Agreement on
Movement and Access must be implemented fully and
immediately.
In conclusion, I would re-emphasize that all
parties must participate if the peace process is to
succeed. Neighbours, including Syria, must play
constructive roles and the international community, led
by the Quartet, must be willing and able to provide
whatever incentives are needed to set the healing
process in motion.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland): It is clear that the Council is gravely
concerned by the deaths of Palestinian civilians in the
strike on Beit Hanoun. It is absolutely right that the
Council should meet on this issue, and we thank Qatar
and you, Sir, for convening this meeting.
On a personal level, nobody could remain
unmoved by the suffering of families that the

16

Palestinian representative movingly described. They
are not in this Chamber, but I ask him to convey our
condolences to the families of those killed and to the
injured.
Like others, we have difficulty understanding
what the action was meant to achieve and how it can be
justified. It is particularly worrying that it happened
after the military operation was declared over. We have
raised our concerns with the Government of Israel.
Israel must respect its obligation to avoid harming
civilians. We remain gravely concerned over the
mounting casualties and the civilian suffering in the
whole Gaza Strip. We recognize Israel’s legitimate
right to self-defence, but urge it to exercise the utmost
restraint. We underline the importance that any action
taken by Israel must be proportionate and in
accordance with international humanitarian law.
We welcome the news that the Israel Defense
Forces (IDF) has launched an investigation into Beit
Hanoun. We heard the Israeli representative’s
description of this tragic accident. We look to Israel to
pursue vigourously the reasons for the attack and to
offer confidence that measures are in place to ensure
that such an event cannot recur, however difficult those
measures might be. If it transpires that there has been
culpability, we look to individuals to be prosecuted in
accordance with the law.
We continue to call for Palestinian militants to
cease their rocket attacks on Israeli civilian targets.
Israeli families, too, have the right not to be targeted.
We call for the release of Corporal Shalit.
In her briefing, the Assistant Secretary-General
referred to the call from the Hamas leader in Syria.
Such language is not acceptable and we hope that Syria
can use its influence constructively to advance the
cause of peace.
There is no justification and no political cause
that justifies terrorism and attacks against innocent
civilians. So much effort is put into death and little by
comparison into peace. Did those who fired the rockets
on Israel want to disrupt President Abbas’ efforts to
bring about national unity?
We support President Abbas in this endeavour. If
based on the Quartet requirements, it offers the
possibility of re-engagement by the international
community and the United Kingdom would look
forward to being able to work with such a Government.

06-60930

S/PV.5564

As the Assistant Secretary-General and others said, this
whole incident underlines the necessity of finding a
political solution to the current situation in Israel and
the occupied territories. We continue to believe that the
Road Map offers the best chance for a lasting peace. I
note the call around the Chamber today for early
meetings of the Quartet, and we would be very happy
to consider that idea.
The situation in Lebanon was also raised. Again,
there has been too much suffering on both sides. I can
assure Mrs. Goldwasser and the Council that we are
committed to the full implementation of resolution
1701 (2006), including the release of the Israeli
soldiers. We commend the Secretary-General’s efforts
to implement that resolution in full.
I return to the point of the Quartet and the Road
Map. We are not asking for Hamas to make
concessions on final status issues, but rather to accept
that for negotiations to happen and be meaningful,
there must be a common basis from which they start:
namely that the goal is a two-State solution achieved
through talks between two parties which mutually
acknowledge each other. We hope every effort can be
exerted now to finding that comprehensive settlement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation is deeply concerned
over the latest dangerous developments in the Gaza
Strip. The situation in this region, in Palestinian-Israeli
relations and in the Middle East region in general is an
extremely difficult one. It calls for urgent actions to
prevent further destabilization; both sides need to
exercise restraint and display wisdom. It also calls for
recognition of the dangerous point to which they have
come.
The operations of the armed forces of Israel in
the Gaza Strip have already claimed considerable
civilian lives and have greatly worsened the prospects
for reaching an Israeli-Palestinian settlement. Moscow
is extremely concerned over the tragic incident in Beit
Hanoun on 8 November 2006. We express our
condolences to the bereaved families and loved ones.
The actions of the Israeli army go beyond the
framework of the declared goal to preventing the
shelling of Israel from the Gaza Strip. Such a
disproportionate and indiscriminate use of force is
unacceptable.
Unfortunately, the current escalation of violence
is taking place specifically at a point in time when the

06-60930

political forces of the Palestinian National Authority
are trying to create a coalition Government that would
be capable of addressing the pressing problems of
Palestinians and establishing constructive cooperation
with Israel. According to the latest reports, the talks
between the Palestinian factions Fatah and Hamas to
form a Government have been suspended. We expect
that, despite the challenging situation in the Palestinian
Authority territory, this process will be resumed in a
constructive spirit in the near term.
The Russian side again calls upon the leadership
of the Palestinian Authority to take robust measures to
reign in extremists, to put an end to terrorist attacks, to
halt the firing of Qassam rockets into Israel, which are
provoking the Israeli Government’s response, and to
release the abducted Israel soldier, Gilad Sharit. We
support mediation efforts to that end.
All Palestinian political factions and groups need
to finally recognize that provocations aimed at
exacerbating tensions are detrimental to attaining the
national aspirations of the people of Palestine.
Major responsibilities for preventing further
destabilization of the situation in the Palestinian
territories and in the entire region lie with the
Government of Israel. Its right and obligation to
protect the life and security of its citizens is not in
doubt. However, these goals will not be achieved at the
price of severely impacting the Palestinian civilians,
massively punishing totally innocent residents of Gaza.
We see only one solution to the current situation.
Both sides need to put an end to violence, undertake
urgent steps to stabilize the situation and resume the
political dialogue. Joint efforts are needed to clear the
way for this kind of dialogue and not create further
impediments to advance it. There is no alternative to
this approach.
The Russian delegation is of the view that, at the
official meeting of the Security Council on 21
November, it will have an opportunity to express its
views on other aspects of a comprehensive settlement
in the Middle East.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation is grateful to Assistant
Secretary-General Angela Kane for her briefing.
The recent firing by Israeli tanks on the Gaza
Strip has resulted in numerous civilian casualties,
including many women and children. China is deeply

17

S/PV.5564

concerned and disturbed by this. We would like to take
this opportunity to express our sincere condolences and
sympathies to the bereaved families of the victims. We
hope that Israel will carry out an earnest and serious
investigation of the incident, and publish their findings
at an early date to accord justice to the victims.
China continues to believe that the PalestinianIsraeli dispute should be resolved through peaceful
negotiations. We are against any practices that may
exacerbate tensions in the region, or any military
actions that may harm innocent civilians. The
excessive use of force by the Israeli army can only lead
to the worsening of Israeli-Palestinian relations. On the
other hand, rocket launches by the Palestinians into
Israeli territory are also unwise. We hope that both
Israel and Palestine will exercise maximum restraint,
resort to reason and put an end to the vicious cycle of
violence, thus avoiding the further deterioration of the
situation.
Recently, the major parties in Palestine — Fatah
of the Palestine Liberation Organization and the
Islamic Resistance Movement, Hamas — have been
discussing the formation of a Government of national
unity, as well as an improvement of Palestinian-Israeli
relations, which is an encouraging sign. However, this
hope is again dashed as a result of the escalation of
violence.
We call upon both Israel and Palestine, in the
long-term interests of both countries, to stop the
bloody conflict and create an environment conducive
to the restoration of political negotiations. The Middle
East problem has lasted for over half a century. It not
only has brought great suffering to the countries in the
region, but also has repercussions for world peace and
development.
Since the beginning of the year, the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories has continued to
worsen. The conflict between Palestine and Israel has
continued to escalate and the Middle East peace
process has been deeply mired in stagnation. China has
always believed that a comprehensive and just solution
to the Middle East question should be worked out on
the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions and
the principle of land for peace through political
negotiations.
Political realities over the years demonstrate that
a State of Palestine, in peaceful coexistence with Israel,
is in the fundamental interests of both Palestine and

18

Israel and the peoples in the Middle East. This will also
contribute to the early realization of peace and stability
in the region. We hope that the day will soon come
when Palestine and Israel will demonstrate political
will and take a courageous step forward.
China will, as always, join forces with advocates
of peace and continue to play a constructive role for
the realization of Middle East peace.
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina)(spoke in Spanish):
Argentina is also gravely concerned about the recent
events in the Gaza Strip and, in particular, about the
rising death toll of innocent civilians as a result of the
Israeli military operations.
My country unequivocally and energetically
condemns the military operation carried out in the
residential area of Beit Hanoun on the morning of 8
November, which has resulted in the deaths of at least
18 Palestinian civilians, including eight children and
seven women. We extend our sincere condolences to
the bereaved families.
We believe that this type of Israeli military action
in populated areas must cease immediately from now
on. Too many so-called mistakes are occurring.
As we have stated in previous occasions, Israel
has the right to defend itself, but in the exercise of this
right it should fully abide by the provisions of
humanitarian international law regarding the protection
of the civilian population, in particular the Fourth
Geneva Convention.
In view of the serious nature of the recent events
in Beit Hanoun, we believe that an independent and
impartial investigation should be carried out urgently,
and that its results should be made available to this
Security Council and to the wider international
community.
In these difficult circumstances, it is necessary
that the parties exercise the utmost restraint and avoid
taking any measures that could lead to an increase of
violence. In the short term, we believe that it is
imperative that the Qassem rocket attacks from the
Gaza Strip against Israeli targets must cease
immediately and that the Palestinian Authority should
take the necessary measures to prevent new suicide
bombings or any other attacks against Israeli civilians
from happening. Recent statements by some leaders of
Hamas in this regard are quite worrying, to say the
least.

06-60930

S/PV.5564

As we said before, Israel must cease all military
activities in the Gaza Strip and withdraw from that
territory. Likewise, — we repeat — Israel should cease
military operations in the West Bank and put an end to
unilateral measures that create facts on the ground,
such as settlement activities and the construction of the
separation wall.
We acknowledge that what happened in Beit
Hanoun may have a profound impact on the Palestinian
territories.
Nevertheless,
we
hope
that
the
conversations between President Abbas and Prime
Minister Haniyeh on the formation of a Government of
national unity will continue. The platform of such a
Government must reflect the three principles set out by
the Quartet. We hope that, in spite of statements to the
contrary, the leadership of Hamas will respond
positively to the proposals made by the Palestinian
President and continue to engage in a meaningful
dialogue to resolve all of the outstanding issues.
We consider that the release of Israeli soldier
Gilad Shalit also continues to be of the utmost priority.
We appreciate and recognize the efforts of the Egyptian
Government in this regard, and we hope they will bear
fruit. Members of the Legislative Council and the
Palestinian Government who are being held as
prisoners by Israel should also be released.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza continues to
be a reason of concern for my Government and for my
country. We reiterate that the crossings into and out of
Gaza should be kept open and that both parties should
take measures to implement the Agreement on
Movement and Access, signed almost a year ago. The
international community, on its part, must intensify its
efforts to provide emergency relief to the Palestinian
people in order to alleviate its suffering.
The long history of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
shows us that military operations or terrorist acts are
not the right way to achieve a just and lasting solution
based on the notion of two independent and sovereign
States living side by side in peace and security. The
path of violence will only increase the resentment and
mutual mistrust and will strengthen extremist sectors.
We are fully convinced that the only path is that
of peace negotiations based on the resolutions of this
Council, the Madrid terms of reference, the principle of
land for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative of Beirut.
The international community, in particular the Quartet
and the Security Council, should assume a more

06-60930

proactive role, with the aim of assisting the parties to
resume such negotiations and to put an end to the
vicious cycle of killings, revenge and reprisals that
have darkened the Middle East in recent times.
Our responsibility is to act in an urgent manner,
and we must do it to the benefit of all peoples of the
region.
With respect to the draft resolution that is being
elaborated by the delegation of Qatar, we will put forth
our proposals, and we hope that it will be adopted by
the Security Council.
Mr. Shinyo (Japan): I join other colleagues in
thanking you for organizing this meeting and also
thank Assistant Secretary-General Angela Kane for her
comprehensive briefing on the latest events in the
situation in the Middle East.
The situation in the Middle East concerning
Palestine and Israel continues to present critical
challenges. We have expressed our concern about the
continuing fighting between Israel and Palestinian
military groups in Gaza, as well as the many casualties
caused by the fighting since the abduction of Corporal
Gilad Shalit at the end of June.
We are gravely disturbed by the report of many
new casualties in Beit Hanoun as the result of an Israeli
military action yesterday. We express our condolences
to the families of the victims. This incident is not only
a worrying development from the humanitarian
perspective, but also has a negative political impact. It
is necessary for all parties concerned to exercise
maximum restraint in order to avoid further
aggravation of the situation.
Japan strongly calls upon the Government of
Israel, in particular, to avoid any action that may lead
to civilian casualties. We also hope that the
Government of Israel will make serious efforts to
determine the causes of the incident and to prevent the
recurrence of such a tragic incident, in particular
through the work of the investigatory panel established
in the Israeli Defense Forces.
We urge the Government of the Palestinian
Authority to take appropriate measures to bring an
immediate end to violence by the Palestinian extremist
groups, including rocket attacks against Israel. We also
reiterate our call on the Palestinian Government to
make every possible effort to secure the immediate
release of the Israeli soldiers abducted in June.

19

S/PV.5564

Mr. Tatsuo Arima, Special Envoy of the
Government of Japan for the Middle East Peace
Process, is currently in the Middle East, visiting Israel,
Palestine and Syria. Mr. Arima is appealing for an end
to the state of confrontation as mentioned above and is
carrying out consultations to encourage parties to make
further and more constructive efforts for the promotion
of peace in the Middle East.
Japan strongly hopes that the recent efforts for
the establishment of a new Palestinian Government
will continue. To break the current stalemate, we urge
Palestinians to find ways to overcome their differences
and support a new Government of the Palestinian
Authority, which will renew its efforts to achieve
coexistence and mutual prosperity with Israel. If the
Palestinian Authority makes clear that it will pursue the
realization of peace through peaceful negotiation with
Israel then the international community should actively
extend its support for such a policy. We expect that
Israel will support and respond positively to the efforts
of President Abbas that are aimed at achieving a
breakthrough.
The deteriorating humanitarian situation of the
Palestinians is a matter of deep concern to our
Government. We reiterate the importance for the
international community, including Israel, to continue
to provide the needed assistance in order to address the
situation. In this regard, we stress that an early
resumption by the Israeli Government of the transfer of
tax and customs revenues to the Palestinian Authority,
as well as the full implementation of the Agreement on
Movement and Access, concluded in November 2005,
are matters of the utmost priority.
For our part, we have been steadily implementing
our pledge of $25 million in humanitarian assistance to
the Palestinian people, made upon the visit of former
Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi to Palestine in July.
At the same time, we are making efforts to realize the
creation of a corridor for peace and prosperity, which
aims at facilitating coexistence and mutual prosperity
in the region in the mid- to long-term, through
consultations among Government representatives of the
four parties concerned — Israel, Palestine, Jordan and
Japan. We have dispatched a study mission to the
region and are making efforts to implement the plan.
Japan will continue to cooperate with the
international community in achieving the mitigation of
tensions and the restoration of stability in the region.

20

The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.
I would like to begin by thanking Mrs. Angela
Kane, Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for the valuable information she presented to the
Council.
The Government of Peru has condemned the
attack by members of the Israeli Defense Forces
committed in the morning of Wednesday, 8 November,
in the Gaza residential area of Beit Hanoun that
resulted in the deaths of Palestinian civilians, including
eight children and seven women. That event is part of
the violent events in that area since last week. In
addition to the victims among the civilian population
and the damage to infrastructure, the military action
underway is having an impact on the peace process in
the Middle East as a whole. The right of any State to
defend itself — in this case against the continuous and
unacceptable launching of rockets — does not justify
the disproportionate use of force, which is counter to
international humanitarian law.
The ongoing occupation of Palestinian territory
by Israel and its repeated acts of aggression against
civilian targets are eroding the only platform on which
it is possible to reach a lasting solution, to be
established pursuant to Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002), the earlier
agreements between the parties and the Road Map.
The recent war in Lebanon should teach us a
lesson about the risks inherent in allowing a conflict to
intensify because of a lack of dialogue between the
parties, and a delay in the resolution of substantive
issues on which a lasting settlement of differences
could be based.
We must bear in mind that it is essential to
promote the internal cohesion of the political regime in
Palestine, and that it must comply with the
requirements expressed by the Quartet. Problems of
governance make action to impede attacks from Gaza
even more difficult, even though such attacks against
Israeli targets are unacceptable.
Similarly, the lack of governability has made it
impossible to achieve the release of the Israeli soldier
who was kidnapped on 25 June, as well as to put an
end to the supply of illicit weapons to the interior of
Gaza. The current complex situation makes it more

06-60930

S/PV.5564

urgent than ever to return to the peaceful path
contained in the Road Map, as outlined by the Quartet
and supported by the Security Council in resolution
1515 (2003). That is the only path that can realize the
goal of two democratic States, Israel and Palestine,
living side by side in peace and security. It requires a
dialogue among all of the parties to the conflict,
simultaneously, so that progress on one negotiating
track is not undermined by regression on others.
To that end, Peru urges all parties involved to put
an end to all acts of violence, to abide by the standards
of international humanitarian law and to resume the
dialogue in order to bring the peace process back to
life. The international community must constructively
support that process in order to reduce tension, restore
stability and achieve a fair and lasting solution.
I now resume my duties as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. Malmierca Díaz (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council and to wish you
success in your difficult task.
Once again, the Council is meeting to examine
the serious situation in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine. We were all horrified at the
massacre yesterday in the Gaza Strip that resulted in
the deaths of 19 innocent Palestinian civilians,
including women and children. My delegation offers its
most sincere condolences to the families of the victims.
Yesterday’s events in Beit Hanoun are just one
more example of what has been suffered for much too
long by the Palestinian people as a result of the illegal
occupation of its territory by Israel, the occupying
Power. The Non-Aligned Movement responded
immediately to the events taking place in the occupied
Palestinian territory by requesting the convening of
this emergency meeting of the Security Council.
In my capacity as Chair of the Coordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement and on behalf of
all member States of the Movement, I have the honour
to read to the Council the following statement on the
deterioration of the current situation in the Middle
East, especially the occupied Palestinian territory. This
statement was agreed this morning by the Coordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement.

06-60930

(spoke in English)
“The Coordinating Bureau of the NonAligned Movement expresses once again its
grave concern at the continued deterioration of
the situation on the ground in the occupied
Palestinian territory, during the recent period,
particularly as a result of the excessive,
indiscriminate and disproportionate use of force
by Israel, the occupying Power, which has caused
extensive loss of civilian Palestinian life and
injuries, including among children and women.
“The Movement condemns in particular the
military assaults being carried out by Israel, the
occupying Power in the Gaza Strip, which has
caused loss of life and extensive destruction of
Palestinian property and vital infrastructure. The
Movement reaffirms the continued validity of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 446 (1979), 1322 (2000), 1397 (2002),
1402 (2002), 1403 (2002), 1435 (2002), 1515
(2003) and 1553 (2004).
“The Movement emphasizes the need to
preserve the institutions of the Palestinian
National Authority and Palestinian infrastructure
and properties.
“The Movement expresses grave concern at
the dire humanitarian situation of the Palestinian
people and calls for the provision of emergency
assistance to them.
“In light of the present situation, the
Movement urges the Security Council to shoulder
its responsibility according to the United Nations
Charter in the preservation of international peace
and security by taking the following measures:
“1. Demanding that Israel, the occupying
Power, immediately cease its aggression against
the Palestinian civilian population in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
and immediately withdraw its forces from within
the Gaza Strip to positions prior to June 2006;
“2. Calling for an immediately ceasefire
between the Israeli and Palestinian sides;
“3. Calling also for the establishment and
dispatch of a United Nations observer force to
supervise the ceasefire;

21

S/PV.5564

“4. Calling upon Israel, the occupying
Power, to scrupulously abide by its obligations
and responsibilities under the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949.
“In that regard, the Movement calls upon
the international community, including the
Quartet, to take immediate steps, including
confidence-building measures between the
parties, with the objective of resuming peace
negotiations and restarting the peace process.
“The Movement will remain seized of this
important issue.”
(spoke in Spanish)
Thus concludes the statement of the Coordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement, which will
shortly be distributed as an official document of the
General Assembly and of the Security Council.
I should like to conclude by calling on all
members of the Security Council to support the draft
resolution submitted by the delegation of Qatar on
behalf of the members of the Group of Arab States. We
hope that the Council will be able to act without delay,
in keeping with its important responsibilities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
the representative of Finland.
Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The following
countries — Albania, Bulgaria, Croatia, Iceland,
Liechtenstein, Moldova, Montenegro, Romania, Serbia,
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey
and Ukraine — align themselves with this statement.
The European Union is deeply concerned by the
escalating violence in Gaza and the West Bank. In
particular, we are shocked by the large number of
civilian deaths and injuries caused by the shelling of
Beit Hanoun by the Israel Defense Forces on
Wednesday. We deeply regret the growing number of
civilian casualties, many of them children, as well as
the destruction of houses and other civilian
infrastructure.
While recognizing Israel’s legitimate right to selfdefence, we urge Israel to exercise the utmost restraint
and underline that
action should not be
disproportionate or in contradiction to international
humanitarian law. We call on Israel to end its incursion

22

into Gaza. It is imperative that the humanitarian
conditions of the Palestinian people be urgently
alleviated.
The European Union also calls on the Palestinian
leadership to bring an end to the firing of rockets on
Israeli territory. The deterioration of the situation will
only aggravate the already grave circumstances in the
region, where a return to a comprehensive peace
process with a clear political perspective is urgently
needed.
The time has come for all parties to fulfil their
responsibilities. The present stalemate must be urgently
brought to an end, and a process of dialogue must be
opened.
To achieve that, an immediate cessation of
violence is imperative. The process of reconciliation
among Palestinians must be given a chance. We urge
the Palestinians to continue their efforts to form a
Government of national unity with a platform
reflecting the Quartet principles and allowing for early
engagement.
The European Union reiterates its intention to
actively contribute to the work within the Quartet to
get the Middle East peace process urgently back on
track in order to make progress towards a
comprehensive settlement on the basis of the Road
Map, the relevant Security Council resolutions and the
commitments made at Sharm el-Sheikh in 2005. The
international community must provide its full support
to the parties in that respect.
This terrible violence clearly underlines once
again that there can be no military or unilateral
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The only
way forward for Israel and the Palestinians is the
negotiation of a viable two-State solution. All parties
have a clear duty to act now to revive a credible peace
process and to avoid further tragedies such as those
witnessed in Beit Hanoun.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): On the
morning of Wednesday, 8 November 2006, the peoples
of the world, together with the remaining inhabitants of
beleaguered Beit Hanoun in Palestine, were shocked to
awaken to the sight of scattered body parts, houses
razed to the ground and squares drenched with blood
and filled with the remains of children, the elderly and

06-60930

S/PV.5564

women — a surreal, abhorrent, alarming and painful
scene rejected and despised by any sane human being.
That scene resulted from Operation Autumn Clouds, in
which the occupying Israeli forces rained artillery
shells down on the residential areas of Beit Hanoun, a
densely populated village with innocent and
defenceless elderly persons, women and children. It
was a horrific war crime against the rights of the
Palestinians and of humanity as a whole — a barbaric
act that runs counter to any rational, logical or legal
justification other than the desire of Israel, the
occupying Power, to continue a systematic war of
genocide, targeting humans, trees and animals and all
forms of life. The question now is: will the
international community stand idly by in the face of
this brutal massacre?
The Republic of Yemen, while expressing its
deep concern and strong condemnation of those
barbaric acts, calls upon all members of the family of
nations, including the Security Council, to take a firm
stand against the State terrorism carried out by the
Israeli occupation forces so that they halt their
ceaseless violations of the rights of the Palestinian
people, who have been subjected for more than half a
century to all kinds of repression, oppression, injustice,
coercion and torture.
We believe that the Council’s inability to take
practical deterrent measures that prevent the recurrence
of aggression — which would further inflame the
already burning situation in the region and broaden the
cycle of violence there — and the Council’s hesitation
to take decisive steps to silence the tanks, artillery,
helicopters and Israeli jets targeting a defenceless,
imprisoned people living in an open jail, crying out in
deteriorating conditions of poverty and destitution,
have given rise to a double blockade. One blockade has
been imposed on the Palestinian people for quite some
time by the occupation authorities, who disregard the
moral norms set out in the instruments of international
law, and the other is an international blockade that has
increased desperation and suffering since the
Palestinian elections at the beginning of 2006.
If the situation continues to deteriorate, it will lay
fertile ground for extremism and terrorism and stifle
the voices of wisdom, reason and moderation. It will
also lead to chaos, instability and grave consequences.
My country therefore believes that it is now essential
for the Council, which is responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to

06-60930

adopt a binding resolution on an immediate ceasefire
and the dispatch of an international observer force to
monitor that ceasefire and protect Palestinian civilians.
It must also make a serious political effort to return the
parties to the negotiating table, in accordance with
international resolutions, the Arab initiative, and
mutually concluded agreements.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting today at a time when the
Palestinian territories are experiencing a continued
escalation by the Israeli occupying forces and an
intensification of Israeli military attacks against the
Gaza Strip. Tens of civilians — mostly women and
children — were killed and injured yesterday in Beit
Hanoun in northern Gaza, in blatant violation by Israel
of all international laws and norms and of its
commitments as an occupying Power under the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Times of War. That has undermined
the credibility of Israel’s commitment to the goal of
reaching a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East based on international legitimacy and to refraining
from imposing de facto policies.
The warning delivered by the Arab Group’s
foreign ministers during the Security Council
ministerial meeting of 21 September has become a
reality. It has been reinforced by the Security Council’s
silence and unwillingness to assume its responsibilities
in maintaining international peace and security and in
enhancing world supervision of the peace process so as
to avoid a further deterioration of the situation and
limit the possibility of further escalation in the region.
Accordingly, it is incumbent on the Council to act and
to refrain from condoning Israel’s violations and illegal
practices in the occupied lands, particularly in the Gaza
Strip, where the killing, the blockade, closures, and the
bloodshed of innocent unarmed civilians continue
unabated.
Events of the past few months in Palestine and
Lebanon have proven the failure of hostile policies and
unilateral measures, and confirmed that a solution can
be attained solely at the negotiating table, the only way
to achieve peace and security between the Arabs and
the Israelis. On that basis, the mere condemnation of
the hostilities is not sufficient to make Israel comply
and refrain from its aggression. The international
community must therefore take a firm stand in order to
put an end to the ongoing political and humanitarian
tragedy and to provide the bases and necessary

23

S/PV.5564

guarantees to halt the ongoing disregard of United
Nations resolutions, international law, the road map,
and the role of the Quartet. In that context, the
following urgent measures should be taken.
First, Israel, the occupying Power, has to
immediately cease its aggression against the
defenceless Palestinian people, stop the killing of
civilians in the occupied lands, withdraw from the
areas that it entered in the Gaza Strip, and return to the
boundaries of 28 June 2006.
Second, Israel should lift the blockade imposed
on the Palestinian lands and take definitive confidencebuilding measures, including by refraining from
targeting civilians and halting all forms violence and
collective punishment; by addressing the deteriorating
humanitarian conditions in Gaza and the West Bank; by
discontinuing the construction of the separation wall;
and by implementing the Agreement on Movement and
Access to ease the movement of Palestinians and allow
the delivery of international humanitarian assistance to
resume.
Third, Israel should abstain from unilateral
measures that contribute to the protraction of the
conflict and prevent a final settlement from being
reached. It should also make serious efforts to build
confidence and resume negotiations in a context of
simultaneous parallel commitments from the
Palestinian side to stop the launching of rockets from
the Palestinian territories towards Israel and the
cessation of all Israeli military operations.
Fourth, the need to create an atmosphere
conducive to a return to negotiations should be
recognized through the release of the abducted Israeli
soldier, and of the Palestinian prisoners, officials and
parliamentarians arrested by Israel, taking into account
the importance of such a step to the re-establishment of
calm.
Fifth, the Security Council has to assume the
responsibilities that it has abandoned, achieve an
immediate and mutual ceasefire between the two sides
through an international monitoring mechanism to be
established under the auspices of the Security Council,
and ensure the cessation of aggression and the nonresumption of actions by Israel against Palestinian
civilians.
Sixth, if Israel is to be made to understand that it
cannot continue to violate the human rights of

24

Palestinians and to occupy their lands with impunity,
its practices in the occupied Palestinian territories must
be investigated and it must be assigned criminal
responsibility for the destruction that has resulted from
its aggression.
Seventh, immediate and effective action and
measures should be taken by the international
community, including the Security Council and the
members of the Quartet, to address the Palestinian
issue and the deteriorating situation in the Middle East.
It must not be content to issue statements that do not
reflect definitive positions vis-à-vis flagrant violations.
In conclusion, we condemn the aggression, which
cannot be justified under any pretext or label, and
reiterate our call on Israel to refrain from using force to
impose a de facto situation and to return to the
negotiating table. We also reiterate our call on the
Security Council, the Quartet, and all Members of the
United Nations to strive earnestly to end the
occupation and establish the foundations of peace in
the Middle East, which has long suffered from conflict.
We emphasize that the Arab countries, in their peace
initiative of 2002, set out a strong position that still
awaits support from the Security Council and needs to
be reflected in practical initiatives and procedures to
achieve the security, peace and stability to which the
people of the region aspire.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me to join those who preceded me in
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. We are
convinced that you will guide our work capably and
wisely. We also wish to thank you and the Security
Council for your prompt response to our call for a
meeting.
We commend your predecessor, the Ambassador
of Japan, who skilfully and distinctively presided over
the Council’s work last month.
The delegation of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
associates itself with the statements made by the
representatives of Qatar on behalf of the League of
Arab States, Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, and Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.

06-60930

S/PV.5564

Through the carnage it is wreaking in the Gaza
Strip, Israel has again called attention to its bloody
nature and inhuman approach. Yesterday, it carried out
yet another massacre in Beit Hanoun, killing tens of
civilians, most of whom were women and children.
Israeli occupation forces fired 11 shells on 6 houses
from tanks surrounding the city, from which they had
withdrawn the day before yesterday. Those shells
struck people while they slept, tearing them apart and
mixing their blood with Palestinian soil.
That barbaric Israeli attack cannot be justified as
self-defence: it was unjustified revenge. Nowhere in
the Charter of the United Nations is there a reference to
revenge. This is an act of aggression that cannot be
justified by international law. Even those few who have
justified revenge as an act of deterrence have qualified
that position by saying that revenge must be
proportionate to the initial crime.
The excessive and indiscriminate use of Israeli
military power and the inhuman practices of the
occupation forces fall under the category of repression
and collective punishment against the Palestinian
people, whose land is occupied and whose rights are
usurped. Israel’s barbaric attacks against Palestinian
civilians, including the killing of women, children and
the elderly, run counter to all international laws and
norms and are clear and flagrant violations of
international law and the relevant provisions of the
1949 Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.
Israel has created an atmosphere of death inside
the occupied Palestinian territory. That has led many to
equate the value of life and death, given that there are
no prospects for the future to give Palestinians hope or
an alternative to the peace process that has been
aborted by successive Israeli Governments. Those with
influence on the peace process have no interest in
intervening to put an end to the bloodshed in occupied
Palestinian territories. That bloodshed will lead to
more violence, because all hope has disappeared from
the lives of Palestinians. They have lost their
livelihood and human dignity.
All of that will only lead to generations filled
with hate, desperation and the desire to avenge. Israel
will be responsible for that. Inaction by the
international community and the fact that the Security
Council has ignored the repeated massacres perpetrated
by Israel and allowed acts of aggression and

06-60930

occupation to replace justice and rule of law, only
serves to encourage Israel to deny the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people to self-determination and to
establish an independent State with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia strongly condemns
the massacre perpetrated yesterday by Israel in Beit
Hanoun, as well as others throughout occupied
Palestine, which have led to the deaths and injury of
dozens of women, children and other innocent
civilians. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia reiterates its
call on the international community to act quickly to
put an end to acts of aggression against innocent
Palestinians, as well as to revive the peace process in
conformity with the Arab peace initiative and
internationally binding resolutions. The Kingdom
warns of the grave consequences that could result from
assaults on the peace process. We also underscore the
fact that it is necessary to urgently convene an
international conference that includes all parties with a
view to ending such horrible massacres and providing
protection to the Palestinian people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would also like to thank
Ms. Angela Kane for her briefing on developments in
the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories.
As if the complete air, land and naval blockade
on Gaza was not enough, as if it were not enough that
last summer’s so-called Israeli withdrawal from the
Gaza Strip was a mere pretext to turn the entire Gaza
Strip into a prison for the Palestinian people, as if the
ongoing daily acts of aggression against innocent
Palestinians were not enough, as if the daily scenes on
Western television of Palestinian deaths and blood
were not enough — as if all of that and Israel’s other
daily actions against the Palestinian people were not
enough, Israel yesterday launched a new military
operation to shed the blood of more Palestinian
women, children and elderly persons, destroying all
hope for peace and a life of dignity for an entire
people.
Words of condemnation no longer rise to the
magnitude of Israel’s actions. The international
community, and the Security Council in particular, can

25

S/PV.5564

no longer stand by as spectators watching this unjust
and protracted tragedy. Israel’s acts of aggression,
killing of dozens of innocent Palestinian victims, firing
on peaceful women demonstrators and the massacre at
Beit Hanoun, as well as its use of internationally
banned weapons and its destruction of Palestinian
civilian infrastructure, require invoking the vast wealth
of civilized human laws and rules, agreements and
moral precepts to end such acts of aggression.
In the light of what is taking place, we wish to
underscore the fact that there is an urgent need to put
an end to Israeli aggression. The Council must adopt a
resolution that demands that Israel end its military
activities, that puts in place a mechanism to ensure that
it in fact does end those activities, and that establishes
a commission to investigate the Beit Hanoun massacre.
Such a resolution would not contradict the work of the
Quartet; rather it will complement it and lend it
momentum while increasing the credibility of the
efforts of the international community to put an end to
daily Israeli massacres. It may also serve to open a
window that would make it possible to adopt a serious
approach to peace in Palestine and the entire Middle
East region.
The positive developments taking place in
southern Lebanon following the adoption of resolution
1701 (2006) have been first and foremost due to the
support of the international community and the full
commitment of the Government of Lebanon to honour
its obligations and responsibilities. The Lebanese army
has now been deployed in the south of the country. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General has
described our cooperation with UNIFIL as excellent.
The Government of Lebanon has deployed 8,600
troops along the Lebanese border to strengthen the
observation mechanisms. The Government has
repeatedly denied all allegations by Israel that arms are
being smuggled into the country.
It is unacceptable that resolution 1701 (2006) be
reduced to meaning solely the release of the two Israeli
soldiers. The resolution aims primarily at ending all
acts of aggression against Lebanon. It also seeks to
assist the Government of Lebanon to exercise its
sovereignty and power over all of its territory. Israel is
daily violating our sovereignty by violating Lebanese
airspace.
As if that were not enough, Israeli military planes
fly at high and low altitudes over German and French

26

naval vessels, in total violation of Israel’s commitment
to abide by the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006)
and the role and authority of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon. It is the joint responsibility
of both parties to implement resolution 1701 (2006),
and we therefore call in this forum on the Israeli party
to abide by its commitments and to assume its
responsibilities vis-à-vis the international community.
We commend the steadfastness of the Palestinian
people and their tenacity in clinging to their land in the
face of the Israeli military machine, which is daily
endeavouring to wipe them out. The time for peace has
come. The Madrid Conference, the relevant resolutions
of the international community and the Arab Peace
Initiative adopted at Beirut in 2002 all are good bases
for bringing about the just, lasting and comprehensive
peace to which the peoples of the region aspire. It is
our hope that the Council will seek to relaunch that
initiative in enhancement of international peace and
security and as a contribution to building a prosperous
future without extremism for coming generations in the
region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I call on the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Hamidon (Malaysia): Let me begin by
associating myself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and with the statement to be delivered by
Azerbaijan on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC).
My delegation endorses the statement delivered
by the representative of Qatar on behalf of the Group
of Arab States and by the Permanent Observer of
Palestine. My delegation would like to expand on one
point touched on in those statements, namely the
establishment and deployment of a United Nations
observer or peacekeeping force to the occupied
Palestinian territory.
The establishment and deployment of a United
Nations force to the occupied Palestinian territory is a
proposal that has been before the Council for almost
four decades. My delegation believes that, under the
present circumstances of heightened tension, only the
forcible separation of the two sides would be able to
provide the necessary peace and security that would be
conducive to the resumption of negotiations aimed at a
political settlement.

06-60930

S/PV.5564

Malaysia, along with other countries, has long
urged the Security Council to establish a strong
interposing international protection mechanism which
would have the immediate effect of defusing the
explosive situation on the ground and instilling
confidence in the two sides. My delegation therefore
urges once again that a robust international protection
force be deployed without further delay. We cannot
afford to let the violence spiral out of control or allow
this conflict to remain unresolved indefinitely.
The Security Council is well aware of the details
of the United Nations force proposal, which had also
been recommended by the Secretary-General.
Unfortunately, the repeated calls made in the past for
the Council to consider that proposal have been met
with
resistance.
Consequently,
thousands
of
defenceless Palestinian civilians, including women and
children, have been, and will continue to be, killed or
wounded and their property and infrastructure
destroyed as a result of the relentless acts of aggression
and the excessive and indiscriminate use of force by
Israel, the occupying Power, in a business-as-usual
fashion.
In retaliating against the occupation and
aggression, acts by Palestinian militants have
wrongfully led to Israeli civilian casualties and to the
destruction of their property. If such acts are
considered legitimate under those circumstances, then I
am afraid that we have returned to the long-gone dark
ages of our ancestors, and that Council members,
oblivious to their responsibilities under the Charter, are
sitting here in this Chamber seemingly endorsing those
war crimes and crimes against humanity.

06-60930

My delegation continues to recognize the
important role of the diplomatic Quartet. The road map
and the two-State solution envisaged therein, among
others, have provided real hope for peace. Given the
current situation on the ground and the steadily
deteriorating overall situation in the region, it appears
that the three-year-old road map has been deliberately
asphyxiated by a Power mightier than the Quartet. It
also appears that the road map is nothing more than a
piece of paper, just like the Council resolutions on the
Palestinian question — excellent in substance but poor
in implementation.
My delegation appeals once again to the Council
to shoulder its Charter-mandated responsibility for the
sake of both the Palestinians and the Israelis, for the
sake of peace and security in the region and the world
at large, and for humanity. While serious efforts to
resuscitate the Middle East peace process are being
made, establishing and deploying a United Nations
force without further delay to the occupied Palestinian
territories is an option that the Council should
seriously consider.
My delegation hopes that the draft resolution that
will be presented in due course by the delegation of
Qatar on behalf of the OIC and the League of Arab
States will serve as a basis in that regard.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are a
number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. I therefore intend, with the concurrence of the
members of the Council, to suspend the meeting until
3.15 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

27
