A /73/PV.82

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

82nd plenary meeting

Monday, 20 May 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
In the absence of the President, Mrs. Imene
(Namibia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
Agenda items 32 and 113 (continued)
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission
(A/73/724)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
Peacebuilding Fund
Report of the Secretary-General on the
Peacebuilding Fund (A/73/829)
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): We thank the President
of the General Assembly for convening today’s
important joint debate. We also thank the Chair and
Vice-Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission for their
valuable stewardship.
As an Organizational Committee member of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) at its inception and
having served in it four times, Indonesia appreciates
the comprehensive approach to ensuring that sustaining
peace remains a vital theme of the Commission.
Indonesia hopes that today’s joint debate, in keeping
with the aims of the 2018 twin resolutions (General
Assembly resolution 72/276 and Security Council
resolution 2413 (2018)), will encourage not just the PBC
but other United Nations bodies, as well as non-United
Nations partners and regional organizations, to work
with greater synergy.

Indonesia would like to emphasize the following.
First, while no single actor alone can mitigate
conflicts, the PBC has a unique role to play in
advancing intergovernmental coherence through
its cross-pillar mandate. It is an indispensable body
among the principal organs and other relevant United
Nations entities. Therefore, we welcome the joint
meetings of the PBC with the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council, as well as last year’s
more comprehensive focus on the Sahel. We hope that
this collaborative approach, including with the Security
Council, will intensify. There are important advantages
for the Security Council in meeting the complex
challenges before it by fully utilizing the Commission’s
longer-term perspective and expertise, not only on
the countries considered by the Commission, but also
on the review of peacekeeping operations and special
political mission mandates.
Secondly, a key point in the restructuring of the
United Nations peace and security pillar last year was
to prioritize conflict prevention and sustaining peace
and to align the pillar closely with the development
and human rights pillars to promote cross-pillar
coordination. Now that the restructuring has unfolded,
an analysis by the PBC as to how the aim has been
fulfilled successfully, in particular regarding the
impact on the ground, where it matters most, will be
very useful to the Secretariat and Member States. A
formal or informal exercise by the PBC in that regard,
with a view to course correction, will be welcomed.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-14670 (E)

*1914670*

A/73/PV.82

Thirdly, as crucial as the sustaining peace agenda
is, it will not succeed if sufficient financial resources
are not available for it. Indonesia and Norway worked
together as the PBC co-focal points on financing for
peacebuilding in 2017-2018. We hope that the promotion
of a financing option as a key policy area with the
PBC will only expand. In addition to aid and grants,
it is vital to harness both domestic and international
investment, trade and innovative financial resources.
Social media and modern information technologies
should be utilized for more effective microfinancing, as
well as skills education in far-flung areas. Indonesia has
first-hand experience in many of those areas. Through
South-South and triangular partnerships, we are ready
to further share our knowledge and lend assistance.
We also facilitated a PBC policy task force in 2008 on
how to engage with the private sector by focusing on
non-traditional elements. Its outcome has continued to
be very useful for the PBC’s work.
Fourthly, Indonesia commends the Peacebuilding
Fund (PBF) as a catalytic and responsive source of
financing in so many critical situations. Its record of
approval of $183 million for 40 countries in 2018, with
an increased resource base, demonstrates the confidence
that stakeholders have in its functions. We commend the
fact that 40 per cent of the funds approved for financing
last year was aimed at women’s empowerment, an
essential element in peacebuilding. However, we also
believe that the most recent investment allocation, of
27 per cent and 20 per cent to peacebuilding and special
political missions, respectively, could be increased.
Indonesia continues to be a strong supporter of the PBF.
We welcome the measures mentioned in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (A/73/829) for strengthening the
oversight of funds and projects, as well as the meeting
to hear about countries’ experiences. However, as we
mentioned last year, that should also be complemented
with direct feedback via media from communities
where the Fund’s finance projects are operationalized.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that if
peacebuilding, sustaining peace and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development are to endure, there
must be strong partners, companions and allies fully
committed to actualizing their responsibilities both
inside and outside the United Nations. For its part,
Indonesia has been working tirelessly to help ensure
peace and stability for all, and will continue to do so.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful for the convening of today’s
2/8

20/05/2019

meeting, and we thank the current and former Chairs
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), Ambassador
Guillermo Fernández de Soto Valderrama, of Colombia,
and Ambassador Ion Jinga, of Romania, for their
informative briefings (see A/73/PV.81) and diligent
efforts at the helm of the Commission.
Peacebuilding assistance remains one of the
most effective tools in the United Nations toolkit for
providing support to States in post-conflict situations
and preventing such conflicts from recurring. The
PBC has been playing a key role in those efforts for
almost two decades now, both as an intergovernmental
consultative body and as a bridging platform whereby
participants can find information about the views
of a broad range of stakeholders on current issues.
The interest that States themselves have shown in
being included on the PBC’s agenda is indicative of
how effective its work and potential assistance are.
It is no coincidence that in addition to the country
configurations for Burundi, Liberia, Guinea-Bissau,
the Central African Republic and Sierra Leone, requests
for assistance from the PBC are also coming from other
countries in need of peacebuilding support from the
international community, and the practice of discussing
regional issues with the agreement of all the States in
the region concerned also continues to develop.
At the same time, the central principle guiding the
work of the Commission and all other peacebuilding
and sustaining-peace initiatives remains national
ownership,
with
Governments
defining
and
implementing their peacebuilding priorities and
strategies based on their societies’ needs. As we have
seen in practice, international peacebuilding assistance
is most effective when it is provided in full respect
for host countries’ sovereignty and based on their
priorities. We support the PBC’s efforts to improve the
effectiveness of international assistance to post-conflict
countries through the United Nations. However, it is
crucial to ensure that the PBC acts strictly within its
mandate and does not attempt to replace other bodies.
Many
peacebuilding
and
sustaining-peace
assistance programmes for States require both proper
coordination and an appropriate division of labour. Only
collective, targeted actions that do not create conflicts
among bodies’ remits can achieve the desired results. In
that context, with regard to the theoretical interlinkages
between human rights, development, peace and
security, it is essential to understand that development
alone cannot guarantee peace, while a peaceful life does
19-14670

20/05/2019

not necessarily guarantee development. It is therefore
vital not just to consider such linkages but to clearly
understand the differences between the purposes of
these processes and which United Nations organ or
body is responsible for promoting each of those areas.
We see the PBC as having the potential to improve
the quality of the advisory services it provides to the
Security Council at its request on country-specific
subjects that are on both bodies’ agendas. The Council’s
December 2018 presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/20)
on the issue was additional confirmation of that.
We believe that the Commission’s value lies in its
ability to transmit the peacebuilding needs of States
hosting peacekeeping missions to the Council. A
comprehensive approach, including analysis of host
Governments’ priorities, the views and expectations of
civil society, and assessments of United Nations system
representatives and other national and international
stakeholders, would be an extremely useful addition
to the Secretary-General’s reports, especially during
the transition stages of the work of peacekeeping
operations. It is that added value and relevancy of the
PBC’s recommendations that have decisive significance
when it comes to their possible consideration in the
work of the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council.
Three years have passed since the General
Assembly and the Security Council’s adoption of twin
resolutions (resolution 70/262 and resolution 2282
(2016)) on the review of the peacebuilding architecture,
but the discussion in the United Nations on further
improvements to the Organization’s assistance to States
in the areas of peacebuilding and peacekeeping is as
intense as ever. Secretary-General António Guterres
made a significant contribution to that discussion with
his 2018 report on the subject (S/2018/43). Through
the twin resolutions adopted last year by the General
Assembly and the Security Council (resolution 72/276
and resolution 2413 (2018)), the States reaffirmed their
intention of continuing to study its proposals. We also
look forward to the Secretary-General’s next report,
which will expand on his recommendations, including
for issues related to the financing of United Nations
peacebuilding activities.
The Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) has an important
role to play in that regard, having proved itself to be a
reliable tool for rapid, targeted financing. The general
improvement in the results of the PBF’s programmes
and the greater effectiveness in its implementation

A/73/PV.82

of its primary projects speak to that and are noted in
the Secretary-General’s annual report (A/73/829). It is
important that many of them are aimed at supporting
national reconciliation, encouraging political dialogue,
implementing projects in the social arena and
strengthening State institutions. We believe that it is
important to improve the PBC and PBF’s coordination
and complementary actions, which will help to eliminate
the fragmentation of peacebuilding assistance, avoid
any duplication of effort and make the Fund’s own
activities more transparent. Any international support
through the Fund must be fully in line with the strategies
and priorities defined at the national level.
Ultimately, it is important to remember that the
primary goal of United Nations peacebuilding and
peacekeeping activities is to help States build their own
capacities so that in the future they can manage without
international assistance and themselves be able to help
others in need.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the
Secretary-General for his report (A/73/829) on the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) and the Chair of the twelfth
session of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) for the
PBC report (A/73/724). We congratulate them on the
significant achievements that have been made during
the reporting period in various areas of peacebuilding
and sustaining peace around the world.
I deeply appreciate the pragmatic leadership in
taking forward the Commission’s work of Ambassador
Fernández de Soto Valderrama, the Permanent
Representative of Colombia, whose wonderful country
I am just returning from after a Joint Board of funds
and programmes field visit. In Colombia’s Nariño
department, we met with stakeholders of a PBF project
and learned first-hand the challenging work of building
peace as part of the peace and reconciliation process
following the signing of the landmark peace deal.
From the start, the delegation of Bangladesh has
been engaged in all aspects of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding in a productive and constructive manner
that is premised on a value-driven approach. We look
forward to continuing our sustained contributions with
other members of the PBC to ensure the appropriate
implementation and follow-up of the forward-leaning
agenda of the reports.
For obvious reasons, the two reports have many
common threads. Both reports put stress on building
coherence and synergy across various actors,

19-146703/8

A/73/PV.82

20/05/2019

agencies and processes, including various organs of
the peacebuilding architecture. The reports value the
centrality of national ownership and leadership in
peacebuilding, which indeed is of paramount importance.

gender and youth promotion is praiseworthy. We are
heartened by the fact that this year 40 per cent of the
Fund was dedicated to promoting gender equality and
women’s empowerment.

Essentially, the PBC report reflects the commendable
work of the country-specific configurations. While
their respective work differs in many ways, there
are also some important similarities. We can gain
enrichment from each one by cross-referencing,
sharing experiences and creating platforms for lateral
dialogues among country-specific configurations. We
feel encouraged by the sight of efforts geared towards
breaking down the silos in implementing peacebuilding
and the sustaining peace agenda. Through its convening
and advisory roles, the PBC must consistently work to
further consolidate those efforts, particularly towards
bringing the actors of the three United Nations pillars
closer together. The Secretary-General’s management
reforms, even at this very early stage, have created a
good impetus towards that important goal.

As part of enhancing the transparency and
accountability of the Fund’s management, efforts to
strengthen the linkage between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Fund through an improved flow
of information are indeed encouraging. But to continue
those efforts, what is perhaps most important is to ensure
the increased, predictable and sustainable financing
and mobilization of further political support towards
the work of the Peacebuilding Fund. In that regard we
echo the Secretary-General’s call for a quantum leap.

We appreciate the focus of the PBC report on
establishing linkages between recommendations
and implementation through national ownership and
partnership-building. As the Commission’s primary
role is about serving as a bridge among the principal
organs and relevant entities of the United Nations,
we see merit in the Commission’s renewed emphasis
on implementation by strengthening partnerships,
including with the World Bank and regional and
subregional organizations. We believe that this
approach can contribute a lot to achieving various
peacebuilding and sustaining peace objectives across
the board, in particular the protection of civilians,
institution-building and the empowerment of women
and youth.
We are happy to see the success of the PBF in
attracting funds from multiple donors, even surpassing
the targets of its current strategic plan. Indeed, the
PBF has evolved as a pool fund success story and has
withstood the test of time as a flexible and catalytic
endowment for complementing global peace efforts. On
a cautionary note, however, we would like to suggest
that it not take too much of an expansionary approach
in terms of its priority and focus areas. Over the years
the Fund has created its own operational niche and
comparative advantages. It is only to be expected that
investments in those areas will yield the best results.
Its value-added work in the areas of promoting social
cohesion, public service delivery, institution-building,
4/8

Before I conclude, let me share my delegation’s initial
thoughts about the 2020 review of the peacebuilding
architecture. As we look forward, we must also take
stock of the implementation of the current review cycle,
particularly our shared commitments in the landmark
twin resolutions (General Assembly resolution 70/262
and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016)), and the
recommendations of the Secretary-General’s report on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace (S/2018/43), which
we endorse. Let us put together our collective wisdom
for a successful review of the peacebuilding architecture
in 2020 to continue our work towards building durable
and sustainable peace across the globe.
Mr. Jaiteh (Gambia): The Gambia would like to
congratulate Mr. Ion Jinga, Ambassador and Permanent
Representative of Romania to the United Nations,
on his successful chairmanship of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), and his successor, the current
Chair of the Commission, Mr. Guillermo Fernández
de Soto Valderrama, Ambassador and Permanent
Representative of Colombia to the United Nations,
for the manner in which he is chairing the work of
the Commission.
My delegation would like to thank the President
for convening this joint debate on agenda item 32,
“Report of the Peacebuilding Commission”, and agenda
item 113, “Report of the Secretary-General on the
Peacebuilding Fund”.
The Gambia today enjoys peace and stability
through the support and solidarity of the United
Nations and our bilateral and regional partners. The
Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding Support
Office and the Peacebuilding Fund have played a
critical role in supporting peace and transitional justice
19-14670

20/05/2019

in the Gambia. We remain grateful for the continued
and relentless engagement of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Support Office and
the Peacebuilding Fund in the Gambia. Through policy
advice and immediate financial support, we have been
able to embark on transitional justice, rule of law
and security sector reform programmes. We are now
building and consolidating the peace we have earned.
Last year, the Gambia and the European Union,
with the participation of our bilateral, multilateral
and regional partners, convened a successful donor’s
round table in Brussels. We thank our partners for
their pledges of support and commitment to the longterm development of the Gambia. The Peacebuilding
Commission made a substantial financial commitment
to peacebuilding and sustaining peace in the Gambia
at the Brussels conference. We are grateful to all our
multilateral and bilateral partners for their generous
commitments. Our task now is to call for the tangible
realization of the pledges to which we committed
ourselves. We are grateful for the generosity of the
Peacebuilding Fund. We also join the call for more
resources to be contributed to the Fund, as it helps
vulnerable societies overcome the challenges of conflict.
My delegation would also like to commend the
convening of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on peacebuilding and sustaining peace (see
A/72/PV.83) last year, at which the Gambia contributed
at the highest level and provided an update on the
situation in the Gambia, including our sustainable
peace priorities. It is our hope that the conclusions of
that meeting will contribute greatly to our collective
push for peace and security in the various conflict
situations around the world. For us in the Gambia,
our new national development plan is built around the
need to consolidate peace and promote democracy,
good governance and respect for the rule of law. Our
overarching goal is to achieve economic growth and
sustainable development for the people in a peaceful
and stable environment.
My delegation has learned useful lessons from
our engagement with the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Support Office and the critical
support that they provide through the Peacebuilding
Fund. The early mobilization and timely intervention
of the United Nations and the PBC made a critical
difference in the support they have provided to the
new Government of the Gambia. By responding to
the specific needs of the Government, a platform for

A/73/PV.82

national ownership was created. Engagement with
regional actors, including the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel, was also very critical
in terms of finding the right partners for meeting
critical transitional challenges. This also allowed for
burden-sharing and better coordination between the
Government and different actors.
As we consolidate our democratic gains, we
will continue to count on the support of the United
Nations and its peacebuilding architecture as partners
for peacebuilding and sustaining peace. We will also
continue to call on our bilateral, multilateral and
regional partners to support our national development
plan. This is the plan that will usher in a new era of
sustainable development, democratic governance,
respect for the rule of law and durable peace.
The critical peacebuilding work that the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture does deserves
more support from all Member States and partners.
It is in this connection that absolute transparency in
sustaining peace is the order of the day in the Gambia.
This transparency is well exercised through the
periodic briefings the Attorney General and Minister
of Justice of the Gambia delivers to the Peacebuilding
Commission. Sustainable peace over the long haul is
the business of all and we call on all to continue their
unwavering engagement and commitment to this cause.
Mr. Kai-Kai (Sierra Leone): At the outset, I
would like to thank the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Ambassador Fernández de Soto
Valderrama, of Colombia for his efforts so far in
pushing the Commission’s agenda. In particular, I
would like to thank Ambassador Ion Jinga of Romania
for his faithful stewardship of the Commission last year.
Special thanks also go to Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco of the Peacebuilding Support Office
and his team for their efforts in supporting the work of
the Peacebuilding Commission, especially with regard
to the management of the Peacebuilding Fund.
This debate is timely and critical as we approach
2020, when the present peacebuilding and sustaining
peace arrangements come up for strategic review.
As a country that has been a beneficiary of the
advocacy and convening power of the Peacebuilding
Commission and funding from the Peacebuilding Fund,
we are particularly pleased with the progress made by
the Commission in supporting countries in conflict
or that are in transition. In this regard, we are pleased

19-146705/8

A/73/PV.82

to note and acknowledge the work of the Commission
on promoting gender issues, prioritizing financing for
peacebuilding activities and building partnerships for
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
As a country with one of the oldest configurations,
Sierra Leone remains grateful to the Peacebuilding
Commission and the donors for their steadfast support
over the past 14 years. We can attest that, at the end
of peacekeeping operations in a country, four main
gaps exist: a financing gap; a coordination gap among
key national and international partners; a gap in the
population’s confidence in their own authorities,
especially in communities that have relied on
peacekeepers for a considerable period after the war;
and finally, a governance gap, especially in the security
sector. The Peacebuilding Commission is critical to
bridging those gaps.
Today, Sierra Leone has come a long way with its
peacebuilding efforts. Since the end of our civil war
in 2002, we have had four successive presidential and
legislative elections and four local elections. We have
also had three changes in Government after those
elections, from a governing political party to the
opposition, with all the accompanying ramifications. In
all these situations, engagement with the international
community, including the Peacebuilding Commission
and regional partners, has been crucial. Today, Sierra
Leone is a contributor to peacekeeping.
Going forward, we share the recommendations
made in the report (A/73/724) and by many Member
States today. In addition, we want the Peacebuilding
Commission to consider the following.
First, we want it to consider a regional approach to
peacebuilding. Apart from the Sahel, which is clear, it
is perhaps prudent to start thinking of the Mano River
Union countries of Sierra Leone, Liberia, Côte d’Ivoire
and Guinea as cross-border activities and programmes
could contribute to conflict prevention and development
in that region.
Secondly, on financing, the Peacebuilding
Commission should also start engaging the private
sector much more to see where it can invest in some of
these countries in order to help contribute to economic
growth and early development.
Thirdly, we recommend that the Peacebuilding
Commission accompany Sierra Leone in its current
journey to establish a peace and national cohesion
6/8

20/05/2019

commission, with the sole aim of providing the space
to allow ordinary people to take ownership and develop
mechanisms for conflict prevention, management and
resolution, as well as to build sustainable peace in
the country.
Sierra Leone will present its second voluntary
national review on the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals at the High-level Political Forum
on Sustainable Development in July. We will, in
consonance with the Peacebuilding Commission, do a
side event to present the new national development plan
of Sierra Leone to further cement the nexus between
development and sustaining peace.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on these items.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda items
32 and 113?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 56 (continued)
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/73/525/Add.1)
The Acting President: The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendations of the Committee have
been made clear in the Committee and are reflected
in the relevant official records. Therefore, if there is
no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I
shall take it that the General Assembly decides not to
discuss the report of the Committee that is before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. May I remind Member
States that, under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the
General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
19-14670

20/05/2019

in plenary meeting is different from its vote in
the Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee), I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same
manner as was done in the Committee, unless notified
otherwise in advance.
The General Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) in
paragraph 6 of its report. The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution. The Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/293).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 56?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 116 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(a) Election of members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination
Note by the Secretary-General (A/73/608/Add.1)
The Acting President: Pursuant to General
Assembly decision 42/450 of 17 December 1987 and
upon the nomination by the Economic and Social
Council, the Assembly elects the members of the
Committee for Programme and Coordination.
Members will recall that, at its 51st plenary
meeting, held on 12 December 2018, the General
Assembly elected five members to the Committee for
a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January
2019 and expiring on 31 December 2021. Members will
also recall that, by its decision 2018/201 E of 4 April
2018, the Economic and Social Council postponed the
nomination of one member from the Latin American

A/73/PV.82

and Caribbean States and one member from the Western
European and other States for election by the General
Assembly for a three-year term beginning on 1 January
2019 and expiring 31 December 2021; and one member
from the Latin American and Caribbean States for a
term expiring on 31 December 2020.
In this connection, the Assembly has before it a
note by the Secretary-General contained in document
A/73/608/Add.1. As indicated in that document, by its
decision 2019/201 C of 7 May 2019, the Economic and
Social Council nominated Paraguay for election by the
General Assembly to fill an outstanding vacancy in the
Committee for Programme and Coordination for a term
of office beginning on the date of election and expiring
on 31 December 2021.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
all elections should be held by secret ballot. However, I
should like to recall paragraph 16 of General Assembly
decision 34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing
with the secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs
when the number of candidates corresponds to the
number of seats to be filled should become standard,
unless a delegation specifically requests a vote on a
given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on the
basis of dispensing with the secret ballot?
It was so decided
The Acting President: The number of States
nominated from among the Latin American and
Caribbean States is equal to the number of seats to
be filled for that group. May I therefore take it that
the Assembly wishes to declare Paraguay elected
as a member of the Committee for Programme and
Coordination for a term of office beginning on the date
of election and expiring on 31 December 2021?
It was so decided (decision 73/410 B).
The Acting President: I congratulate Paraguay
on its election as a member of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination.
Members are informed that the Economic and
Social Council, in its decision 2019/201 C, decided to
further postpone the nomination of one member from
the Latin American and Caribbean States for election
by the Assembly for a term beginning on the date of
election and expiring on 31 December 2020, and one

19-146707/8

A/73/PV.82

member from the Western European and other States
for election by the General Assembly for a term
beginning on the date of election and expiring on
31 December 2021.

8/8

20/05/2019

The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 116.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

19-14670
