United Nations

S/PV.6628

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6628

th meeting
Thursday, 6 October 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Salam
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Mashabane
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei (S/2011/603)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-53430 (E)

*1153430*

S/PV.6628

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Abyei (S/2011/603)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of South Sudan and the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting. On behalf of
the Council, I want to welcome him in his maiden
appearance here.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/603, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I wish to thank
you, Madam President, for your kind words addressed
to me. I am pleased to be here today for this first
Security Council briefing in my capacity as UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
This briefing will focus on the situation in the
Abyei Area. The Council has before it the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/603), which provides an
exhaustive overview of the situation there in the past
two months. I plan to brief the Council on the most
recent developments relating to the security situation
on the ground as well as on the status of the
deployment of United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA) and of political negotiations. I
will also present the recommendations of the
Secretary-General calling for a modification of the
UNISFA mandate aimed at incorporating the bordermonitoring mechanism established by the Sudan and
South Sudan. I will then respond to questions, should
there be any.

2

The security and humanitarian situation in the
region has remained unchanged since June 2011. The
humanitarian community continues to assist about
110,000 displaced persons in Agok and in Warrap
State, in South Sudan. Unfortunately, the delivery of
humanitarian aid remains hampered by flooding and by
restrictions on flight authorizations and security
clearances. The Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement are present in the
north and the south, respectively, of the Kiir/Bahr
el-Arab river. Although UNISFA has not observed any
significant movements across the river or skirmishes
between the two forces, tensions remain high.
Mines also remain a cause for concern, as was
made clear by the tragic deaths of four Ethiopian
soldiers on 2 August following a landmine explosion.
With respect to the human rights situation, as has been
reported earlier, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights deployed an
evaluation mission to Abyei to investigate allegations
of human rights abuses following the May hostilities.
However, the mission did not receive authorization to
go to Abyei.
A total of 1,780 UNISFA troops are currently
deployed on the ground, including a small contingent
in Kadugli, where, on 2 October, UNISFA took over
the logistics base that had been used by the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan. Military observers have
taken up positions in Abyei, Agok and Diffra. Liaison
officers have been designated for deployment to
Khartoum and Juba, and a small team is in place to
facilitate the mission’s deployment. Since 23 August,
UNISFA has been patrolling the city of Abyei and
Agok, Diffra, Banton and Noon, as well as the main
roads. The mission has also undertaken patrols and air
reconnaissance operations. It has also undertaken
demining operations, pending the deployment of the
United Nations Mine Action Service. Preparations have
been made to repair the Banton bridge when weather
and road conditions improve. As Council members
know, the Banton bridge is a strategic point linking the
south and the north parts of the Abyei Area. It is
therefore essential for the return of displaced persons
and also for the delivery of supplies to UNISFA as well
as its operations.
We could say that the deployment of UNISFA is
an important success story given the many obstacles
the mission has faced: delays in the issuance of flight
authorizations and road access clearances, which have

11-53430

S/PV.6628

led to a shortage of fuel and rations, as well as delays
in the issuance of visas and residence permits; and, of
course, heavy rains.
We continue to address these problems so as to
deploy 900 additional troops by the end of October to
strengthen the mission before the migration of
Misseriya nomads. In order to enhance our cooperation
with the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan,
and in an attempt to resolve operational problems
related to the deployment of UNISFA, a consultative
mechanism has been established between the United
Nations and the Governments of Ethiopia, the Sudan
and South Sudan. This quadripartite consultative
mechanism held its first meeting on 26 September in
New York and was able to make progress in several
areas, including land allocation for deployment followup, the opening of supply routes and demining. In
addition, I spoke with the State Minister of the Sudan
and received guarantees as concerns the issuance of
visas.
(spoke in English)
Council members will recall that, under the terms
of the 20 June Agreement on temporary arrangements
for the administration and security of the Abyei Area,
all armed forces are to withdraw from the area, and
UNISFA is to provide the sole military presence in
Abyei. The withdrawal is essential to facilitate the
return of displaced persons, create conditions for a
peaceful Misseriya migration and build confidence
among the parties.
Following a lack of progress on the withdrawal of
armed forces in July and August, we were encouraged
when on 8 September the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee agreed on a timeline for the redeployment
of Sudan People’s Liberation Army and SAF forces, at
a meeting facilitated by the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel, in Addis Ababa. The parties
agreed that the withdrawal would begin on
11 September and conclude by 30 September. In recent
weeks, the UNISFA Head of Mission, LieutenantGeneral Tesfay, has continued to engage the parties on
actions required to effect the spirit of the agreement.
Unfortunately, as of today UNISFA has not
observed significant progress on the withdrawal of
armed forces from the Abyei Area. A second meeting
of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, scheduled for
15 and then 30 September, has been further postponed.
On 30 September, according to media reports, a

11-53430

Sudanese Armed Forces spokesperson stated that
Sudanese troops will remain in Abyei until UNISFA is
fully deployed. The Government of South Sudan
accused the Sudan of retaining its troops in order to
prevent the return of the displaced. The two parties
have yet to make further progress on the formation of
the Abyei Area administration, which has been stalled
by a disagreement on the chairmanship since early
July. In the context of UNISFA’s role, a functioning
Abyei Area administration is also essential to the
establishment of the Abyei police service, which
UNISFA is mandated to support.
The lack of progress towards implementation of
the 20 June Agreement is of particular concern as we
approach the upcoming seasonal migration of the
Misseriya. Council members will recall that, due to a
number of political and security issues, last year’s
migration through the Abyei corridor was blocked. In
this context, and given the violence of May this year
and the fact that the Misseriya will be traversing an
international border, we are concerned that this year’s
migration will be more sensitive and a test of the
relationship between the two countries. It could
become a potential source of serious tensions in the
Abyei Area if armed forces remain in place and the
Ngok Dinka internally displaced persons are unable to
return before the end of the planting season, which has
already begun.
UNISFA is already being configured to provide
support, within its capacities, for a peaceful migration
and the protection of civilians, but the mission’s best
efforts cannot compensate for the progress urgently
needed on the political track. The parties must
therefore redouble their commitments to withdrawing
their armed forces, establishing the joint administration
and allowing recovery and reconciliation efforts in
Abyei to begin.
Council members will recall that on 30 July, the
Sudan and South Sudan signed the latest in a series of
agreements on the border, recommitting themselves to
the establishment of a border monitoring mechanism
and envisaging a key supporting role for UNISFA. In
line with this Agreement, Lieutenant General Tesfay
conducted a reconnaissance mission with both parties
in early August, to define the possible structure and
modalities of a border monitoring support mission. The
results were discussed during a meeting of the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism on 18 September,
under the chairmanship of President Thabo Mbeki.

3

S/PV.6628

While that meeting did not deliver a formal agreement
on all the technical details, it was held in a constructive
atmosphere, and we hope that the locations of the team
sites and mission headquarters will be formalized at the
next meeting, which will take place in Juba on
18 October.
On the basis of these positive developments, the
Secretary-General has proposed an amendment of
UNISFA’s mandate to incorporate support for the
border monitoring mechanism and implementation of
the parties’ security commitments along the border,
under a Chapter VI mandate. As laid out in detail in the
report, UNISFA’s new tasks would include support for
the operational activities of the parties along the safe
demilitarized border zone, such as verification,
investigations, monitoring, arbitration, coordination,
information exchange and patrols, as well as the
maintenance of charts and maps, liaison between the
parties and support for capacity-building for effective
bilateral management mechanisms along the border.
We propose that this be achieved within the existing
troop strength of 4,200 military personnel.
Our proposal envisages the reconfiguration of
UNISFA into two pillars with separate and distinct sets
of tasks, albeit of course under a common leadership
and management structure. The new pillar would
comprise a dedicated capacity of 297 force protection,
90 military observers — subject to a final agreement
between the parties on the number of team sites — and
146 enabling elements for support to the border
mechanism. These elements would be deployed into
four joint border verification and monitoring sectors,
each comprising a sector headquarters and up to 10
permanent joint border verification monitoring teams
composed of personnel from the Sudan, South Sudan
and UNISFA, under a UNISFA lead. The mission
would avail of existing operating bases, assets,
infrastructure and supply routes established by the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan and UNISFA.
In order for UNISFA to deliver this support to the
border mechanism, a number of conditions must be in
place. First, it is critical that the parties continue to
move forward to formalize the technical arrangements
of the border mechanism, including the locations of the
team sites and headquarters. Secondly, UNISFA must
have the full support of the Governments of the Sudan
and South Sudan, including unrestricted freedom of
movement by air and land and full cooperation for the

4

deployment of the mission’s remaining troops. Thirdly,
given the fact that the border is 2,100 kilometres long,
and due to limited road infrastructure, UNISFA will
also require additional air assets, including four utility
helicopters and two specialized reconnaissance fixedwing aircraft. I urge the Council to work with the
parties to ensure that the conditions for successful
implementation of the mandate are in place.
The two Governments have shown that they can
come together to make progress, most recently in
relation to the border. International engagement
towards the implementation of existing commitments is
therefore essential to building trust and fostering an
environment conducive to the negotiation on the final
status of Abyei. It is in this spirit that I would
encourage the Council first, to authorize UNISFA
support for the establishment of the border monitoring
mechanism, and secondly, to engage the parties on the
withdrawal of their forces from Abyei so as to enable
internally displaced persons to return and ensure a
peaceful migration in order to prevent a serious
deterioration of the situation in the coming months.
(spoke in French)
In closing, I would like to thank the Government
of Ethiopia for its commitment to UNISFA and to its
troops for their proactive efforts to deploy and to start
implementing the mandate in very challenging
circumstances.
The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like once again to congratulate you,
Madame, on your accession to the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. Your country is an
African friend of the Sudan and has contributed
significantly to the maintenance of international and
regional peace and security, particularly on our mother
continent, Africa, and in my country, the Sudan. The
Darfur peace negotiations were launched in Abuja, the
capital of your country.
Through you, I should like once again to extend
our sincere condolences to the Government and people
of Ethiopia for the death of four Ethiopian soldiers in a
landmine explosion on 2 August in the Mabok region,
east of Abyei.

11-53430

S/PV.6628

I also reiterate my congratulations to Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, on his well-deserved appointment. I wish
him every success in his new endeavours and stress our
commitment to cooperating with him in that regard,
just as we enjoyed close cooperation with his
predecessor, Mr. Le Roy.
The report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Abyei (S/2011/603) states, in paragraph 2,
that the security situation in the Abyei region remained
calm during the reporting period. In paragraph 6, the
report also mentions that progress has been made
towards implementing the 20 June Agreement between
the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement, which, inter alia, provided for
the important need to negotiate so as to achieve a
political settlement on the implementation of the
outstanding elements of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. All of these are indicators of our
Government’s resolve to settle all pending matters
through political dialogue.
With regard to the deployment of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), I
would like to assure the Council that the Government
of the Sudan is keen to expedite the deployment and
facilitation of the work of the Force. A case in point is
that the first phase of deployment was completed in
September. A total of 1,798 personnel of the mandated
troop strength of 4,200 were deployed. The
Government of the Sudan has stated its commitment to
facilitate the second phase of deployment through its
participation in a meeting of the mission’s quadripartite
consultative mechanism, held in New York on
26 September. All aspects related to the deployment of
the Force were discussed, including special measures
to secure land for the construction of its premises, as
well as supply lines, necessary logistics and the
civilian support component of the Force. These details
indicate that the two parties are firmly resolved to
press ahead with the completion of the deployment of
the Force.
The recommendation to amend the mandate of
UNIFSA to provide force protection for the border
monitoring mechanism is in itself a positive
development. It shows the Council that the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan are indeed
cooperating, having agreed to establish a border
monitoring mechanism to ensure that their accessible
borders allow for the movement of citizens and trade

11-53430

between the two brotherly countries. Again, this is a
positive
development
that
demonstrates
the
constructive steps taken by both parties to contain
outstanding issues and to push ahead with efforts to
substantially increase cooperation.
Therefore, as Council members discuss the
expansion of the mission’s mandate, we trust that it
will take decisions in accordance with the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report. I would like to recall here the recommendation
that border monitoring personnel consist of some 300
personnel, within the mission’s current authorized
troop strength of 4,200, in compliance with Security
Council resolution 1990 (2011).
The report before the Council recommends, in
paragraph 25, that UNIFSA be reconfigured in order to
establish a dedicated capacity for the border
mechanism, including 297 force protection personnel,
90 military observers and 146 enabling elements. We
trust that the Council will adhere to the
recommendations contained in paragraph 24 of the
report, which establishes that the troops are mandated
under Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter, and
which indicates, as I mentioned, that the purpose is to
make the borders accessible and facilitate the
movement of citizens and trade between the two
countries.
Concerning the withdrawal of the forces of the
two parties to outside the Abyei Area, in my previous
statements to the Council I indicated that the Sudanese
Armed Forces did not enter Abyei so as to remain
there. Today I reiterate that they will not stay in Abyei
ad infinitum; they will be pulled out. However, the
withdrawal that we meant should be organized in
concurrence with the completion of the deployment of
the Ethiopian forces, so as to avoid a security vacuum.
This is a genuine concern of the Council. In that
connection, I would like to share with the Council that,
owing to the heavy rainfall typical of the fall season in
the region and the lack of paved roads, as Mr. Ladsous
said moments ago, this may be an obstacle to the
movement of vehicles and cars transporting UNIFSA
personnel. We hope that this will be taken into account
when the Council discusses the withdrawal of forces.
These are obstacles beyond our control that are
imposed by weather conditions in the Area. They are
ad hoc conditions.

5

S/PV.6628

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate our gratitude
to the sisterly State of Ethiopia, as well as to Mr. Thabo
Mbeki, head of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, and Mr. Haile Menkerios, the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. Once again,
we would like to reiterate our commitment to facilitate
the deployment of these forces and to extend the
necessary support to them.
Finally, I have three brief observations. First,
with regard to visas, I wish to say to the Council that a
commitment has been made to grant visas to all
UNISFA personnel. To date, we at our Mission have
issued visas to all who have requested them, including
a number of diplomatic missions concerned with the
deployment of UNISFA.
My second point has to do with the visit to
Khartoum this Saturday by President Salva Kiir of
South Sudan to meet with President Omer Hassan
Al-Bashir. We look forward to that meeting and hope
that it will take place in an atmosphere of good faith to
contain and resolve all remaining problems. I hope that
such an environment is taken into consideration as we
discuss here all the matters pending before us.
Lastly, with regard to internally displaced
persons, it is our hope that, given that a force of more
than 1,700 has now been deployed, those people will
begin to return to their areas. That would send a
positive message with regard to the success of the
mission.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Choat (South Sudan): The Republic of South
Sudan welcomes the report (S/2011/603) of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei. We also
express our thanks to the Government of the Federal
Republic of Ethiopia for providing troops to the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei, as well as
for its continuous efforts in support of peace and
stability in the region.
As the Secretary-General notes in his report, the
Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, comprised of senior
representatives from the Republic of the Sudan and the
Republic of South Sudan, met for the first time on 7
and 8 September in Addis Ababa, in the presence of the

6

African Union High-level Implementation Panel and
the United Nations. At that meeting, the members of
the Committee agreed and signed a detailed timetable
for the withdrawal of all troops from the Abyei Area.
In compliance with the provisions of the Addis
Ababa agreement, Sudan People’s Liberation Army
forces withdrew from the Abyei Area and redeployed
to Warrap State. Subsequent to the issuance of the
Secretary-General’s report, the Force Commander
confirmed that SPLA forces had complied with the
agreed withdrawal plan. As of today, Sudanese Armed
Forces (SAF) troops have not withdrawn from the
Abyei Area, despite the clear timeline agreed at the
meeting of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee,
which was signed by senior representatives of the
Government of the Republic of the Sudan.
The SAF must now withdraw immediately and
unconditionally from the Abyei Area. We respectfully
request the Council to set a deadline for that
withdrawal, and to hold whoever violates it
accountable. In that regard, we are also concerned that
the Republic of the Sudan has stated that the SAF
cannot withdraw from Abyei unless the Area
institutions are established. While establishing those
institutions is necessary, in no agreement between the
parties is the withdrawal of troops conditional upon
their establishment.
The Republic of South Sudan underlines that it is
ready to continue serious negotiations with the
Republic of the Sudan on all outstanding issues. My
Government seeks lasting peace in Abyei. We wish to
see the security situation on the ground stabilized in
order to enable the peaceful return of civilians.
We thank the Council for its continued support
for peace and stability in the region. We stand ready to
continue cooperation with the Council, the United
Nations peacekeeping missions, the African Union,
regional partners and the international community in
support of that purpose.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion of the
subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

11-53430
