XII

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE
THIRD COMMITTEE
313 (IV). Draft Convention on Freedom
of Information
The General Assembly,
Convincea that freedom of information is one
of the uasic treedoms and that it is essential to
the furtherance and protection of all other freedoms,
Considering that the Commission on Human
Rights is engaged in drafting an International
Covenant on tiuman Rights, the object of which
is to promote the observance of basic human
rights throughout the world,
Considering that the Commission on Human
Rights has declared its intention of submitting
the draft International Covenant on Human
Rights to the fifth regular session of the General
Assembly,
1. Recommends to the Economic and Social
Council that it request the Commission on Human
Rights to include adequate provisions on freedom
of information in the draft International Covenant
on Human Rights, taking into account the work
done on the draft Convention on Freedom of
Information 1 at the United Nations Conference on
Freedom of Information and at the third and
fourth regular sessions of the General Assembly;
2. Decides to postpone further action on the
draft Convention on Freedom of Information to
the fifth regular session of the General Assembly
and pending receipt of the draft International
Covenant on Human Rights or a progress report
thrreon.
232nd plenary meeting,
20 October 1949.

convened by them take place, for the purpose of
covering such meetings, in accordance with the
terms and conditions of agreements made by the
United Nations or its specialized agencies with the
Governments of such countries, or, in the absence
of such an agreement, on terms and conditions
similar to those contained in agreements made by
the lJ nited Nations or its specialized agencies
with other Member States; and
( /,) To all public information sources and
services of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies and to all meetings and conferences of
the United Nations or of the specialized agencies
which are open to the Press, equally and without
<liscrimination.
233rd plenary meeting,
21 October 1949.

315 (IV). Discriminations practised by
certain States against immigrating
labour and, in particular, against
labour recruited from the ranks of
refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item on the agenda of
its fourth regular session entitled "Discriminations practised by certain States against immigrating labour and, in particular, against labour
recruited from the ranks of refugees",
Noting that the question of the treatment of
migrant labour has been dealt with by the International Labour Conference which, at its 32nd
session, adopted a Convention 2 and a recommendation3 dealing comprehensively with migration
for employment,
Decides to transmit the records of the discussions on this subject at its fourth regular session
to the International Labour Organisation, with the
request that the International Labour Organisation
should do all in its power, in view of the importance
of the principle of non-discrimination embodied in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, to
expedite the ratification and application of the
Convention by its members, and to promote its
observance as regards the social relations of the
workers and their families with the inhabitants of
the region, so that no offensive distinctions may
be established in regard to the former and that
they may enjoy all facilities for accommodation,
food, education, recreation and medical assistance,
both public and private, which are provided for
the community.
243rd plenary meeting,
17 November 1949.

314 ( IV) . Access for news personnel to
meetings of the United Nations and
the specialized agencies
The General Assembly,
Considering that the United Nations, in accordance with the aims and purposes of its Charter,
should be prepared to grant all the necessary
facilities for enabling media of information to
function with full freedom and responsibility in
following the course of its work and that of conferences called by it and its specialized agencies,
Urges all States Members of the United Nations to grant news personnel of all countries who
have been accredited to the United Nations or
specialized agencies, as the case may be, free access
(a) To countries where meetings of the United
Nations or specialized agencies or any conferences
1 See Official Records of the fourth session of the Central Assembly, Annex to the Third Committee, documents

• See International Labour Office, Industry and Labour,
volume II, No. 3, pages 114-124.
• Ibid., pag~, 129-142.

A/961 and A/C.3/518.

32
