S/2002/1034

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 September 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 16 September 2002 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
You will recall that I have, on several occasions, appealed to the Government
of the Republic of Iraq to allow the return of United Nations inspectors to Iraq in
implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions. My discussions with
Iraq and my appeals have been based on the commitment of the Security Council
and all States Members of the United Nations to all the purposes and principles laid
out in the Charter of the United Nations and guided by the relevant Security Council
resolutions.
I would like to inform you that the Foreign Minister of Iraq, Naji Sabri, has
written to me indicating that the Government of the Republic of Iraq has decided to
allow the return of United Nations weapons inspectors to Iraq without conditions.
The Foreign Minister has also indicated that his Government is ready to discuss the
practical arrangements necessary for the immediate resumption of inspections. As I
had the honour to mention to the General Assembly a few days ago, this decision by
the Government of the Republic of Iraq is the indispensable first step towards an
assurance that Iraq no longer possesses weapons of mass destruction and, equally
important, towards a comprehensive solution that includes the suspension and
eventual ending of the sanctions that are causing such hardship for the Iraqi people
and the timely implementation of other provisions of the relevant Security Council
resolutions.
I attach a copy of the Foreign Minister’s letter (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-59182 (E)

160902

*0259182*

S/2002/1034

Annex
Letter dated 16 September 2002 from the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Iraq addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to refer to the series of discussions held between you and the
Government of the Republic of Iraq on the implementation of relevant Security
Council resolutions on the question of Iraq, which took place in New York on 7
March and 2 May and in Vienna on 4 July 2002, as well as the talks which were held
in your office in New York on 14 and 15 September 2002, with the participation of
the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States.
I am pleased to inform you of the decision of the Government of the Republic
of Iraq to allow the return of the United Nations weapons inspectors to Iraq without
conditions.
The Government of the Republic of Iraq has responded, by this decision, to
your appeal, to the appeal of the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, as
well as to the appeals of Arab, Islamic and other friendly countries.
The Government of the Republic of Iraq has based its decision concerning the
return of inspectors on its desire to complete the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions and to remove any doubts that Iraq still possesses
weapons of mass destruction. This decision is also based on your statement to the
General Assembly on 12 September 2002 that the decision by the Government of the
Republic of Iraq is the indispensable first step towards an assurance that Iraq no
longer possesses weapons of mass destruction and, equally important, towards a
comprehensive solution that includes the lifting of the sanctions imposed on Iraq
and the timely implementation of other provisions of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 687 (1991). To this end, the Government of the
Republic of Iraq is ready to discuss the practical arrangements necessary for the
immediate resumption of inspections.
In this context, the Government of the Republic of Iraq reiterates the
importance of the commitment of all States Members of the Security Council and
the United Nations to respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Iraq, as stipulated in the relevant Security Council resolutions and
in Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Dr. Naji Sabri
Minister of Foreign Affairs
Republic of Iraq

2
