United Nations

A/RES/55/246

General Assembly

Distr.: General
6 April 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 94 (e)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/55/L.78)]

55/246. Organizational arrangements for the Thematic
Committee for the special session of the General
Assembly for an overall review and appraisal of the
implementation of the outcome of the United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II)
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 55/195 of 20 December 2000, in which it decided that
the special session of the General Assembly for an overall review and appraisal of
the implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements (Habitat II) should have a plenary, an ad hoc committee of the whole
and a thematic committee, the details of which were to be worked out at the second
session of the Preparatory Committee for the special session,
Decides to adopt the organizational arrangements for the Thematic Committee
contained in the annex to the present resolution.
97th plenary meeting
21 March 2001
Annex
Organizational arrangements for the Thematic Committee
1.

The Thematic Committee shall hold five meetings, as follows:
Wednesday, 6 June 2001, from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 7 p.m.
Thursday, 7 June 2001, from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 7 p.m.
Friday, 8 June 2001, from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m.

2.
The five meetings shall focus on the two main themes of the Habitat Agenda: 1
“adequate shelter for all” and “sustainable human settlements development in an
urbanizing world”.

1
Report of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), Istanbul, 3–14 June 1996
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.97.IV.6), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.

00 57391

A/RES/55/246

3.
The Bureau of the Thematic Committee shall consist of one Chairperson, three
Vice-Chairpersons and one Rapporteur. The Chair of the Thematic Committee shall
be assisted by facilitators who are representatives of Member States.
4.
The Thematic Committee shall be open to Member States, observer States and
observers, entities of the United Nations system, including programmes, funds,
specialized agencies and regional commissions with expertise in the subject matter
of the special session, and accredited Habitat Agenda partners.
5.
To facilitate the presentations, the United Nations Centre for Human
Settlements (Habitat), in consultation with Governments and accredited Habitat
Agenda partners, shall be entrusted with the selection of thematic experiences.
Submissions may come from the full range of Governments of Member States and
accredited Habitat Agenda partners. Presentations may be made only by members of
governmental delegations or accredited Habitat Agenda partners.
6.
The Chair of the Thematic Committee shall present a summary of the
deliberations at the concluding plenary meeting of the special session.

2
