22 (1). PRMLEGES AND IMMUNITIES OF THE

Section 6. In exercising its rights under section
5 above, the United Nations shall pay due regard
to any representations made by the Government of
any Member in so far as it is considered that effect
can be given to such representations without detrirncnt to the interests of the Unitcd Nations.

UNITED NATIONS
A.
RESOLUTION RELATING TO THE ADOPTION OF THE
GENERAL CONVENTION ON PRIVILEGES ANO IMMUNITIES

OF THE UN!TEO NATIONS,

ANO TEXT OF

Section 7. The United Nations, its assets, income and other property shall be:

THE CONVENTION.

The General Assembly approves the annexed
convention on the privileges and immunities of the
United Nations and proposes it for accession by
each Member of the United Nations.
Thirty-first plenary me,,ting, 13 February 1946.

(a) exempt from ali direct taxes; it is understood, however, that the United Nations will not
claim exemption from taxes which are, in fact,
no more than charges for public utility se.rvices;

CONVENTJON ON THE PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITlES
OF THE UNITED NATIONS

( b) exempt from customs duties and prohibitions and restrictions on imports and exports in
respect of articles imported or exported by the
U nited Nations for its official use. It is understood, however, that articles imported under such
exemption will not be sold in the country into
which they were imported except under conditions agreed with the Government of that
country;

Whereas Article 104 of the Charter of the United
Nations provides that the Organization shall enjoy
in the territory of each of its Members such legal
capacity as may be necessary for the exercise of its
functions and the fulfilment of its purposes and
Whereas Article 105 of the Charter of the United
Nations provides that the Organization shall enjoy
in the territory of each of il, Members such privileges and immunities as are necessary for the fulfilment of its purposes and that representatives of
the Members of the United Nations and officials
of the Organization shall similarly enjoy such privileges and immunities as are necessary for the independent exercise of tlH' functions in connection
with the Organization:
Consequently the General Assembly by a resolution adopted on 13 February 1946 approved the
following convention and propases it for accession
by each Member of the United Nations.

(e) exempt from customs duties and prohibitions and restrictions on imports and exports in
respect of its publications.

Section 8. While the United Nations will not,
as a general rule, daim exemption from excise
duties and from laxes on the sale of movable and
immovable property which forro part of the price
to be paid, nevertheless, when the United Nations
is making important purchases for official use of
property on which such duties and taxes have been
charged or are chargeable, Members will, whenever
possible, make appropriate administrative arrangements for the remission or return of the amount of
duty or tax.

ARTICLE I
Juridical Personality
Section l. The United Nations shall possess
jurídica! personality. It shall have the capacity:
(a) to contract;
( b) to acquire and dispose of immovable and
movable property;
(e) to institute legal proceedings.

ARTICLE III
Facilities in respect of Communication.1

Section 9. The United Nations shall enjoy in
the territory of each Member for its official communications treatment not less favourable than
that accorded by the Government of that Member
to any other Government, including its diplomatic
mission, in the matter of priorities, rates and taxes
on mails, cables, telegrams, radiograms, telephotos,
telephone and other co□munications; and press
rates for information to the press and radio. No
censorship shall be applied to the official correspondence and other official communications of the
United Nations.

ARTIC:Lº" II
Property, F,rndJ and A.ssets
Section 2. Thc United Nations, its property
and assets wherever located and by whomsoever
held, shall enjoy immunity from every fonn of legal
process except in so far as in any particular case it
has expressly waived its immunity. It is, howevcr,
understood that no waiver of immunity shall extend to any measure of execution.
Section 3. The premises of the United Nations
shall be inviolable. The property and assets of the
United Nations, wherever located and by whomsoever held, shall be immune from search, requisition,
confiscation, expropriation and any other form of
interfr.rence, whether by executive, administrative,
judicial or legislative action.
Section 4. The archives of the United Nations,
and in general ali docummts belonging to it or held
by it, shall be inviolable wherever located.
Section 5. Without being restricted by financia!
controls, regulations or moratoria of any kind,
{a) The United Nations may hold funds, gold
or currency of any kind and operate accounts in
any currency;
{b) The United Nations shall be free to transfer its funds, gold or currency fn;'.n one country
to another or within any <:ountry and to convert
any currency hek! bv .' ;r,to any nther currency.

Section 10. The United Nations shall have the
right to use codes and to dispatch and receive its
correspondence by courier or in bags, which shall
have the same immunities and privileges as diplomatic couriers and bags.
ARTICLE

IV

The Representatives of Members
Section 11. Representatives of Members to the
principal and subsidiary organs of the United Na-·
tions and to conferences convened by the United
Nations, shall, while exercising their functions and
during their journey to and from the place of
meeting, enjoy the following privileges and immunities:
(a) immunity from personal arrest or detention and from seizure of their personal baggage,
and, in respect of words spoken or written and
ali acts done by them in their capacity as repre-

25

MTICLE V

sentatives, immunity from legal process of every
kind;

Officials
Section 17. Toe Secretary-General will s~ify
the categories of officials to which the provwons
of this article and article VII shall apply. He shall
submit these categories to the General ~bly.
Thereafter these categories shall be commurucited
to the Govemments of ali Members. Toe names of
the officials included in these categories shall from
time to time be made known to the Governments
of Members.

( b) inviolability for ali papers and docu-

ments;
(e) the right to use codes and to receive
papers or correspondence by courier or in sealed
bags;
( d) exemption in respect of th~~lves '.'°d
their spouses from immigra ti_on res«:11ct!ons, ~hens
registration or national serv1ce obhgat101:1s m the
State they are visiting or thro~gh wh1_ch they
are passing in the exercise of their functions;

Section 18. Officials of the United Nations
shall:
(a) be immune from _legal process in respect
of words spoken or wntten and ali . acts performed by them in their official capac1ty;
( b) be exempt from taxation on the sal~es
and emoluments paid to them by the Uruted
Nations;
(e) be immune from national service obligations;
(d) be immune, together with thei~ s~uses
and relatives dependent on them, from lffiffi1gration restrictions and alien registration;
(e) be accorded the same privileges in respect
of exchange facilities as are acc_orded to the _officials of comparable ranks formmg part of d1plomatic missions to the government concerned;
(/) be given, together with their spouses ~d
relatives dependent on them, the ~ e re~3:tr1ation facilities in time of internatJonal cnsJS as
diplomatic envoys;
(g) have the right to import f~e of duty
their furniture and effects at the time of first
taking up their post in the country in question.

(e) the same facilities in respect of currency
or exchange restrictions as are accorded to representatives of foreign governments on temporary
official missions;

(/) the same immunities and facilities in respect of their personal baggage as are accorded
to diplomatic envoys, and also;
(g) such other privilege~, immunities ~nd facilities, not inconsistent w1th the foregomg, as
diplomatic envoys e~joy, exce~t that they shall
have no right to claim exemption fr?m customs
duties on goods imported ( otherw1se than _as
part of their personal baggage) or from excJSe
duties or sales taxes.

Section 12. In order to secure for the representatives of Members to the principal and subsidiary organs of the United Nations and to conferences convened by the United Nations, complete
freedom of speech and independence in the discharge of their duties, the immunity fr?m legal
process in respect of words spoken or wntten and
ali acts done by them in discharging their duties
shall continue to be accorded, notwithstanding that
the persons concerned are no longer the representatives of Members.

Section 19. In addition to the immunities and
privileges specified in section 18, the SecretaryGeneral and ali Assistant Secretaries-General shall
be accorded in respect of themselves, their spouses
and Ininor children, the privileges and immunities,
exemptions and facilitie_s a~corded_ to diplomatic
envoys, in accordance w1th mternahonal law.

Section 13. Where the incidence of any form
of taxation depends upon residence, periods during which the representatives of Membe~ to the
principal and subsidiary organs of the Umted !'Jations and to conferences convened by the Umted
Nations are present in a State for the discharge of
their duties shall not be considered as periods of
residence.

Section 20. Privileges and immunities are
granted to officials in the interests of the Uni~
Nations and not for the personal benefit of the mdividuals themselves. The Secretary-General shall
have the right and the duty to ~ai"'.e ~~nity of
any official in any case where, m bis opiru~>n, the
immunity would impede the course of Jushce and
can be waived without prejudice to the interests of
the United Nations. In the case of the SecretaryGeneral, the Security Council shall have the right
to waive immunity.

Section 14. Privileges and immunities are accorded to the representatives of Members not for
the personal benefit of the in~ividuals themselv~,
but in order to safeguard the mdependent exercJSe
of their functions in connection with the United
Nations. Consequently a Member not only has the
right but is under_a duty to waive th~ immuni_ty_ of
its representative m any case where m the op1mon
of the Member the immunity would impede the
course of justice, and it can ~ waiv~ with~ut
prejudice to the purpose for wh1ch the immumty
is accorded.

Section 21. The United Nations shall co-operate at ali times with the appropriate authorities of
Members to facilitate the proper administration of
justice secure the observance of police regulations,
and p:.CVent the occurrence of any abuse in connection with the privileges, immunities and facilities mentioned in this article.

Section 15. The provisions of sections 11, 12
and 13 are not applícable as between a ~resen~tive and the authorities of the State of which he 1s
a national or of which he is or has been the representative.

ARTICLE VI

Section 16. In this article the expreS5ion "representatives" shall be deemed to include ali delegates, deputy delegates, advisers, technical experts
and secretaries of delegations.

Experls on Missions for the United Nations
Section 22. Experts ( other than officials coming within the scope of article V) performing mis26

AaTJCLE VIII

sions for the United Nations shall be accorded such
privile~ and immunities as are necessary for the
independent exercise of their functions during the
period of their missions, including the time spent
on journeys in connection with their missions. In
particular they shall be accorded:
(a) immunity from personal arrest or detention and from seizure of their personal baggage;
( b) in respect of words spoken or written and
acts done by them in the COW'Se of the performance of their mission, iromunity from legal proces!I of every kind. This immunity from legal
process shall continue to be accorded notwithstanding that the persons concemed are no
longer employed on missions for the United
Nations;
(e) inviolability for ali papers and documents;
( d) for the purpose of their communications
with the United Nations, the right to use codes
and to receive papers or correspondence by
courier or in sealed bags;
(e) the same facilities in respect of currency
or exchange restrictions as are accorded to representatives of foreign govemments on temporary
official missions;
(f) the same immunities and facilities in respect of their personal baggage as are accorded
to diplomatic cnvoys.

Settlement of Disputes
Section 29. The United Nations shall make
provisions for appropriate modes of settlement of:
(a) disputes arising out of contracts or other
dÍ9putes of a prívate law character, to which the
United Nations is a party;
( b) disputes involving any official of the
United Nations who by reason of his official
position enjoys immunity, if immunity has not
been waived by the Secretary-General.
Section 30. Ali differences arising out of the
interpretation or application of the present convention shall be referred to the lntemational Court
of Justice, unless in any case it is agreed by the
parties to have recourse to another mode of settlement. If a difference arises between the United
Nations on the one hand and a Member on the
other hand, a request shall be made for an advisory
opinion on any legal question involvro in accordance with Article 96 of the Charter and Article 65
of the Statute of the Court. The opinion given by
the Court shall be accepted as decisive by the
parties.
FINAL ARTICLE

Section 31. This convention is submitted to
every Member of the United Nations for accession.

Section 23. Privileges and immumltes are
granted to experts in the interests of the United
Nations and not for the personal benefit of the
individuals themselves. The Secretary-General shall
have the right and the duty to waive the immunity
of any expert in any case where, in his opinion, the
immunity would impede the coW"Se of justice and
it can be waived without prejudice to the interests
of the United Nations.

Section 32. Accession shall be effected by deposit of an instrument with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and the convention shall
come into force as regards each Member on the
date of deposit of each instrument of accession.
Section 33. The Secretary-General shall infonn
ali Members of the United Nations of the deposit
of each accession.

ARTICLE VII
United Nations Laissez-Passer
Section 24. The United Nations may issue
United Nations laissez-passer to its officials. These
lais~ez-passer shall be recognized and accepted as
vahd travel documents, by the authorities of Mcmbers, taking into account the provisions of section
25.

Section 34. It is understood that, when an .instrument of accession is deposited on behalf of any
Member, the Member will be in a position under
its own law to give effect to the terms of this convention.
Section 35. This convention shall continue in
force as between the United Nations and every
Member which has deposited an instrument of accession for so long as that Member remains a Member of the United Nations, or until a revised general convention has been approved by the General
Assembly and that Member has become a party to
this revised convention.

Section 25. Applications for visas (where required) from the holders of United Nations laissezpasser, when accompanied by a certificate that they
are travelling on the business of the United Nations, shall be dealt with as speedily as possible. In
addition, such persons shall be granted facilities
for speedy travel.

Section 36. Toe Secrctary-General may conelude with any Member or Members supplementary
agreements adjusting the provisions of this convention so far as that Member or those Members are
concemed. These supplementary agreements shall
in each case be subject to the approval of the General Asscmbly.

Section 26. Similar facilities to those specified
in section 25 shall be accorded to experts and other
persons who, though not the holders of United
Nations laissez-passer, have a certificate that they
are travelling on the business of the United
Nations.

B.
RESOLUTION RELATING TO NEGOTIATIONS wrrH
THE COMPETENT AUTHORITIES OF THE UNrrED
STATES OF AMERICA CONCERNING THE ARRANGE-

Section 27. The Secretary-General, Assistant
Secretaries-General and Directors travelling on
United Nations laissez-passer on the business of the
United Nations shall be granted the same facilities
as are accorded to diplomatic envoys.

MENTS REQUIREO AS A RESULT OF THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE SEAT OF THE UNITED NATIONS IN
THE UNrrED STATES OF AMERICA, AND TEXT .OF A
DRAFT CONVENTION TO BE TRANSMITTED AS A BASIS
OF DISCUSSION FOR THESE NEGOTIATIONS.

Section 28. Toe provisions of this article may
be applied to the comparable officials of specialized
agencies if the agreements for relationship made
under Article 63 of the Charter so provide.

l. The General Assembly authorizes the Secretary-General (with the assistance of a committee
'l:t

composed ot persons appointed by the governments
of Australla.-Belgium, Bolivia, China, Cuba, Egypt,
France, Poland, United Kingdom, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics) to negotiate with the competent authorities of the United States of America
the arrangemt>-0ts required as a result of the establishment of the seat of the United Nations in the
United States of America.
2. The following draft convention is transmitted
by the General Assembly to the Secretary-General
for use in these negotiations as a basis of discussion.
3. The Secretary-General shall report to the
General Assembly the results of these negotiations.
4. Any agreement apart from purely temporary
agreements with the competent authorities of the
United States resulting from these negotiations
shall be subject to approval by the General Assembly before being signed on behalf of the United
Nations.
Thirty-first plenary meeting, 13 February 1946.

Section 3. The Govemment of the United
States of America undertakes, on the entry into
force of this convention, to cause to be vested in
the United Nations possession immediately and full
ownership as soon as possible of ali land in the
zone as shown in annex I and of ali buildings situated thereon at the time of transfer.
Section 4. The Government of the United
States of America shall be responsible for expropriating and compensating so far as nccessary and
as soon as possible ali interests in land and buildings conveyed to the United Nations.
Section 5. Having regard to section 4, the
United Nations shall pay to the United States of
America a fair price for any land and buildings
conveyed to the United Nations. The amount so
payable shall be credited to the United States of
America. in the accounts of the United Nations and
shall be set off, during such period as may be fixed,
against contributions due from the United States
of America. In default of agreement, this price and
this period shall be determined by an expert selected by the President of the lnternational Court
of Justice.

CoNVENTION BETWEEN THE UNITED NATIONS ANO
THE GoVERNMENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA

(This draft has been prepared on the assumption
that there will be no prívate persons living within
the zone containing the seat of the United Nations.)

Section 6. The United Nations shall have exclusive rights over the subsoil of land conveyed to
it, and in particular the right to make constructions underground and to obtain therefrom supplies
of water. It shall not, however, have the right to
exploit minerals.

THE UNITED NATIONS AND THE GovERNMENT
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA:

OF

Desiring to conclude a convention for the purpose of carrying out the resolution adopted by the
General Assembly .................................. , to establish
the seat of the United Nations in ............................. .
and to regulate questions arising as a result thereof:
Have appointed as their plenipotentiaries for this
purpose:
The United Nations ............................... .
Secretary-General
The Govemment of the ...................... .
United States of America
who have agreed as follows:

Section 7. The United Nations may establish
in the zone any type of installation which it deems
necessary for the purpos!" of its work, and in particular may establish its own radio telegraph sending and receiving stations, including broadcasting,
teletype, and telephoto services. The United Nations shall make arrangements with the Intemational Telecommunications Union with regard to
wawlengths and other similar matters.
Section 8. The Government of the United
States of America shall, at the request of the Secretary-General acting in pursuance of a resolution of
the General Assembly, cause to be vested in the
United Nations possession immediately and full
ownership as soon as possible ovcr such further
land as may be required for the purpos<' of constructing an airport, railway station, or radio telegraphic station or for such other purposes as may
be required by the United Nations. The provisions
of sections 4, 5 and 6 shall apply to land so conveyed.

ARTICLE I
Definitions
Section l. In this convention:
(a) the expression "zone" meaos the area reftrred to in section 2, including any additions to
it;
( b) the expression "la w of the U ni ted Sta tes
of America" includes federal, state, and local
laws, however designated;
(e) the expression "Govemment of the United
States of America" includes a State or a competent state authority wherever the context so requires;
(d) the expression "courts of the United
States of America" includes federal and state
courts;
(e) the expression "U nited N ations" means
the Intemational Organization established by
the Charter of the United Nations.

S(lction 9. In the event of the land conveyed
in accordance with section 8 not being contiguous
to the remainder of the zone, the Govemment of
the United States of America shall guarantee unimpeded communication and transit bt-tween parts
of ~e zone.
ARTICLE III
Law and Authority in the Zone
Section 10. The zone, including the air space
above it and the subsoil below it, shall be inviolable.

Section 11. Save as otherwise provided in this
convention, the zone shall be under the control and
authority of the United Nations.

ARTICLE II

The United Nations Zone
Section 2. The seat of the United Nations shall
be the area situated .............................. and marked
pink on•the map which forms annex I. Additions
may be made later to this area in accordance with
the provisions of section 8.

Section 12. Without prejudice to the generality of section 11, the Government of the United
States of America renounces jurisdiction over any
matters relating to entry into the rone and to the

28

spective of the relations existing between their
Govemment and the Govemment of the United
States of America, officials both of the United
Nations and of the specialized agencies, and the
farnilies of these representatives and officials, shall
at ali times enjoy the right of unimpeded and safe
transit through the territory of the United States
of America to and from the zone.

conditions under which persons may remain or reside there, and over any matters relating to the
construction or removal of buildings in the zone.

Section 13. Officers or officials of any authority in the territory of the United States of America, whether administrative, judicial, military, or
police, shall not enter the zone to perform any
official duties therein except with the permission
of and under conditions agreed by the SecretaryGeneral. The service of legal process, including the
seizure of private property, shall take place within
the zone under conditions approved by the Secretary-GeneraJ.

Section 21. The accredited representatives of
news agencies, whether press, radio, or films, and
of non-govemmental organizations recognized by
the United Nations for the purpose of consultation,
shall also enjoy the rights referred to in section 20.

Section 14. Withóut prejudice to the provisions which are contained in annex II and subsequently in the General Convention referred to in
section 32, and which relate to the immunities of
officials of the United Nations and of the representatives of Members, the United Nations shaJI
not permit the zone to become a rcfuge either for
persons who are avoiding arrest under the law of
the United States of America or are required by
the Govemment of the United States of America
for cxtradition to another country, t>r for persons
who art:> endeavouring to avoid service of legal
proccss.

Section 22. Immigration and other regulations
in force in the United States of America, regarding
the entry and residence of' foreigners, shall not be
applied in such a manner •as to interfere with the
rights referred to in sections 20 and 21. Visas required by the persons referred to in those sections
shall be granted without charge, without delay and
without requirement of personal attendance for the
issue of the visa.
Section 23. The Govemment of the United
States of America shall give or cause to be given
facilities for the issue of visas to, and for the use
of the available means of transport by, persons
corning from abroad ( other than those referred to
in sections 20 and 21) who desire to visit the zone.
The Secretary-Gcneral of the United Nations and
th1· Govemment of the United St.ates of Ameríca
shall, at the request of either of them, enter into
discussion with regard to the application of this
section

Section 15. Subject to scction 16, the law of
the United States of America shall apply within
the zone, and in particular thc ordinary civil and
criminal law.
Section 16. The United Nations may enact
regulations making provisions of an administrative
character for the zone. Any such regulation shall
prevail over any provi.,ions m the law of the United
Statcs of America which are inconsistent with it.
It is agreed that within the zone the protection
afforded by the Constitution of the United States
to personal liberty and to the basic human freedoms of expression and worship shall not be lcssencd, ;.md no form of racial discrimination shall be
permitted.

Section 24. The prov1S1011S of this article shall
not prcvcnt the Govemment of the United States
of America from taking precautions in the interests
of national security, provided that such precautions shall not have the effect of interfering with
the rights rderred to in sections 19, 20 and 21.

Section 17. The courts of the United States of
America shall, without p:rejudice to any provisions
of annex II and subsequently of thc General Conven ti,,n rdnred to in scction 32, have jurisdiction
ovr-r act., done and t.ransactions taking place in the
zone, in the ,ame mannrr as they have over similar acts and transactions taking place outside the
zone.

ARTICLE V
Resident Representatives to the United Nations

Sectwn 25. Persons accredited to the United
Nations by Members as resident representatives
and their staffs, whether residing inside or outside
the zone, shall be recognized by the Governrnent
of the United States of America as entitled on its
territory to the same privileges and immunities as
that Govemment accords to the diplomatic envoys
accredited to it, and the staffs of these envoys.

Sectwn 18. The courts of the United States of
America, when dealing with cases arising out of
or relating to acts done or transactions taking place
in the zone, shall take cognizance of the regulations
enacted by the United Nations under section 16,
though they shall not be obliged to inflict penalties
for infraction of such rcgulations unless the Gov~
ernrnent of the United States of America has
agreed to these regulations before the infraction
wa.s committcd.

ARTICLE VI
Police Prntection of the Zone
Section 26. The Govemment of the United
States of America shall cause to be provided on the
boundaries of the zone such police protection for
the zone as is required, and shaJl be responsible for
ensuring that the tranquillity of the zone is not
disturbed by the unauthorized entry of bodies of
persons from outside or by disturbances in its immediate vicinity.

ARTICLE IV
Communications and Transit to and from the Zone
Section 19. The Govemmcnt of the United
States of America shaJI guarantee at ali times adequate means of communication to and from the
zone through the territory of the United States of
America, for the passage of persons, the transmission of postal correspondence and telegrams, and
the transport of goods required for use and consumption in the zone.

SPction 20.

Section 27. If so requested by the SecretaryGeneral, the Governrnent of the United States of
America shall cause to be provided a sufficient
number of police to perfonn duties inside the zone
for the preservation of law and order therein, and
for the removal of persons who have committed

Representatives of Members, irre-

29

shall be complementary to the provisions of the
genernl convention and, until the Govemment of
the United States of America becomes a party to
the general convention, to the provisions of annex

or are suspected of having committed or of being
about to commit offences, including infractions to
the administrative regulations of the United
Nations.
ARTICLE

II.

VII

Section 34. In so far as any provision of this
convention and any provision of the general conven tion ( or of annex II as the case ma y be) relate
to the same subject matter, thc two provisions shall,
wherever possible, be treated as complementary, so
that both provisions shall be applicable and neither
shall narrow the effect of the other; but in any
case of absolute conflict, the provisions of this convention shall prevail.

Public Seruices f or and the Amenities of the Zone
Section 28. The Govemment of the United
States of America will exercise all the powers which
it possesses to ensure that the zone shall be supplied
on equitable terms with the necessary public services (including electricity, water, gas, post, telephone, telegraph, drainage, collection of refuse)
and that these services shall not be interrupted. In
case of any interruption or_ threatened interruption
of any of these services, the Govemment of the
United States of America will consider the needs
of the zone as being of equal importance with the
essential services of the United States Govemment
itself. Consequently, in that event it will take all
those steps which it would take in case of interruption or threatened interruption of these services to the essential Departments of thc United
States Government to ensure that the work of the
United Nations is not prejudiced.

ARTICLE

Section 29. The Govemment of thc United
States of America shall be responsible for ensuring
that the amenities of the zone are not prejudiced
and the purposes for which the zone is required
are not obstructed by any use made of the land in
its vicinity.
ARTICLE

VIII

Matters Relating to the Operation of
this Convention
Section 30. The Secretary-General and the
Govemment of the United States of America shall
settle by agreement thc channel or channels
through which shall be conducted correspondence
relating to the application of the provisions of this
convention and to other questions affecting the
zone. If the Secretary-General so requests, the Government of the United States of America shall appoint a special representative for the purpose of
liaison with the Secretary-General.
Section 31. In so far as the fulfilment of this
convention rcquires co-operation and action by any
state or other non-federal authority of the United
States of America, the Govemment of the United
States will conclude with that state or autf10rity
such agrecments as are necessary for this purpose.
The conclusion of these agreements, together with
the enactment of any necessary legislation by the
United States and by the state, shall be completed
befare the notice is given which is required under
section 35 to be given by the Govemment of the
United States of America before tl1is convention
enters into force.
ARTICLE IX

Relation between this C01wention and the
General Convention
Section 32. Until the Govemment of the
United States of America becomes a party to the
general convention relating to the privileges and
immunities of the United Nations, the provisions
of annex II shall apply betwern the Unitcd Nations and the Govemment of the United States of
America. Thcreafter, those provisions shall be replaced by the provisions of the General Convention, which shall continue in force so long as the
present convention remains in operation.

lN

WITNESS

Tl!EREOF

PI.ENIPOTENTIARIES

JIA\.E

THE

The provisions of this convention

IN D!JPLJCATE.

30

ABOVE·MENTIONED

SIGNED

TION:
DONE THIS

Section 33.

X

Final Provisions
Section 35. This convention, having already
been approved by a resolution '.of the General Asscmbly, shall enter into force ás soon as the Government of thc United States of America notifies
the Secretary-GC'neral that it has ali the powers
necessary to fulfil the provisions of the convcntion.
Thc Govemment of the United States of America
,hall take every possible step to enablc it to give
this notification as soon as possiblc, and in any case
not la ter than ........................... .
Section 36. This conwntion shall remain in
force so long a, the seat of the Ut-.íted Nations is
maintaincd in thc territory of the United States of
Anwrica.
Sl'Cúon 37. The seat of the United Nations
shall only be removed from the territory of the
United States of -America if the United Nations
should so decide.
Section 38. If the seat of the United Nations
i, removed from the territory of the United States
of America, the Govemmcnt of the United States
of America shall pay to the United Nations an
equitable sum for the land in the zone and for al!
buildings and installations thereon. An expert nomina tcd bv tl1c Prcsident of the lntt'mational Court
of Justicc shall decide, in default of agree'llent bctween the parties, what sum is equitable, having
n·gard to
(a) the then value to the United States of
America of the land, buildings and installations;
,md
(/1) the cost incur:-ed by the Unitcd Nations
m acquiring thc land and in erecting the buildings and installations.
Section 39. Any difference between the United
Nations and the Government of the Unitcd States
of America conccming the interpretation or applic;ttion of this convention or of any supplemcntary
agrecment or agrerment which is not settled by
negotiation shall be refcrred to the arbitration of
an umpire appointed for the purpose by the President of tlw International Court of Justice.
Scction 40. Either party may ask the General
Assc1,1blv to requesl of thc lnll'n1ational Court of
Ju.,tic,· ;111 advisory opinion on any legal quC'stion
arising in the course of the proceedings refrrred
to in section 39. Pending the receipt of the opinion
of the Court, an interim dccision of the umpire
shall be observed by both partics. TherC'after the
umpire shall render a final decision, having- regard
to the opinion of the Court.

DAY OF .

THIS

CON\'EN-

ANNEX 1

ARTICLE 111

MAP

Facilities in respect of Communicalions
Section 9. The United Nations shall enjoy in the

(Not reproduced here)

territory of the United States of America for its official
communications trcatment not less favourable than that
accorded by the Govemment of the United States of
America to any other govemment, including its diplomatic mission, in the matter of prioritics, rates and
taxes on mails, cables, telegrams, radiograms, telephotos, telephone and other communications; and press
rates for information to the press and radio. No censorship shall be applied to the official correspondence and
other official communications of the United Nations.

ANNEX Il
ARTICLE I
Juridical Personality

Section 1. The United Nations shall posscss juridical personality. It shall have the capacity:
(a) to contract;
( b) to acquire and dispose of immovable and movable property;
(e) to institute legal proceedings.
ARTICLE

Section 10. The United Nations shall ha"'e the
right to use codcs and to dcspatch and receive its correspondence by courier or in bags, wruch shall have the
same immunities and privilegcs as diplomatic couriers
and bags.

II

Property, Funds and Assets
Section 2. The United Nations, its property and
assets wherever Jocated and by whomsoever held, shall
enjoy immunity from every form of legal process except
in so far as, in any particular case, it has expressly
waived its immunity. It is, however, understood that no
waiver of immunity shall extend to any measure of
execution.
Section 3. The premises of the United Nations shall
be inviolable. The property and assets of the Unitcd
Nations, whercver Jocated and by whomsoever held,
shall be immune from search, requisition, confiscation,
expropriation, and any other form of interferencc,
whether by exccutive, administrative, judicial or Jegislative action.
Section 4. Thc archives of the United Nations, and
in general ali documents belonging to it or heldiJy-ir,
shall be inviolable wherever located.
Section 5. Without being restricted by financia!
controls, regulations of moratoria of any kind,
(a) the United Nations may hold funds, gold or
currency of any kind and operate accounts in any
currency;
( b) the Uruted Nations shall be free to transfer
its funds, gold or currency between the United States
of America and any other State, and from one place
to another within the United States of America, and
to convert any currency held by it into any other
currency.
S ection 6. In exercisin¡¡- its rights under scction 5
above, the United Nations shall pay due regard to any
representations made by the Govemment of the United
States, in so far as it is considered that cffect can be
given to such representations without detriment to the
interests of the United Nations.
Section 7. The Unitcd Nations, its assets, income
and other property shall be :
(a) excmpt from ali direct taxes; it is understood,
however, that the United Nations will not claim exemption from taxes which are, in fact, no more than
charges for public utility services;
( b) exempt from customs dutics and prorubitions
and restrictions on im ports and exports in respect of
articles imported or exported by the United Nations
for its official use. lt is understood, howevcr, that
articles imported under such exemption will not be
sold in the United States of America exccpt under
conditions agreed with the Govemment of the United
States of America;
(e) exempt from customs duties and prorubitions
and restrictions on imports and exports in rcspect of
i ts publica tions.
Section 8. Wrule tl,e United Nations will not, as a
general rule, claim exemption from excise duties and
from taxcs on the sale of movablc and immovable property which form part of the price to be paid, nevertheless, when the United Nations is making importan! purchases for official use of property on which su,h <iuties
and laxes have been charged or are chargeable, the
Government of the United States of America will,
whenever possible, make appropriate administrative arrangements for the remission or retum of the amount
of duty or tax.

ARTICLE IV
The Representatiues o/ Members

S ection 11. Representatives of Members to the principal and subsidiary organs of the United Nations and
to conferences convened by the United Nations, shall,
wrule exercising their functions and during their journey to and from the place of meeting, be accordcd by
the Govemment of the United States of America the
following privileges and immunities:
(a) immunity from personal arres! or detention
and from seizure of their personal baggage, and, in
respect of words spoken or written and ali acts done
by them in their capacity as representativcs, immunity from legal process of every kind;

( b) inviolability for ali papers and documents;
(e) the right to use codes and to receive papcrs
or correspondence by courier or in sealed bags;
(d) exemption in respect of themselvcs and their
spouses from immigration restrictions, aliens registration or national service obligations in the State they
are visiting or through which they are passing in the
exercise of their functions;
(e) the same facilities in respect of currcncy or
exchange restrictions as are accorded to representatives of foreign governments on temporary official
nfüsions to the Government of the United States;
(·!) the same immunities and facilities in respect
of their personal baggage as are accorded to diplomatic envoys, and also;

(g) such other privileges, immunities and facilities, not inconsistent with the foregoing, as diplomatic envoys enjoy, except that they shall have no
right to claim exemption from customs duties on
goods imported ( otherwise than as part of their personal baggage) or from excise duties or sales taxes.

Section 12. In order to secure for the representatives of Members to the principal and subsidíaty organs
of the United Nations and to conferences convened by
the Unitcd Nations, complete frcedom of speech and
indcpendence in thc dischargc of their dutics, the immunity from legal process in respect of words spoken
or written and ali acts done by them in discharging thcir
duties shall continuc to be accordcd, notwithstanding
that the persons concerncd are no longer the representatives of Members.
Section 13. Where thc incidence of any form of
taxation depends upon residence, periods during which
the representatives of Members to the principal and
subsidiary organs of the United Nations and to confcrences convened by thc United Nations are present in
the United States of Amcrica for the discharge of their
duties shall not be tonsidered as periods of residcnce.
Section 14. Privilcges and immunities are accorded
to the represcntatives of Members not for thc personal
benefit of thc individuals themselves, but in order to
safeguard the independent exercise of their functions in

31

connection with the United Nations. Consequently a
Member not only has the right but is under a duty to
waive the immunity of its represcntative in any case
where the immunity would impede the course of justice, and it can be waived without prejudice to the
purpose for which the immunity is accorded.

Section 15. The provisions of sections 11, 12 and 13
may not be invoked against the authorities of the
United States of America:
(a) by a national of the United States of America;
( b) by a representative of the U nited States of
America;

(e) by a represeutative of anothcr Mcmber, whc11
that Member has waived the immunity in question.

S ection 16. In this article the expression "representatives" shall be deemed to include ali delegates,
deputy delegates, advisers, tcchnical experts and secrctaries of delegations
ARTICLE

V

Officials
Section 17. The Secretary-General will specify the
cat!"gories of officials te which the provisions of this
article and article VII shall apply. He shall submit
these catcgories to the General Assembly. Thereafter
these categories shall be communicated to the govemments of ali Members. The names of the officials included in these categorics shall from time to time be
made known to the Govemment of the United States
of America.

ARTICLE VI

Experts on Missions for the United Nat,ons
Section 22. Experts ( other than officials coming
wi thin the scope of article V) performing missions for
the United Nations shall be accorded such privileges
and immunitieJ as are necessary for the independent
excrcíse of their f unctions during the period of their
míss;ons, including the time spent on joumeys in connectiou wi th their missions. In particular they shall be
accorded:
(a) immunity from personal arrest or Jetention
and from seizure of their personal baggage;
( b) in respect of words spoken or written and acts
done by them in the course of the performance of
their mission, immunity from legal process of every
k.ind. This immunity from legal process shall continue
to be accorded notwithstanding that the persons con·
cerned are no longer employed on mission.s fur thc
United Nations;
(e) inviolability for ali papers and documents;
( d) for the purposc of their communic,1tions wíth
the United Nations, the right to use codes and to receive papers or correspondence by courier or in sealcd
bags;
(e) the same facilities in respect of currency or
exchange restrictions as are accorded to representatives of foreign governments on temporary official
missions to the Govemment of the United States of
America;
(f) the same immunities and facilities in respect
of their personal baggage as are accorded to diplom.1tic

Scction 18. Officials of the United Nations shall:
(a) be immune frorn legal process in respect of
words spoken or written and al! acts performed by
them in their official capacity;
(b) be exempt from ta.xation on the salaries and
emoluments paid to thern by the United Nations;
(e) be immune frorn national service obligations;
(d) be immune, together with their spouses and
relatives dependen! on them, from irnmigration restrictions and alíen registration;
(e) be accorded the same privileges in respect of
exchange facilities as are accorded to the officials of
comparable ranks forming part of diplomatic missions to the Govemrnent of the United States of
America;
(f) be given, together with their spouses and relative~ depe.ndent on them, the same repatriation facilities in time of intemational crisis as diplomatic
envoys;
(g) have the right to import free of duty their
fumiture and effects at the time of first taking up
their post in the country in question.

CllVOJS.

Section '.?1. Pri,ilcges and immunities are granted
to experts in thc interes¡s of the United Natíons and
not for the personal benefit of the individuals themselvr-s. The Sccretary-General shall have the right and
thc duty to waive thc immunity of any M<pert in any
case where, in his opinion, the immunity would impede
the course of justic,· and it can be waived without
prcjudin· to tlw intcrcsts of thc lfnite<I :'<ati,,ns
ARTICLE

VII

Umted Natwns Laissez-Passn
Section 24. The United Nations may issue United
Nations /aissn-passer to its offícials. These laissez-pasier
shall be rocognized and accepted as valid travcl documents, by the authorities of the United States of America, taking ihto account the provisions of section 25.
Section 25. Applications for visas ( where required)
Írorn the holders of United Nations /aissez-passer, when
accompanied by a certificate that they are travelling
on the business of the United Nations, shall be dealt
with as speedily as possible. In addition, such persons
shall be grantro facilities for speedy travcl.

Secti.on 19. In addition to the immunities and privileges specified in section 18, the Secretary-General and
ali Assistant Secretaries-General shall be accorded in
respect of themselves, their spouses and minor children,
the privileges and immunities, exemptions and facilities
accorded to diplomatic envoys, in accordance with
international law.

Section 26. Similar facilities to those specified in
section 25 shall be accorded to experts dnd other per•ons who, though not the holders of United Nations
laissez-passer, have a ccrtificate that they are tra,·elling
un the business of the United Nations.
Section 27. The Secretary-General, Assistant Secretaries-General and Directors travelling on United Nations laissez-passer on the business of the United Nations shall be granted the same facilities as are accorded
to diplomatic envoys.

Section 20. Privileges and immunities are granted
to officials in the interests of the United Nations and
not for the personal benefit of the individuals themselves. The Secretary-General shall have the right and
the duty to waive the immunity of any official in any
case where, in his opinion, the immunity would impcde
the course of justice and can be waived without prejudice to the interests of the United Nations. In the case
of the Secretary-General the Securi ty Council shall
have the right to waive immunity.

Srrtion 28. The provisions of this article may be
applied to the comparable officials of specialized agencies if the a~reemcnts for relatiomhip rnade under
Article 61 of the Ch,irtcr so providc.
ARTICLE

Section 21. The United Nations shall co-operate at
ali times with the appropriate authorities of the United
States of America to facilitate the proper administration of justice, secure the observance of police regulations, and preven! the occurrence of any abuse in connection with the privileges, immunities and facilities
mentioned in this article.

VIII

Settlemerzt of Disputl'S
Section 29. The linitcd Nations shall make provision for appropriate modes of scttkment of:
(a) disputes arising out of contracts or othcr dispntrs of a private law character, to which the United
l\::nions is a party;

32

the general convention on privileges and immunities, which determines the details of the application of these articles.
Therefore the General Assembly instructs the
Secretary-General to ensure that the drivers of all
official motor-cars of the United Nations and all
members of the staff, who own or drive motor-cars,
shall be properly insured against third party risks.
Thirty-first plenary meeting, 13 February 1946.

( b) disputes involving any official of the Unitcd
Nations who by reason of his official ,position cnjoys
immunity, if immunity has not bccn waived by thc
Secretary-Gcneral.

c.
RESOLUTION ON THE PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES 0F THE INTERNATIONAL CouRT OF JusTICE.

l. The General Assembly, with a view to ensuring that the lnternational Court of Justice shall
enjoy the privilcges, immunities and facilities necessary for the exercise of its functions and the fulfilment of its purposes, in the country of its seat
and elsewhere, invites the members of the Court at
their first session to consider this question and to
inform the Secretary-General of their recommendations.
2. The General Assembly decides that the question of the privileges and immunities of the Court
shall be considered as soon as possible after the receipt of the recommendations of the Court.
3. The General Assembly recommends that, until further action has been taken, the rules which
have been applied to the Permanent Court of
lnternational Justice should be observed by Members in relation to the lnternational Court of
Justice.
Thirty-first plenary meeting, 13 February 1946.

F.
RESOLUTION RELATING TO ARRANGEMENTS TO BE
MADE SO THAT OFFICIALS OF MEMBERS WHO ARE
TRANSFERRED OR SECONDED FOR SERVICE WITH THE
UNITED

ON

THE CO-ORDINATION

NOT LOSE THEIR AC-

Therefore, the General Assembly recommends
that:
after such discussion with the Secretary-General
as may be necessary to settle details the governments of Members adopt such legislative or administrative measures as may be required to preserve such pension rights.
Thirty-first plenary meeting, 13 Febru.ary 1946.

OF THE

PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES OF THE UN!TED NATIONS AND THE SPECIALIZED AGENCIES.

The General Assembly considers that there are
many advantages in the unification as far as possible of the privileges and immunities enjoyed by
the United Nations and the various specialized
agencies.
While recognizing that not ali specialized agencies require ali the privileges and immunities which
may be needed by others, and that certain of these
may, by reason of their particular functions, require privileges of a special nature which are not
required by the United Nations itself, the General
Assembly considers that the privileges and immunities of the United Nations should be regarded,
as a general rule, as a maximum within which the
various specialized agencies should enjoy such privileges and immunities as the appropriate fulfilment
of their respective functions may require, and that
no privileges and immunities which are not really
necessary should be asked for.
Therefore the General Assembly instructs the
Secretary-General to open negotiations with a view
to the re-consideration, in the light both of the
General Convention adopted by the United Nati??' and of the considerations above, of the prov1s1ons under which the specialized agencies at
present enjoy privileges and immunities.
Thirty-first plenary meeting, 13 February 1946.

23 ( 1) • REGISTRA TION OF TREATIES AND
INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS

The Executive Secretary sent a circular letter
to the Members of the United Nations on 8 November 1945 informing them that from the date
of the entry into force of the Charter treaties and
international agreements would be received and
filed on a provisional basis until the adoption of
detailed regulations prescribing the procedure to
be followed in the registration and publication of
treaties and international agreements under the
provisions of Article 102 of the Charter. The Executive Secretary also invited the Government:s of
Members to transmit to the Secretariat for filing
and publication treaties and international agreements not included in the treaty series of the
League of Nations and entered into in recent years
before the date of the entry into force of the Charter.
lt is desirable, as a matter of practica! convenience, that arrangements should be made for
the publication of any treaties or international
agreements which non-member States may voluntarily transmit and which have not been included
in the treaty series of the League of Nations. These
arrangements should not, however, extend to treaties or international agreements transmitted by any
non-member State such as Spain, the Government
of which has been founded with the support of the
Axis powers and does not, in view of its origin, its
nature, its record and its clase association with the
aggressor States, possess qualifications necessary to
justify membership in the United Nations under
the provisions of the Charter.

E.
RESOLUTION

SHOULD

In order to facilitate the engagement, as members of the staff of the United Nations, of persons
who have accrued pension rights as officials, either
of the central government of Members, or of subordinate governmental or other administrative authorities within the territory of Members, it is desirable that arrangements should be made to secure
that accrued pension rights are not lost when such
persom accept posts on the staff of the United
·Nations, by way either of transfer or of secondment.

D.
RESOLUTION

NATIONS

CRUED PENSION RIGHTS BY REASON OF SUCH TRANSFER OR SECONDMENT.

RELATING

TO
THE
INSURANCE
AGAINST THIRD PARTY RISKS OF MOTOR-CARS OF
THE ÜRGANIZATION ANO OF MEMBERS OF THE
STAFF.

It has been found that a frequent source of difficulty is road accidents in which motor cars, owned
or driven by persons possessing immunity from
legal process, are involved.
It is the intention of the United Nations to prevent thc occurrence of any abuse in connection
with privileges, immunities and facilities granted
to it under Articles 104 and 105 of the Charter and

33
