S/2021/199

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 March 2021
Original: English

Situation in the Sudan and the activities of the
United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission
in the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2524
(2020), in which the Council decided to establish the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) and requested that the
Secretary-General report to the Council every 90 days on the implementation of the
UNITAMS mandate. The report covers the situation in the Sudan related to political,
security, socioeconomic and humanitarian developments and to the protection of
civilians, human rights and the rule of law during the period from 24 November 2020
to 15 February 2021. It also contains an update on the establishment of the Mission.
The 90-day report on the drawdown of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) is included as an annex to the present report, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 2559 (2020).

II. Significant developments
Political situation
2.
On 1 December 2020, the Sovereign Council issued decree No. 511, in which it
established the Council of Partners of the Transitional Period (CPTP), which is
composed of 29 members, including 6 representatives from the military, the Prime
Minister, 13 representatives of the Forces for Freedom and Change (FFC), the
7 signatories of the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan and 2 additional seats
reserved for unnamed representatives of the eastern track of the Juba peace process.
Only one of the 29 members is a woman. The civilian-led transitional Government,
FFC and some of the signatories of the Juba Agreement, namely the Sudan Liberation
Army/Transitional Council (SLA/TC) and the Sudan People’s L iberation MovementNorth (SPLM-N) Malik Agar faction, initially rejected the decree on the basis of fears
that CPTP would undermine other transitional institutions, referring to a provision of
the decree in which CPTP was granted “any additional powers req uired … to
implement its mandate and exercise its authority”. Notwithstanding those initial
rejections and following a quadripartite review by the Sovereign Council, the
transitional Government, FFC and the armed group signatories of the Agreement,

21-02521 (E)

030321

*2102521*

S/2021/199

CPTP held its inaugural meeting on 16 December 2020. In the first statement by
CPTP, it endorsed regulations on it functioning as a “supporting” entity, in line with
the role originally envisioned for it to “coordinate between actors and resolve
differences” among the various political components. CPTP is expected to issue
internal regulations that would not “violate/breach the authorities and prerogatives of
transitional institutions” and would “complement” decree No. 511 of the Sovereign
Council.
3.
Negotiations and consultations were held on the formation of an expanded
transitional Government incorporating the signatories of the Juba Agreement. On
4 February 2021, the Sovereign Council issued a constitutional decree expanding its
membership to 14 members through the addition of three signatories to the
Agreement: Chair of the Sudanese Revolutionary Front (SRF) and head of the
SLA/TC faction, El Hadi Idris; head of the SPLM-N Malik Agar faction, Malik Agar;
and leader of the Sudan Liberation Force Alliance, Al-Taher Abu Bakr Hagar.
Prominent women’s groups continued to campaign for the equal and meaningful
representation of women in the transitional legislative and executive branches. That
would be in accordance with earlier commitments made by the transitional
Government and other signatories to the Juba Agreement to improve gender equality
and women’s empowerment, as well as relevant provisions in the Constitutional
Document, including for women to represent a minimum of 40 per cent of the
Transitional Legislative Council. Women’s rights activists from the All Our Rights
campaign submitted to FFC, SRF and the office of the Prime Minister a list of
proposed female candidates for ministerial posts. On 19 January, in a meeting with a
delegation from the All Our Rights campaign, the Prime Minister of the Sudan,
Abdalla Hamdok, recognized the critical role that women had played in the revolution
and reiterated the transitional Government’s support for their inclusion in the political
and public life of the Sudan.
4.
On 8 February 2021, the Prime Minister announced the formation of the
expanded new Cabinet, which included representatives of FFC, which was allocated
17 ministerial portfolios, and SRF, which was allocated 7 portfolios. The new cabinet
comprises 26 Ministries, all of whose Ministers were announced on 8 February,
except for the Ministry of Education, the decision on which remains subject to
consultations. The Cabinet includes four women, in the positions of Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Minister of the Federal Government, Minister of Higher Education
and Minister of Labour and Administrative Development. Five Ministers from the
previous Cabinet retained their positions, namely, the Ministers of Defence, Justice,
Irrigation, Higher Education and Religious Affairs and Endowments. During the
announcement of the new Cabinet, the Prime Minister also stated that state governors
would be appointed by 15 February and that the Transitional Legislative Council and
commissions established as a result of the Juba Agreement would be formed on
25 February. The state governors have yet to be appointed and the Transitional
Legislative Council has yet to be formed, despite continued demands from across the
Sudanese political spectrum and appeals from the regional and internationa l partners
of the Sudan for it to be formed rapidly. The continued postponement is due to
ongoing consultations regarding the distribution of seats among Sudanese political
forces, including the signatories of the Agreement, leading to a risk of serious de lays
in the timeline of the political transition.
5.
On 19 December 2020, on the second anniversary of the December 2018
revolution, thousands of Sudanese people took to the streets to protest in Khartoum,
El Fasher, Gedaref, Kassala, Kadugli, Port Sudan, Atbarah, Dongola and Nyala. The
protesters’ demands ranged from appeals for the continued commitment to the
democratic transition to calls to topple the transitional authorities. The Sudanese
Communist Party and the Khartoum-based Resistance Committees denounced the
2/18

21-02521

S/2021/199

performance of the Sovereign Council and the transitional Government, the formation
of CPTP and the deteriorating socioeconomic conditions. In addition to advocating
the revolution’s objectives of freedom, peace and justice through a civilian -led
democratic State, protesters called for the accountability of governance structures and
for the rapid formation of a representative and inclusive Transitional Legislative
Council. While FFC supporters took to the streets to celebrate the anniversary, two
attempted sit-ins, in front of the Presidential Palace in Khartoum and the parliament
building in Omdurman, were dispersed by security forces.
6.
Political alignments continued to shift throughout the reporting period. On
25 December 2020, the SPLM-N Abdelaziz Al-Hilu faction joined 11 Sudanese
political parties, women’s groups and movements in a new alliance. The group
condemned the encroachment of the Sovereign Council on the prerogatives and
mandate of the civilian authorities and reiterated its support for the civilian-led
government; the Prime Minister’s prerogative to lead the peace process; the joint
agreement on principles signed by Abdelaziz Al-Hilu and the Prime Minister in Addis
Ababa on 3 September 2020; the swift formation of the Transitional L egislative
Council; and the separation of religion and State. On 12 January 2021, SRF and the
National Umma Party also announced the formation of an alliance.
International relations
7.
Tensions escalated between the Sudan and Ethiopia concerning the F ashaqah
area on their border. The Sudanese Armed Forces reportedly deployed troops along
the non-demarcated border areas with Ethiopia. The pace and scope of operations
escalated after militias from Ethiopia allegedly killed three Sudanese soldiers and one
officer on 15 December 2020. The Ethiopian forces are also reported to have
increased their military presence along that border. On 13 December 2020, the Prime
Minister of the Sudan met with the Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Abiy Ahmed, in Addis
Ababa. They met again on 20 December, on the margins of the Extraordinary Summit
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development Heads of State and Government,
to discuss, inter alia, bilateral issues, including the border tensions. The Ethiopia Sudan joint political committee for the demarcation of boundaries subsequently met
in Khartoum on 22 and 23 December. On 12 January 2021, the Sudan accused militias
from Ethiopia of killing five women and one child. The Sudan also alleged that its
airspace had been breached on the following day by an Ethiopian military aircraft,
causing the Sudanese authorities to declare a no-fly zone over the area. On 13 January,
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Sudan and the Sudan National Boundary
Commission of the Sovereign Council gave a presentation to the diplomatic
community, detailing the history of border negotiations with Ethiopia and calling for
political re-engagement and full commitment to a peaceful resolution of the border
dispute, in accordance with the original 1903 demarcation of the eastern border. Since
then, both countries have reiterated their commitment to a peaceful resolution of their
differences regarding the demarcation of the border. Djibouti, South Sudan and the
United Arab Emirates have offered to provide mediation.
8.
On 14 December 2020, the United States of America rescinded the designation
of the Sudan as a State sponsor of terrorism. The decision is a major achievement for
the transitional Government as it stands to gain access to much -needed financial and
economic assistance at an important juncture in the political transition of the Sudan.
On the same day, in a press conference to welcome the decision, the Prime Minister
expressed optimism that the removal of the country from the list of State sponsors of
terrorism would improve its socioeconomic conditions. On 21 December, United
States lawmakers approved an act on the resolution of claims in the Sudan, which
restores the country’s sovereign immunity with regard to the United States, with the
exception of legal claims related to the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001.
21-02521

3/18

S/2021/199

9.
On 6 January 2021, Minister of Justice of the Sudan, Nasredeen Abdulbari, and
then United States Secretary of the Treasury, Steve Mnuchin, signed an agreement on
the normalization of relations with Israel. There continue to be diverging views in the
political realm and within Sudanese society.
10. The Friends of Sudan group has continued to play an important role in providing
political and economic support for the country during its historic period of transition.
On 28 January 2021, in a virtual meeting hosted by Germany, the group was provided
with an update by the transitional Government on recent political, peace and
economic developments. The members of the group acknowledged the progress made
in the political and peace processes and encouraged the signatories of the Juba
Agreement to ensure its swift implementation and avoid further delays in the
establishment of the transitional bodies and in preparations for the upcoming
constitutional conference. They also acknowledged the significant progress made by
the transitional Government in advancing its economic reform agenda and welcomed
its commitment to the swift implementation of additional reforms to promote business
and encourage investment in the Sudan. Members of the group stressed the urgent
need to tackle exchange rate reform in order to ensure that the performance of the
Sudan in the International Monetary Fund (IMF) staff-monitored programme
remained on track and to enable the country to fully benefit from the support offered
by partners and the international financial institutions through the Sudan Family
Support Programme. The transitional Government confirmed its commitment to
exchange rate reform but stressed its view that foreign currency reserves needed to
be held in the Central Bank. During the meeting, the members of the group welcomed
ongoing preparations by multilateral institutions and other partners to provide debt
relief, indicated that resources were still needed for macroeconomic reform and
expressed their readiness to assist the Sudan in the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Initiative. As a prerequisite for the assessment of the eligibility of the Sudan in the
debt relief process of the Initiative, and with the su pport of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), the Anti-Corruption Act has been finalized and
submitted to the Joint Council meeting for adoption.
Security situation
11. The security situation was characterized by major armed clashes in some areas
of Darfur. In the Jebel Marra area, armed clashes were recorded between factions of
the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid (SLA/AW) elements, which had resulted in
the deaths of several fighters and civilians in the area. The leaders of the two facti ons,
Saleh Borsa and Mubarak Aldouk, reportedly have divergent positions on the peace
process. The former is opposed to the peace process and remains a proponent of the
mainstream SLA/AW position on negotiations, while the latter supports the peace
process. The infighting also triggered the displacement of over 13,000 people across
30 villages in the Golo locality. Villages were attacked at night, with civilians
apprehended, beaten or killed on suspicion of belonging to the other faction. At least
4 of the 30 villages (Nimra, Koma, Sabi and Dowo) were reported to have been
completely destroyed. In the Jebel Marra area, two attacks were reported to have been
carried out by the Sudanese Armed Forces on SLA/AW positions at Sabanga on
24 and 31 January 2021. The attacks resulted in 14 people being killed, 10 wounded
and the displacement of an estimated 22,000 people. The incidents did not, however,
result in a further escalation of violence or in reprisal attacks.
12. On 6 February 2021, the SPLM-N Al-Hilu faction announced a five-month
extension, until 30 June, of the unilateral cessation of hostilities in areas under its
control, reportedly as a gesture of goodwill for a peaceful resolution of the Sudanese
conflict and to give peace an opportunity for success.

4/18

21-02521

S/2021/199

13. As the mandate of UNAMID ended on 31 December 2020, institutional and
security sector reforms, including the establishment of a force for the protection of
civilians in Darfur, are a major challenge faced by the transitional Government.
Evidence of critical gaps in the protection of civilians is the increased tensions and
violence in many parts of the Sudan, including in the Darfur region. Intercommunal
violence continues to threaten the lives of civilians, with a rise in the number of
incidents in January 2021 leading to the death or injury of hundreds of civilians,
including a humanitarian worker.
14. Intercommunal violence broke out on 15 January 2021 between the Masalit and
Mahameed tribes in El Geneina and in the Krinding camp for internally di splaced
persons, in West Darfur, which resulted in 162 deaths, the displacement of over
100,000 people and injuries to 300 people. A national staff member of an international
non-governmental organization (NGO) was killed during the violence. On 17 January,
the transitional Government convened a National Security Committee meeting and
dispatched additional forces to the area to help to restore calm. The Minister of
Cabinet Affairs travelled to the area on 18 January and engaged with the communities.
On the same date, a Government delegation, led by the Attorney General and
including representatives of the judiciary, the military and security institutions, was
also sent there to assess and help to resolve the situation, as well as to help to restore
law and order. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a statement on 19 January
condemning the events and emphasizing the Government’s responsibility to continue
to provide protection. On the same day, in a speech to a graduating class of the Rapid
Support Forces, General Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo, also known as Hemedti,
described the events in El Geneina as the work of instigators using social media to
spread chaos. He called for the Rapid Support Forces deployed in Darfur to operate
impartially, respect the law and follow the guidance provided by the police and the
judiciary.
15. On 18 January 2021, there were violent clashes between the Falatta and Rizeigat
tribes in Tawil village in South Darfur, resulting in the displacement of close to
20,000 people. The Governor of South Darfur State condemned the incident and
issued directives to restore law and order, strengthen security forces and prevent
confrontations from spreading to other areas. Subsequently, joint security forces
comprising the Sudanese Armed Forces, the police and the Rapid Support Forces were
deployed and established security buffer zones between the two communities.
Although joint forces were deployed to respond to the recent violence in West Darfur
and South Darfur States, their presence has not been ob served in the other states of
Darfur. The joint security-keeping force envisioned in the Juba Agreement, which is
supposed to comprise government forces and signatory armed movements, has not
yet been formed. On 21 January, during an emergency closed session of the Security
Council, the Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, Bintou Keita, briefed the Council
on the clashes in Darfur.
16. From 8 to 10 February 2021, there were reports of violent protests, including
riots, vandalism, arson and looting, in Western Kordofan, Northern Kordofan, South
Darfur, North Darfur and East Darfur. The violent protests led Governors to declare
a state of emergency and impose curfews in the affected states. While it was reported
that the civil unrest may have been fuelled by increasing economic hardships, a
number of Sudanese officials have accused elements of the former regime of
instigating the violence, given the coordinated timing of the violent outbursts and the
traditionally peaceful nature of the Sudanese protest move ment.
Socioeconomic situation
17. The economic situation continued to deteriorate. The transitional Government
lifted fuel subsidies as part of the IMF staff-monitored programme. The resulting
21-02521

5/18

S/2021/199

increase in the fuel price has exacerbated the spike in the inflation rate, which reached
304 per cent in January, as reflected by sharp increases in the price of bread and
vegetables, transport and clothing.
18. The transitional Government is working towards economic recovery, while
facing massive budget and trade deficits and amid widespread shortages of essential
goods. The trade deficit, which stood at approximately $3.2 billion in the third quarter
of 2020, along with reductions in foreign direct investment, has driven the persistent
devaluation of the Sudanese pound, leading to a rate on the parallel market of
340 Sudanese pounds to the United States dollar as at 1 February 2021, compared
with the official exchange rate of 55 Sudanese pounds to the United States dollar.
19. On 19 January 2021, the Sovereign Council and the Council of Ministers
approved the State budget for 2021. The budget, estimated at approximately 1 trillion
Sudanese pounds, or $18 billion at the official exchange rate of 55 Sudanese pounds
to 1 United States dollar, is based on the transitional Government’s national priorities,
which includes the implementation of the Juba Agreement. The transitional
Government aims to reduce inflation from over 250 per cent to 95 per cent by the end
of 2021. The 2021 budget is also reportedly the first budget of the Sudan in which the
12.5 per cent allocation for education (137 billion Sudanese pounds, a 170 per cent
increase compared with 2020) exceeds military expenditure, to which 12.4 per cent
(136.99 billion Sudanese pounds) have been allocated. The transitional Government
has allocated 28.5 per cent of the budget to social protection and salaries
(313.22 billion Sudanese pounds), 9 per cent to health services (99.01 billion Sudanese
pounds) and 5 per cent (54.1 billion Sudanese pounds) to the implementation of the
Agreement. On 9 January, the economic committee of FFC criticized the lack of
transparency in the budget preparation process and noted that allocations to defence
and security institutions had increased significantly.
20. On 6 January 2021, the United States and the Sudan signed a memorandum of
understanding to provide the Sudan with a bridge loan that will enable the clearing of
approximately $1.2 billion in arrears to the World Bank once the conditions agreed
upon with the Bank have been met. On 21 January, the Foreign Secretary of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland visited the Sudan for meetings with
the Prime Minister, the acting Foreign Minister, Omer Gamareldin Ismail, and the
Chairperson of the Sovereign Council, Abdel Fattah Burhan. The visit led to
confirmation that the United Kingdom would provide £40 million in funding to the
Sudan Family Support Programme and would offer, as part of a coordinated
international package, a bridge loan of £330 million to cl ear arrears to the African
Development Bank (ADB). The support of the United Kingdom is contingent on the
Sudan staying the course with regard to the economic reforms agreed upon with IMF,
and on the Executive Board of IMF and the Board of Directors of the World Bank
approving similar packages on the clearing of arrears. The clearing of arrears with the
World Bank and ADB will enable the Sudan to receive more than $1 billion annually
from the World Bank for the first time in 27 years. However, the Sudan rem ains in
arrears to IMF, thereby barring it from receiving fresh funds from IMF until it has
cleared those debts.
21. On 9 December 2020, the acting Minister of Finance and Economic Planning,
together with the Minister of Agriculture and the Minister of Ani mal Resources,
announced the start date of the population and housing census and the comprehensive
agricultural census, which will be conducted from 15 to 30 April 2022. The acting
Minister of Finance and Economic Planning affirmed the transitional Governm ent’s
full commitment to carrying out the censuses during the transitional period. She also
announced that the transitional Government was committed to paying 53 per cent of
the total cost for its conduct, which is estimated at $305 million, and that inter national
development partners had committed to provide the remaining funds.
6/18

21-02521

S/2021/199

Protection of civilians, human rights and the rule of law
22. The transitional Government continued its efforts to carry out institutional and
legal reforms, strengthening the framework for the promotion and protection of
human rights and for delivering justice to victims through nationally led processes.
The recruitment and appointment of a new cadre of justice sector professionals is
pending, following the termination of 209 advisers of the Ministry of Justice by the
national committee on the dismantling of the former regime. With the support of
UNDP, the Ministry of Justice has made advances in the reform of the justice sector
and finalized a national strategy on institutional reform for the judiciary and the
Ministry of Justice, which includes a restructuring plan and a human resources
strategy for justice sector professionals.
Commissions
23. The transitional Government continued to make efforts to establish the justice
and accountability mechanisms enshrined in the Constitutional Document and the
Juba Agreement. In November 2020, the Ministry of Justice, with the support of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, concluded a
series of consultations with civil society organizations on the draft law of the
Transitional Justice Commission. The draft law, reviewed by the parties to the
Agreement, was submitted to the Joint Council for adoption. The Ministry of Justice
also finalized the first draft of the law on the National Human Rights Commission,
which would be subject to consultations with civil society and other relevant
stakeholders, including regarding the process for selecting the Commission’s
members, in order to bring it into line with the principles relating to the status of
national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights. The draft law
on the National Anti-Corruption Commission has been submitted to the Joint Council
for adoption, following public consultations led by the Ministry of Justice and with
the support of UNDP. On 12 January 2021, the judiciary of the Sudan decided to
revise the appeals mechanism for decisions issued by the national committee on the
dismantling of the former regime, replacing it with a new court chamber composed
of three Supreme Court judges. This mechanism is designed to provide people
affected by the committee’s decisions with concrete judicial guarantees.
Legislation
24. Within the framework of the legal reforms, the United Nations extended its
technical support to the transitional Government for the development of the first draft
of a law on combating violence against women. The transitional Government also
took steps to review the Personal Status Law for Muslims of 1991, in compliance with
the Constitutional Document and the international obligations of the Sudan.
Human rights situation
25. The human rights situation was characterized by a continuation of protests
around the date of the second anniversary of the 2018 revolution and a surge in
violence, especially in the Darfur region. Popular protests calling on the transitional
Government to expedite investigations into gross violations and to hold alleged
perpetrators accountable intensified following the alleged torture and killing of
Sudanese activist Bahaa el-Din Nouri in a detention centre of the Rapid Support
Forces on 21 December 2020. Mr. Nouri’s death prompted calls for protests by the
Sudanese Professionals Association and other civil society groups on 11 January
2021, coupled with demands for the restructuring of security institutions, the
integration of eligible members of the Rapid Support Forces into the Sudanese Armed
Forces and the closure of detention centres of the Rapid Support Forces. In parallel,

21-02521

7/18

S/2021/199

the Sudanese Professionals Association launched a campaign to raise awareness about
torture and illegal detention and called for the lifting of the immunity of alleged
perpetrators and for transparency in the investigation which is currently under way.
26. Although few cases relating to the killing of protesters have reached the courts,
broad immunity from prosecution for the security forces continues to hamper the
expeditious and effective investigation of serious crimes and violations. The
investigation of the independent national commission of inquiry, established by the
Prime Minister in September 2019 to examine the killing of more than 100
demonstrators during the violent dispersal of peaceful sit-in protests in Khartoum on
3 June 2019, continued to advance, including the collection of testimonies of
witnesses and the questioning of high-ranking government officials, including
military members of the Sovereign Council. The investigation by the Office of the
Attorney General into the illegal burial and the mass graves of alleged victims of the
violent dispersal of protesters is also ongoing.
27. Incidents of sexual violence against women and girls, in which internally
displaced people were mostly targeted, continued to be reported and at least nine
incidents of sexual and gender-based violence had been perpetrated in West Darfur,
North Darfur and Central Darfur by members of the Sudanese Armed Forces or other
armed actors. On 11 January 2021, the Sudanese Women’s Revolution Initiative held
a vigil in front of the Ministry of Justice in Khartoum to protest against rape, sexual
harassment and discrimination against women. On the same day, a vigil was also held
in front of the El Fasher court in North Darfur to protest against gender-based
violence. The Sudanese Women’s Revolution Initiative, in cooperation with the
KAFA women’s association protested against continued attacks against women and
girls in Darfur by armed groups and security entities. The group reportedly delivered
a memorandum to the Ministry of Justice in which it called for the amendment of the
1991 law on harassment and rape.
Children and armed conflict
28. Concerning the six grave violations against children, between 24 November and
31 December 2020, UNAMID and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
received reports of the mass recruitment of children in Kabkabiyah, North Darfur, and
Nertiti, Central Darfur, by armed groups that are signatories to the Juba Agreement,
ostensibly to gain leverage through strength in numbers. The United Nations verified
the recruitment and use of 10 boys by the Sudan Liberation Movement/Transitional
Council (2 in Central Darfur and 8 in North Darfur). In addition, the rapes of two girls
were verified: a 15-year-old girl from a camp for internally displaced person s in
Central Darfur was gang-raped by five unknown armed elements, and a 17-year-old
girl was raped in El Geneina, West Darfur, by an element of the Sudanese Armed
Forces. Furthermore, the country task force on monitoring and reporting also verified
the killing of three boys and the maiming of two boys, all by the Rapid Support
Forces, in Kass, South Darfur, on 28 December 2020. It has been reported that two of
the children who were killed were between 14 and 16 years of age and that they were
robbed, shot and then killed while on their way to school. No accountability actions
are known to have been taken in these cases.
Humanitarian situation
29. Humanitarian needs remained high because of the economic crisis, which was
characterized by high inflation rates and shortages of fuel and medicine, along with
intercommunal conflict, the arrival of refugees from Ethiopia and protracted internal
displacement. The Integrated Food Security Phase Classification indicates that during
the fourth quarter of 2020, food insecurity remained widespread, mainly owing to the
economic conditions in the country. In November and December 2020, the retail price
8/18

21-02521

S/2021/199

of sorghum and millet remained, on average, between 240 and 300 per cent higher
than in 2019 and seven times above the five-year average. It is estimated that
7.1 million people (16 per cent of the population) were food -insecure in December,
an increase of about 700,000 compared with an estimate in June of 6.4 million people.
In urban centres, poor families are likely to have below-average food access until
May 2021 because high food prices will limit household purchasing power. The
situation is expected to worsen if the Sudanese pound weakens.
30. Intercommunal tension and violence in parts of Darfur have heightened
concerns about protection. In West Darfur, approximately 149,000 people were
displaced across El Geneina and surrounding villages, following the outbreak of
violence on 15 January 2021. That includes over 84,000 people displaced within
El Geneina town and an estimated 64,000 people to sites outside that town. The
intercommunal clashes have also triggered the displacement of 3,500 people to Chad.
In South Darfur, it is estimated that 19,300 people were displaced by intercommunal
fighting near Graida on 18 January and need humanitarian assistance. Graida hosts
one of the biggest camps for internally displaced persons in the Sudan. Humanitarian
organizations are providing support to internally displaced persons in Graida town
and adjoining camps and new internally displaced persons in Nyala and Tulus have
access to humanitarian services, including health care, nutrition and water. In
addition, over 7,800 people were displaced to Katur village, following intercommunal
fighting in late January 2021 in several villages in the East Jebel Marra locality in
South Darfur.
31. In 2020, half of the 40 incidents of intercommunal violence recorded in Darfur
were in West Darfur. Following the latest escalation, the main roads into El Geneina
were blocked by a sit-in by members of the Arab community, which caused flights to
be suspended and the town to be cut off from the rest of the region. The protesters
demanded greater levels of humanitarian and development assistance, the dismissal
of the Governor, the removal of camps for displaced persons from the town and the
restructuring of the El Geneina police force. Following a visit by a delegation of
transitional Government representatives, the blockade was lifted on 7 February 2021
allowing the movement of humanitarian supplies and personnel. The in-town
humanitarian response in town has reached affected people, who received a one month food package, water and non-food items, as well as protection services. The
Federal Humanitarian Aid Commission also dispatched relief items from Khart oum
to El Geneina and the Ministry of Health evacuated critically injured people to
Khartoum.
32. Since 9 November 2020, more than 61,000 refugees from the Tigray region of
Ethiopia have fled to Eastern Sudan, arriving in three locations: Hamdayet, in Kassala
State; Ludgi and Abderafi, in Gedaref State; and, to a lesser extent, in the Wad al -Mahi
locality in Blue Nile State. The Sudan has kept its borders open to the refugees and
host communities are sharing their resources with them. On 22 December, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and partners launched the
Regional Refugee Preparedness and Response Plan for the Ethiopia Situation
(Tigray). The $157 million plan covers the period from November 2020 to June 202 1.
In the plan, it is estimated that 100,000 refugees and 17,500 people from host
communities will require assistance in the Sudan.
33. According to the Ministry of Health, as at 15 February 2021, 29,933 people in
the Sudan had contracted coronavirus disease (COVID-19), there had been 1,849
associated deaths and the case fatality rate stood at 6.2 per cent. In addition, 3,438
positive cases of COVID-19 had been reported by private laboratories that are not
reflected in the overall figure. Khartoum State accounted for most of the reported
cases in the country. Since the start of the pandemic, 78 per cent of tested health -care

21-02521

9/18

S/2021/199

staff throughout the Sudan had tested positive for COVID -19. That is globally one of
the highest rates for health-care staff.
34. In 2021, an estimated 13.4 million people will need humanitarian assistance.
The United Nations and humanitarian partners aim to support 8.9 million of the most
vulnerable people in the Sudan, which will require $1.9 billion in funding.
Humanitarian partners plan to take advantage of improvements in the access to areas
under the control of armed groups in Darfur, Southern Kordofan State and Blue Nile
State, as well as of the increasing presence of international humanitarian NGOs, with
17 new organizations having started operations in the Sudan in 2020.

III. Update on the establishment of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
35. UNITAMS has reached its initial operational capacity, with 5 national staff and
32 international staff onboarded or onboarding as at 15 February 2021. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan, Volker Perthes, arrived in
Khartoum on 2 February. On 14 February, he held an introductory meeting with the
Prime Minister. The Deputy Special Representative for the Sudan, who would also be
serving as Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator, has been appointed
and is being onboarded. The recruitment of national and international staff for priority
positions in UNITAMS in 2021 has begun, and every effort is being made to achieve
both geographical diversity and a gender balance in the Mission’s first year of
operations.
36. As requested by the Security Council in its resolution 2524 (2020), UNITAMS
has started to develop a full set of clear and measurable core and contextual
benchmarks and indicators to track its progress in achieving its strategic objectives
and priorities. Discussions will be held with the United Nations cou ntry team and the
transitional Government, with a view to finalizing the benchmarks and indicators and
to including them in the next report of the Secretary -General on the situation in the
Sudan and the activities of UNITAMS.
37. UNITAMS continued to conduct outreach activities with a wide range of
interlocutors, including government officials, political party and civil society
representatives, military officials and representatives of armed movements. It also
conducted its first official mission to Central and North Darfur States from 25 to
28 January 2021, with the support of UNAMID. The delegation, led by the Officerin-Charge of UNITAMS, met with government officials, local communities,
representatives of internally displaced persons and their camps, civ il society
organizations, activists and women’s groups. The introductory visit allowed
UNITAMS to engage directly with those groups regarding the Mission’s mandate and
to hear first-hand accounts of local priorities and concerns. In El Fasher, the
delegation met with the government spokesperson, in his capacity as representative
of the Governor of North Darfur. He expressed the importance of United Nations
support for a range of humanitarian and development needs, including helping
internally displaced persons to return to their homes and assisting South Sudanese
refugees. He expressed his support for the mandate of UNITAMS and for the
Mission’s presence in North Darfur.
38. Internally displaced persons and other civilians in Zalingei, Golo, Sortony and
El Fasher reported severe protection and security concerns to UNITAMS, including
fears of continued conflict-related sexual violence. These interlocuters cited the
withdrawal of UNAMID from the area of operation, the absence of accountability for
previous war crimes, armed militias and recent violence in West Darfur and South

10/18

21-02521

S/2021/199

Darfur as factors contributing to local communities’ lack of confidence in national
efforts to ensure the protection of civilians.
39. Representatives of various political movements, civil society organizations,
women’s groups and representatives of camps for internally displaced persons in
Central Darfur conveyed their perception that, to date, they had been excluded from
the peace process and that the absence of tangible peace dividends from the Juba
Agreement, such as the delivery of basic services and support for livelihoods. Women
in both El Fasher and Zalingei, representing the Darfur Women’s Platform and other
groups, stressed the importance of women’s participation in the new governm ent, the
larger political transition, future peace talks, and implementation bodies and
commissions. They also requested the support of UNITAMS in facilitating linkages
between women’s groups throughout the Sudan and ensuring that the voices of women
living in the periphery were heard in political discussions in Khartoum.
40. From 2 to 5 February 2021, UNITAMS held meetings in Juba with the SPLM -N
Al-Hilu faction, which remains outside the Juba peace agreement, to explain the
mandate of UNITAMS and answer questions on the Mission’s role, including its good
offices in support of peace talks.
41. Having been granted access following the conclusion of the Juba Agreement,
the Mine Action Service has started operations under the mandate of UNITAMS. In
Blue Nile State, two mine action teams surveyed 33.62 km of road and undertook
11 explosive ordnance disposal spot tasks, clearing a total of 423,238 square metres
of land and destroying 80 hazardous items, including one anti-personnel mine and
one anti-tank mine. The teams surveyed and cleared approximately 70 per cent of the
Ullu airstrip, creating space for a helicopter landing site, and marked for further
surveying and clearance segments of road that were suspected to be contaminated.
42. A new peacebuilding and stabilization window of the multi-partner trust fund,
the Sudan financing platform, was established in December 2020. The programmatic
framework for the window will be in the Sudan Peacebuilding and Stabilization
Programme, which is currently under development. The Programme articulates a
coordinated and coherent United Nations strategy for peacebuilding and stabilization
in support of the implementation of the UNITAMS mandate and is a vehicle for much needed peace dividends and durable solutions in conflict-affected areas, in support of
the implementation of the Juba Agreement. As a next step, the terms of reference of
the fund will be adapted to reflect the programmatic framework of the new window
and the governance and decision-making mechanisms under that window.
43. The Mission is working closely with the transitional Government’s National
Committee for Coordination and held its first meeting with the full Committee on
19 January. In the meeting, the Chair reiterated that the Committee had been formed
to streamline and facilitate work between UNITAMS and the relevant ministries of
the transitional Government.
44. A draft status-of-mission agreement was shared with the transitional
Government on 1 July 2020 by the Permanent Mission of the Sudan to the Unite d
Nations in New York. The transitional Government’s suggested changes to the draft
agreement were transmitted by the Permanent Mission on 7 January 2021. Additional
consultations will be held in the near future, to finalize the draft agreement as soon
as possible in order to facilitate the operations of the new Mission.
45. The existing capacity of UNAMID was leveraged in 2020 to support the initial
logistical requirements of UNITAMS, allowing time for the Mission’s own logistical
and administrative capacity to be built. Accordingly, assets provided by UNAMID,
such as engineering materials, communications equipment and vehicles, are being
transferred to UNITAMS. The interim headquarters of UNITAMS in Khartoum is
21-02521

11/18

S/2021/199

fully operational and arrangements for the deployment of UNITAMS staff in the
regional offices in El Fasher, Kassala and Kadugli have been concluded. Efforts are
also being made to co-locate UNITAMS staff with those of the United Nations
agencies resident in Zalingei, Nyala, Kauda, El Damazin and Port Sudan.
46. UNITAMS has established service level agreements with the Regional Service
Centre in Entebbe, Uganda, the Global Procurement Support Section and the United
Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, for the provision of non -location-dependent
transactional services, to minimize costs and the staffing complement on the ground
in the Sudan. Joint support services have been established with lead agencies for the
delivery of a wide range of services, enabling UNITAMS to maintain a light footprint
so that it can scale down or up operations without the need for undue administrative
and support efforts.

IV. Observations
47. Despite the acute challenges faced by the Sudan, the country continues to make
progress in its political transition. The formation of the new transitional Government
and the expanded Sovereign Council mark milestones in the implementation of the
Juba Agreement. I encourage the parties to ensure the swift formation of the
Transitional Legislative Council and the commissions established as a result of the
Agreement in order to further advance the transition, in line with the Constitutional
Document.
48. I welcome the continued efforts made by the Sudanese to implement the Juba
Agreement. Significant challenges lie ahead to meet the ambitious implementation
timelines of the Agreement and secure the financial resources needed for its
implementation. I call on the transitional Government to clearly articulate the
financial and technical support that it will require from partners and urge partners of
the Sudan to provide the necessary assistance for the implementation of the
Agreement through the Ministry of Finance. The United Nations, through UNITAMS,
stands ready to support implementation, in line with the Mission’s mandate and as
requested by the signatories to the Agreement.
49. The second anniversary of the December 2018 revolution was marked by the
continuation of a vibrant Sudanese protest movement that remains unrepresented
within transitional institutions, but that neverthele ss persistently seeks to achieve the
demands, articulated since the start of the revolution, for civilian -led democratic
governance. Sudanese women’s rights leaders continue mobilization for women’s
meaningful participation in the transitional decision -making bodies and for the
fulfilment of other gender equality commitments set out in the Constitutional
Document and the Juba Agreement.
50. The rapid escalation of violent clashes in Darfur in January 2021 demonstrates
the complex challenges that the transitional Government faces in carrying out its
responsibilities and fulfilling its commitment to protect civilians and provide State
authority throughout the Sudan. Peace in the Sudan will not be complete until all
conflicts come to an end. I call on those armed movements that remain outside the
peace process to commit to negotiations that will lead to a fully inclusive and
sustainable peace in the Sudan.
51. Important steps have been taken at the national level to advance the Sudanese
women’s rights agenda, as stipulated in the Constitutional Document and the Juba
Agreement. However, concerns remain that Sudanese women could lose the gains
made in key transitional milestones, including by falling short of achieving the
minimum of 40 per cent representation of women in the Transitional Legislative

12/18

21-02521

S/2021/199

Council and, more broadly, gender equality in the Cabinet, the Government and other
decision-making structures, including peace implementation bodies. The situation of
women’s protection and security in Darfur, including the continued risks that women
face in terms of sexual and gender-based violence, are of deep concern. International
support for the transitional Government to fulfil its national commitments to the
women and peace and security agenda, as stipulated in the country’s national action
plan on that theme, will prove essential to enhancing women’s full and meaningful
participation in all aspects of the transition and strengthening mechanisms for the
protection of women and girls in conflict-affected areas.
52. I take note of the transitional Government’s continued efforts towards
institutional reforms and accountability processes. I urge the transitional Government
to take an inclusive and participatory approach to justice and legal reforms in the
Sudan, include victims and civil society in ongoing transitional justice processes in a
meaningful way and prioritize the building of trust between State authorities and
communities.
53. The restoration of relations with the international financial institutions
represents an achievement for the transitional Government and an important step in
the country’s path to achieving debt relief and securing grants to finance major
infrastructure and other development projects. The country today has accumulated
more than $60 billion in foreign debt, and debt relief and access to foreign loans are
widely seen as its gateway to economic recovery. I call on partners of the Sudan to
inject fresh international funding through the Ministry of Finance. Such assistance
would provide central support for economic stability, in conjunction with reforms
implemented by the transitional Government. The reforms will address structural
distortions in the economy, promote growth, encourage investment and help to build
a prosperous economy for all Sudanese, in particular young people, women and
communities affected by war and marginalization. Meanwhile, the socioeconomic
situation, exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic, continues to impose significant
hardship on the population and increases the risk of instability. I therefore encourage
the transitional Government to continue its critical economic reform, including
exchange rate unification, which will enable the Sudan to fully benefit from the
support offered by its partners and the international fin ancial institutions through the
Sudan Family Support Programme.
54. I reiterate my heartfelt condolences to the family members of the victims of the
recent violence in Darfur and wish a full recovery to all those who were injured. In
the light of the recent disturbing developments in Darfur and the end of the mandate
of UNAMID at the end of 2020, I urge the transitional Government to accelerate
implementation of its national strategy for the protection of civilians and to rapidly
deploy the joint security-keeping force composed of Government forces and signatory
armed movements, in order to protect the civilian population throughout Darfur.
Addressing the root causes of these conflicts is the ultimate goal, so that protection
forces will be unnecessary. I urge the new transitional Government, the Sovereign
Council and the Transitional Legislative Council, once it has been formed, to assume
their responsibilities in that regard. The United Nations, through UNITAMS, remains
ready to support the transitional Government to fulfil that responsibility and I call
upon the newly established transitional Government to quickly formulate its
protection priorities and articulate the support that it will require from the United
Nations and the international community.
55. I also remain concerned about the escalation in tensions between the Sudan and
Ethiopia regarding the Fashaqah area along their border. I urge the leaders of Ethiopia
and the Sudan to de-escalate the situation, ensure the safety of those living in the area
and work towards a common solution. I will continue to explore opportunities to
encourage de-escalation and a peaceful resolution.
21-02521

13/18

S/2021/199

56. I thank the transitional Government for the ongoing support that it has provided
to UNITAMS while the Mission continues to build up its presence in the Sudan. I
urge the transitional Government to finalize the agreement on the status of the Mission
as soon as possible, in order to facilitate the effective operation of the new Mission.
Lastly, I would like to express my support for the new Special Representative for the
Sudan as he takes up his responsibilities and for all United Nations personnel who
continue to support the Sudan.

14/18

21-02521

S/2021/199

Annex
Report on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2559 (2020)
I. Introduction
1.
The present annex is submitted pursuant to Security Cou ncil resolution 2559
(2020), by which the Council requested that it be kept regularly informed by the
Secretary-General about all relevant developments in relation to the drawdown and
withdrawal of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) as an annex to the regular report on the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS). The present annex provides
an update on the context and the progress made in the drawdown for the period from
1 December 2020 to 31 January 2021.

II. Update on the drawdown of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
A.

Closure of team sites and facilities
2.
The sequence for the closure of the team sites and facilities is dictated by
security considerations and logistical feasibility. In the current drawdown plan, it is
envisaged that the 14 team sites in Darfur close in five phases. Phase I includes the
closure of Saraf Umrah (21 January) and Kutum (3 February). Phase II will see the
closure of Khor Abeche (15 February), Menawashei (25 February), Kalma (11 March)
and Nyala II (13 March). Phase III comprises the closure of Sortony (28 March), Golo
(11 April) and Nertiti (22 April). Phase IV inclu des the closure of Kass (5 May),
Tawilah (11 May) and Zalingei (27 May). Lastly, phase V will complete the process,
with the closure of Shangil Tobaya (5 June) and Kabkabiyah (16 June). The logistics
base in El Fasher, North Darfur, will be closed during t he liquidation period, along
with offices in Khartoum and Port Sudan. The team sites will be closed at a rate of
approximately one site every two weeks or less, depending on the size and complexity
of each. To date, phase I has been completed. Civilian sta ff will be separated once
their functional tasks end, with staff members separated when the team sites where
they are located close and only those kept on board who are required to support the
drawdown and liquidation processes. The Joint Special Represent ative for UNAMID
and the Deputy Joint Special Representative for UNAMID left their roles on
31 January 2021, along with the Force Commander and the Police Commissioner. The
United Nations Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator in the Sudan ad interim,
M’Baye Babacar Cissé, will act as officer-in-charge for the Operation ad interim,
while the Deputy Force Commander and Deputy Police Commissioner will exercise
overall command and control over uniformed personnel during the drawdown period.
Coordination with the Government and local community
3.
In resolution 2559 (2020), the Security Council called upon the Government of
the Sudan to cooperate fully with the United Nations and the African Union during
the drawdown and liquidation of UNAMID in order to ensure the orderly and safe
withdrawal of the Mission.
4.
Coordination with the Government at the federal and at the Darfur state levels is
ongoing. On 18 January 2021, a high-level meeting was held with the federal Government

21-02521

15/18

S/2021/199

to discuss the modalities for cooperation and coordination, with government representatives
reiterating their commitment to facilitating the drawdown. Agreement was reached on
information-sharing for related activities and the issuance of visas for UNAMID
personnel. At the Darfur state level, UNAMID is engaging with the state technical
committees for North, South and Central Darfur to coordinate all drawdown activities.
5.
Nevertheless, UNAMID has faced challenges in the movement of its convoys.
On 11 December 2020, a convoy carrying supplies for UNITAMS was detained
en route from El Fasher to Khartoum and delayed for several days by customs
officials. On 18 December, military intelligence authorities prevented a UNAMID
convoy from leaving the Kutum team site in North Darfur to go to El Fasher. The
convoy was unable to move until 31 December, following the completion of
negotiations with federal and North Darfur State authorities. Again, on 15 January
2021, a UNAMID-contracted convoy on its way to the Khor Abeche team site in
South Darfur was stopped by the Sudan Police Force and instructed to return to
El Fasher. On 21 January, a consignment of contingent-owned equipment and assets
being transferred to UNITAMS was seized by North Darfur S tate customs authorities
for several days. Such incidents have resulted in financial losses for the Operation
and delays in the conduct of critical drawdown activities.
6.
In some instances local communities and local authorities have resisted efforts
to remove assets or equipment from the sites, insisting that they should be left for
their use. The sale of scrap and other commodities to local contractors, which is
required under the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations, has also
been opposed by some local communities and local authorities.
Civilian end-use of sites
7.
In resolution 2559 (2020), the Security Council called upon UNAMID and the
Government of the Sudan to swiftly finalize a revised framework agreement that
ensures, inter alia, the principle of civilian end-use of the handed-over UNAMID sites
and assets. The Government has officially committed itself to the use of handed -over
sites and facilities for health care, education and other social services, and discussions
regarding the draft framework agreement are ongoing. The proposed uses of the team
sites range from educational facilities to health and humanitarian hubs, locations for
vocational training for women and young people, and centres for the delivery of
veterinary services. It will remain largely the responsibility of the Darfur state
governments to ensure that the proposals are fully realized. The Saraf Umrah facilities
will be used as a vocational centre, while the Kutum team site will be shared by the
University of El Fasher and community centres delivering veterinary services and
training for women and young people.

B.

Security context for drawdown
Current developments
8.
The overall security environment for the drawdown of UNAMID remains
uncertain. Since 7 December 2020, largely peaceful demonstrations against the exit of
UNAMID have been held in front of several team sites and petitions have been received
from various communities, including internally displaced persons, worried about their
security after the withdrawal. This has included a four-week-long demonstration at
Kalma camp in South Darfur and at team sites in Kabkabiyah and Shangil Tobaya in
North Darfur, Kass in South Darfur, and Nertiti and Zalingei in Central Darfur.
9.
Protests were also held by former UNAMID national staff members and
contractors regarding the payment of benefits and entitlements, including a prolonged
sit-in at the logistics base in El Fasher and a demonstration by former UNAMID

16/18

21-02521

S/2021/199

individual contractors in front of the Shangil Tobaya team site. The Operation is dealing
with these issues on a case-by-case basis, while monitoring their security implications
and impact on UNAMID operations, given that the demonstrators have on occasion
blocked the gates to UNAMID premises, causing disruptions to normal activities.
10. Since 31 December 2020, the Government of the Sudan has responded to the
need to protect UNAMID premises and assets by deploying joint forces. Within the
Operation, the remaining UNAMID uniformed components are now focused on the
protection of UNAMID facilities and assets until their repatriation date.
Incidents involving United Nations personnel and installations
11. Criminal incidents targeting UNAMID personnel and premises have escalated
during the drawdown period. These have included incidents of armed robbery,
carjacking, intrusion on premises and theft. On 20 December 2020, armed individuals
highjacked a UNAMID vehicle at gunpoint in El Fasher, Nor th Darfur, and on
22 December 2020, two United Nations staff members were robbed and a United
Nations vehicle was stolen in Kabkabiyah, North Darfur. On 6 January 2021, a power
cable to the perimeter security lights of the UNAMID super camp in Zalingei was cut
and the perimeter fence was damaged in an attempted intrusion. On 3 February,
another attempt at forceful entry into the super camp was made by people claiming
compensation for road traffic accidents involving UNAMID vehicles. Two days later,
a group of 150 people blocked the movement of a logistics convoy with similar
demands.
12. Concerns remain that such incidents could increase further as the withdrawal
progresses. In some cases, where the removal of assets from the closure of team sites
has been opposed by local communities or authorities, mutual agreements between
local communities, state authorities and UNAMID may be necessary in order to
ensure a smooth handover.
Guard unit
13. The Security Council, in its resolution 2559 (2020), authorized, for the duration
of the drawdown and liquidation of UNAMID, the retention of a guard unit from
within the Operation’s existing footprint. During much of the drawdown period up to
30 June 2021, security responsibilities for the personnel, facilities and assets will
continue to be assumed by the uniformed contingents at each site. The major task of
the guard unit will be to protect personnel, facilities and assets concentrated at the
El Fasher logistics hub, as well as to provide escorts, where necessary. Details
concerning the size and operations of the guard force are currently being developed,
bearing in mind that the primary responsibility of the Government of the Sudan is to
protect UNAMID personnel, premises and assets.

C.

Transition of tasks to the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan
14. The Security Council, in its resolution 2559 (2020), reiterated its request to
ensure that the transition from UNAMID to UNITAMS was phased, sequenced and
efficient. The Operation has continued to coordinate closely with UNITAMS, including
through weekly working-level coordination meetings, to ensure synchronization with
the scaling up of UNITAMS. A joint framework has been adopted for identifying
priority activities that need to be transferred from UNAMID to UNITAMS in three
main workstreams: political support for the Sudan in respect of its quest for a long lasting political settlement, peacebuilding issues and protection concerns. An online
platform has been developed to allow UNAMID to upload related information for use

21-02521

17/18

S/2021/199

by UNITAMS and the United Nations country team. An integrated team comprising
representatives of UNAMID, UNITAMS and the United Nations country team has
been established to assist the country team in its oversight of the completion of
residual activities, including projects supported by the State liaison function, and to
support knowledge transfer to UNITAMS.

III. Financial aspects
15. The General Assembly, in its resolutions 74/261 C and decision 74/571, as well
as in its resolution 75/251, authorized the Secretary-General to enter into
commitments for the Operation for amounts not exceeding $240.2 million for the
period from 1 July to 31 December 2020, and $198.8 million for the period from
1 January to 30 June 2021.
16. As at 9 February 2021, unpaid assessed contributions to the special account for
UNAMID amounted to $308.4 million. Total outstanding assessed contributions for
all peacekeeping operations at that date amounted to $3,173.5 million. The
reimbursement of troop and formed police costs was made for the period up to
31 March 2020, as well as the reimbursement of the costs of contingent-owned
equipment, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

IV. Observations
17. As we continue with the withdrawal of UNAMID, the task before us is
significant. The size of the Operation, both in terms of its personnel and assets,
coupled with its geographical footprint and related logistical hurdles, present a
complex picture for drawdown and liquidation. The coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
pandemic adds an additional layer of risk.
18. In its work to date, the Operation has demonstrated its ability to undertake this
task within the set time frame. It has been well served by planning early, in
anticipation of the final decision by the Security Council to end the mandate, and I
commend the Operation’s efforts in that regard.
19. Cooperation with the Sudanese authorities during the remainder of the process
will be critical and I am grateful to the transitional Government for its commitment
to facilitating a safe and orderly withdrawal. Nevertheless, I remain concerned about
resistance faced at the local level, including in some cases from state authorities. I
encourage UNAMID and the transitional Government to finalize the framework
agreement expeditiously and I call upon the Government to use its influence at every
level to ensure that the drawdown can proceed on time and in accordance with United
Nations rules and regulations.
20. UNAMID and UNITAMS will continue to coordinate and cooperate closely to
preserve the knowledge and experience that UNAMID has built up over the past
13 years in support of the people of the Sudan.
21. With its mandate successfully ended and drawdown under way, I want to express
my deepest gratitude to the Acting Joint Special Representative for Darfur, Jeremiah
Mamabolo, for his unwavering leadership, as well as to the rest of the UNAMID
leadership and staff for the tireless work they have performed in support of peace in
Darfur. I also want to convey my sincerest gratitude to the United Nations country
team and our partners, the African Union, the troop- and police-contributing countries
and the humanitarian community for their invaluable suppor t towards our common
objectives.

18/18

21-02521
