S/PV.8664

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8664th meeting

Thursday, 14 November 2019, 3.20 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Pierce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-36729 (E)
*1936729*

S/PV.8664

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: As the conflict in Syria evolves, one
fact remains — it is the people of Syria who continue
to bear the consequences of eight and a half years of
war. Across the country, more than 11 million remain in
need of humanitarian assistance. That is more than half
the estimated population.
Today I want to, first, update the Council on the
humanitarian response; secondly, cover the situation in
the north-west; thirdly, flag some points on the northeast; fourthly, brief Council members on the findings of
my recent visit on the cross-border operation; and fifthly,
remind the Council of the wider regional situation.
First, with regard to the humanitarian response, the
United Nations and other humanitarian organizations
work through all possible avenues to reach as many
of the people in need as possible every month. So far
this year, we have reached an average of 5.6 million
people a month in all parts of Syria. We try to prioritize
the neediest. Over half of the response takes place in
areas under Government control. It takes place with
the Government’s agreement and acceptance and in
coordination with it. This year, the United Nations and
humanitarian organizations are delivering assistance
from within Syria to an average of 3 million people every
month. Most of the beneficiaries are people in the most
acute need and in communities with a high concentration
of people in need. The assistance provided by the
United Nations and other humanitarian organizations is
2/17

14/11/2019

tailored to meet people’s needs, based on independent
assessments. Despite the administrative and security
challenges we continue to face from within Syria, the
United Nations conducted more than 5,500 missions
between January and September to assess needs, deliver
aid and monitor the impact of our work. In addition to
the United Nations coordinated humanitarian response
in Government-controlled areas, we are regularly
made aware of bilateral humanitarian assistance from
Member States, including the Russian Federation.
Secondly, I remain very concerned about the
situation in the north-west. In recent weeks, there
has been an increase in air strikes and ground-based
strikes, mostly in parts of southern and western Idlib,
which, the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) reports, have caused a high number of
civilian casualties. In the past two days, there have been
reports of over 100 air strikes in Idlib and surrounding
areas. The Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights reports that four separate health facilities were
damaged on 4 and 6 November, including the Kafr Nabl
hospital. An increase in shelling out of the area has also
been reported.
Not only do civilians in those areas have to endure
the impact of hostilities, but continue to suffer under the
presence of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, a United Nationslisted terrorist organization. We are following with
concern the situation for civilians in Kafr Takharim,
where civilians were besieged and shelled following
protests against Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham. Reports indicate
that civilians have been killed. More broadly, we are
seeing that civilian infrastructure is being dismantled
and sold in areas under Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham control,
including water and electrical infrastructure, as well
as rail lines. Removing civilian infrastructure affects
basic services now, but will also make any future
recovery all the more difficult.
More than half of the people in Idlib have had to move
from other parts of the country. Hundreds of thousands
are living in camps and informal shelters close to the
border with Turkey. There is little space left to absorb
additional displacement. The onset of winter — with
the rain, the cold and the mud it brings — compounds
the dire humanitarian situation. In that context, the
internal United Nations Headquarters board of inquiry
established by the Secretary-General has begun its work
to investigate a series of incidents that have occurred in
north-west Syria since September 2018. I would remind
the Council of the Secretary-General’s request that all
19-36729

14/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

relevant parties extend their support to the board in the
conduct of its duties.
Thirdly, I continue to follow developments in northeast Syria very closely. Hostilities have decreased since
the agreements were reached on 17 and 22 October, but
clashes continue in border areas, particularly around
the Ras Al-Ayn and Tel Abyad districts. OHCHR has
verified reports that 49 civilians have been killed by
a combination of air strikes, ground-based strikes,
sniper fire and executions carried out by armed groups.
OHCHR has also verified that 31 civilians have been
killed by improvised explosive devices or explosive
remnants of war since the beginning of October. About
200,000 people left the border areas between Turkey
and Syria in the early phases of hostilities, mostly
heading south. Most of them have now returned, but
more than 70,000 remain displaced.
Civilian infrastructure has also been affected. The
World Health Organization has reported that five medical
facilities have been affected by fighting. The Allouk
water station, which provides water services to 460,000
people in Al-Hasakah, has been repeatedly put out of
service due to hostilities. The Government of Turkey
has responded to requests to support humanitarian
operations. A number of cross-line missions have been
facilitated by Turkey, whereby technicians came from
Al-Hasakah to Allouk to do repairs to the water station
and the power supply. Turkey has also sent its own
technicians. While the water has again been restored,
it is important to have sustained access to ensure the
ongoing operations of those critical facilities.
More broadly, I remain concerned about the
impact that changes in administrative control could
have on humanitarian operations in the north-east.
With 1.8 million people in need, it is critical that
there be continuity of life-saving essential services
and humanitarian aid deliveries, regardless of any
changes in control. That has particular implications for
displacement camps like Al-Hol, where needs for the
68,600 residents are high. The camp includes Syrians,
Iraqis and third-country nationals. It is more important
than ever that States Members of the United Nations,
including members of the Council, repatriate their
nationals for reintegration or for prosecution under
national legislation, as appropriate.
Across northern Syria, 4 million people are
supported by the United Nations cross-border
humanitarian assistance mechanism, including

S/PV. 8664

2.7 million in the north-west who cannot be reached
from within the country. That brings me to my fourth
point. In October, I went to Turkey and visited our
cross-border operations. I was able to see the delivery
of assistance, assess the work of the United Nations
Monitoring Mechanism and talk to people we are
helping inside Syria. Since 2014, the United Nations
has sent nearly 30,000 truckloads of humanitarian
assistance across the four border crossings named in
resolution 2165 (2014). Civilians have been provided
with food assistance, water, medical assistance, shelter
and other help. More trucks are using the cross-border
mechanism today than ever before, with more than 900
passing through in October. More people are being
reached than ever before. In October alone, the United
Nations provided 1.1 million people with food through
cross-border deliveries, which is double the number
in January. The operation from Turkey has grown by
more than 40 per cent since this time in 2018, due to
the increase in humanitarian needs. It is through those
operations that we have been able to stave off an even
worse humanitarian crisis in northern Syria.
I can confirm that the operation mandated by
resolution 2165 (2014) is one of the most closely
scrutinized aid delivery systems in the world today.
The movement and delivery of humanitarian aid is
monitored at four distinct levels: at the border, at the
warehouses inside Syria, at distribution points and after
distribution. The humanitarian nature of United Nations
cross-border assistance is monitored and verified by the
United Nations Monitoring Mechanism. Monitors of 15
different nationalities verify the humanitarian nature of
the cargo being shipped. The monitors, whom I met,
climb into every truck. They open boxes, cut into bags
of rice and inspect vehicles before clearing assistance
to cross the border.
When aid arrives at warehouses inside Syria,
it is examined by third-party monitors contracted
by the United Nations. They check the items being
offloaded against the waybill. Third-party monitors
have conducted almost 2,000 assessments of aid so far
this year. In addition to monitoring the arrival of aid at
warehouses, they have observed the direct distribution
to affected people and deliveries of aid to schools
and hospitals. They have conducted post-distribution
monitoring, using community feedback mechanisms
and individual interviews with beneficiaries. Their
monitoring has not identified any evidence of systemic
aid diversion.

19-367293/17

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.8664

We are also using new technologies to monitor
the delivery of aid. Through video and time-stamped
geotagged photos, we can monitor the delivery process
every step of the way. Commodity tracking systems
using barcodes on each box of aid allow assistance to
be followed from the border to the warehouse and on
to the individual beneficiary. Those same boxes have
phone numbers printed on them to allow beneficiaries
to report back by phone or WhatsApp if everything
they are expecting is not delivered or if there are other
things they need. A call centre has been established,
allowing anyone with questions about aid deliveries to
get in touch.
Nothing in life is completely risk-free, but I can say
with confidence that the United Nations knows what
is going across the border under our programme and
where it is going. We know that help is reaching the
civilians who need it. Therefore, I can be clear that
there is no alternative to the cross-border operation. A
renewal of the provisions of resolution 2165 (2014) is
critical. There is no plan B. Without the cross-border
operation, we would see an immediate end of aid that
is supporting millions of civilians; that would cause a
rapid increase in hunger and disease. A lot more people
would flood across the borders, making an existing
crisis in the region even worse.
That brings me to my fifth and last point. With
more than 5.6 million Syrians living in neighbouring
countries as refugees, the crisis has had an enormous
impact on the entire region. The responsibility that
refugee-hosting countries bear is heavy. When I
visited Turkey last month, I had the opportunity to
express again my deep admiration and gratitude to
Turkey’s Government and people for their exceptional
and prolonged hospitality to the refugees. The same
gratitude is due to Jordan, Lebanon, Iraq, Egypt and
others. I urge the international community to be more
generous in supporting them all in shouldering the
burden they have taken on.
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Lowcock

for

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium): I am
delivering this statement on behalf of the three
co-penholders: Kuwait, Germany and Belgium.
4/17

14/11/2019

I would first like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock for his valuable and timely briefing.
Mr. Lowcock has reminded us once again that millions
of Syrians continue to need humanitarian assistance
and protection. We heard the numbers. Eleven
million Syrians, including some 5 million children,
need humanitarian assistance. These are essential
and critical needs. We are talking about food, water,
shelter, medical assistance, preventive medical care
and education for Syrian children. The United Nations
and its humanitarian partners should be allowed to
continue to deliver humanitarian assistance in a timely,
safe, sustained and unimpeded manner by using all
means — including cross-border, cross-line and regular
programming — to reach Syrians in need throughout
the country. As of last month, 4 million people in need
of humanitarian assistance depended on cross-border
operations. In other words, almost 40 per cent of the
entire humanitarian assistance is covered through
that mechanism.
Since the United Nations began cross-border
operations in July 2014, pursuant to resolution 2165
(2014), the mechanism has offered a true lifeline
to the people in areas not under the control of the
authorities. To this date, the mechanism continues to
allow the United Nations and its partners to ensure
that life-saving assistance reaches millions of people.
In fact, this year has been extremely busy. Never have
there been as many humanitarian cross-border convoys
as during the month of October, owing to the situation
in the north of the country. Moreover, as Mr. Lowcock
explained in detail, the Monitoring Mechanism linked
to cross-border operations is robust and reliable. It
is known to be among the most effective and detailoriented systems of all humanitarian operations run
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs across the world.
The current mandate of cross-border operations
ends by the beginning of next year. The renewal of
the mandate is of prime importance. As the SecretaryGeneral notes in his report,
“Without this operation, we would see increased
numbers of civilian deaths, greater prevalence of
disease and even greater suffering being inflicted
on a population who cannot be reached at this scale,
in such a timely and direct manner, through any
other means.” (S/2019/820, para. 44)
19-36729

14/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

We share that assessment, which is why the
co-penholders will work closely with all members of the
Council and the countries concerned or involved in order
to renew the resolution on cross-border operations — a
purely humanitarian resolution — before the end of the
year. It is our collective responsibility to ensure that
resolution 2165 (2014) is renewed so that the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners can continue to
alleviate the humanitarian needs of all people in Syria.
In north-eastern Syria, clashes continue to be
reported, adding further risk to the already dire
humanitarian situation. They have led to civilian
casualties and, although the number has dropped, many
people remain displaced. It is of prime importance that
humanitarian access not be impeded. At this stage,
we are paying particular attention to the Allouk water
station and call on all parties to ensure the continued
full functioning of the station, which provides water
to almost half a million people in Al-Hasakah. Some
68,000 residents, 94 per cent of whom are women and
children, remain in Al-Hol camp. We call for continued
and full humanitarian access to the camp and for its
specific protection needs to be addressed.
In the north-west, despite a reduction in hostilities
since the end of August, a recent upsurge in violence has
been reported, leading to civilian casualties, especially
in southern and western Idlib, and further impacting
civilians and civilian infrastructure. Once again, we
are deeply concerned about recent reports of attacks on
medical facilities.
We have also condemned the attacks perpetrated
by Security Council-designated terrorist groups, while
reiterating that counter-terrorism efforts can never
absolve the obligations of all parties under international
humanitarian law, including that of adherence to the
principles of distinction and proportionality. More than
half of the current population in Idlib is made up of
internally displaced persons, many of whom remain
displaced close to the Turkish border, facing dire
humanitarian circumstances in overcrowded camps as
the winter sets in.
We remain equally concerned about the situation
in the south-west, including around Damascus,
where a total of 2.8 million people remain in severe
humanitarian need of essential protection, water,
sanitation, health care, food, education and other relief.
The security situation, which remains volatile in this
region, adds to the challenge. The situation in Rukban

S/PV. 8664

also remains dire. We continue to call for a durable
and lasting solution for the remaining inhabitants and
underline, in this context, the importance of providing
United Nations access to the camp.
Finally, I will make four more points.
No lasting peace in Syria will be possible without
justice and accountability. We reiterate our support for
the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under
International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. We also welcome the
board of inquiry that was recently established by the
Secretary-General and which is now operational.
With regard to the return of refugees our position
remains unchanged. All returns must be safe, voluntary,
dignified and well-informed.
We reiterate our call for a nation-wide cessation
of hostilities in accordance with Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2401 (2018). There is
no military solution to the conflict in Syria.
Finally, we welcome the convening of the
Constitutional Committee as a first step in the political
process and we reiterate our support for Special Envoy
Pedersen in his efforts to reach a political solution in
Syria on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015) and the
2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing.
The Council has gathered scores of times to
discuss the humanitarian crisis in Syria. After so many
meetings, one might begin to believe that this crisis has
always been with us and that it always will be — like a
problem we that can analyse but cannot address. But we
cannot be content with merely observing this problem.
In fact, the Council has an obligation to the Syrian
people — an obligation to respond to the deliberate
choices of the Al-Assad regime, which have left a
million Syrians dead and another 12 million displaced.
That is an obligation that the United States is prepared
to meet.
We stand firmly behind the call of the UnderSecretary-General for the continuation for an additional
12 months of the life-saving cross-border humanitarian
aid mechanism established pursuant to resolution 2165
(2014). That is because the mechanism is working.

19-367295/17

S/PV.8664

The situation in the Middle East

The United Nations has reached more people in 2019
through the cross-border mechanism than any time
since the Council adopted resolution 2165 (2014). We
also support the mechanism because it is transparent,
reliable and, most importantly, indispensable to
millions of Syrians. We call on all Council members
to support a technical rollover of that resolution for
another 12 months. The importance of the resolution’s
renewal cannot be overstated. It will ensure under its
terms that vital supplies continue to flow through all
four crossing points.
In the first instance, we are grateful to the
United Nations and the humanitarian organizations
that have provided basic necessities and life-saving
medicines through the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing.
That integral crossing point must remain open. In
north-western Syria, brazen and heinous military
operations conducted by the regime have made civilian
communities in Idlib and northern Hama fully reliant
on United Nations cross-border aid deliveries through
the Bab Al-Hawa and Bab Al-Salam crossings. We
strongly condemn the Al-Assad regime’s escalation of
these air strikes that have, with Russian support, killed
and injured civilians and humanitarian workers. These
repulsive attacks have deliberately targeted civilians
and civilian infrastructure, including two medical
facilities operated by the Union of Medical Care
and Relief Organizations humanitarian coalition, in
violation of resolution 2286 (2016). The United States
seeks full accountability for those responsible for the
attacks on hospitals, schools and civilian homes. We
therefore fully support the work of the United Nations
board of inquiry to investigate attacks on United
Nations-supported medical facilities in north-western
Syria. A public accounting of the board’s findings will
be essential to ensuring accountability and deterring
future attacks.

14/11/2019

utilizing the Al-Ramtha crossing, the use of which has
been authorized by the Council. We urge the United
Nations to remain prepared to utilize the Al-Ramtha
crossing as soon as the security conditions in southern
Syria allow. When they do, it is our firm belief that
purely humanitarian aid, including $9 billion that the
United States has provided since the conflict began,
should go to all Syrians in need.
While the choices of the Syrian regime embody the
very quality of dishonour, there are those whose choices
merit this Council’s praise. I therefore conclude today
by saluting the humanitarian workers who risk their
lives for the Syrian people every day. We remember
with admiration and gratitude Mr. James Le Mesurier,
founder and director of the Mayday Rescue group, and
we offer our deepest condolences to his family and his
loved ones. In his humanitarian efforts, James worked
to save the lives of civilians threatened by Syrian and
Russian air strikes. It was James’s commitment to the
Syrian people that led him to support the creation of the
White Helmets, whose life-saving work we are so very
proud to support.
The Syrian people have suffered at the hands of
the Al-Assad regime since 2011, but we have the power
to relieve that suffering. Indeed, we are obligated to
relieve it. May we delay no further in doing so, and as
Mr. Lowcock stated, there is no plan B.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for his briefing and,
in particular, for sharing with us his assessment of the
functioning of the cross-border assistance mechanism.

We call for an immediate end to these attacks
by Syrian and Russian forces in order to end the
humanitarian crisis and move the United Nations-led
political process forward, in line with resolution 2254
(2015). But it is not only these attacks that must end.
The regime must also cease using humanitarian aid
to punish its political rivals. Aid must go wherever it
is needed — without exception. Yet as we speak, the
regime is blocking United Nations humanitarian aid and
access to eastern Ghouta, Rukban and southern Syria.

The first point I would like to make is that we
must take every possible action to ensure humanitarian
access throughout Syrian territory. I will not repeat the
figures cited by Mr. Lowcock because they speak for
themselves. Cross-border humanitarian aid is essential
and irreplaceable. That point is clearly demonstrated by
the ever-growing number of recipients of cross-border
aid, at a time when hostilities continue in north-eastern
and north-western Syria. France calls on the members
of the Council to show unity and responsibility in
preserving this essential asset by adopting another
technical rollover of resolution 2165 (2014). There is
no alternative to helping the millions of people in need
while the regime of Bashar Al-Assad continues to use
humanitarian aid for political purposes.

The fragility of the security situation, especially in
southern Syria, even prevents the United Nations from

The Syrian population is preparing to face the
rigours of a new winter of war. As in previous years,

6/17

19-36729

14/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

it is imperative to have access to the whole Syrian
territory by the most direct roads and the fastest means.
The survival of men, women and children depend upon
it. It also means maintaining the whole-of-Syria aid
architecture and maintaining the role of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Amman,
which is crucial. The development of a first instalment
of the Syria Cross-border Humanitarian Fund for northeast Syria should be encouraged in that regard and
represents a major step in addressing the needs of more
than 700,000 displaced people in the region. We call
once again on actors with influence over Damascus to
ensure safe, full and unhindered humanitarian access
throughout Syrian territory, including in areas where
the regime has recently regained control and where
access remains particularly inadequate, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions and
international humanitarian law.
The second point I would like to highlight, which
we tirelessly repeat, is that respect for international
humanitarian law by all is essential and not negotiable.
The protection of civilians must be an absolute priority.
We strongly condemn attacks, specifically by the
regime, against civilians and civilian infrastructure,
especially against humanitarian and medical
infrastructure. We are very concerned about reports
of new strikes on four medical facilities in Idlib last
week. The intensification of fighting in the north-west
in recent weeks is unacceptable. The board of inquiry
set up by the Secretary-General on those attacks, to
which we give our full support, should make it possible
to shed light on those incidents. Everything must be
done to restore the ceasefire in Idlib.
It is essential to make progress in three directions
in the north-east — the continued fight against
terrorism, the protection of the civilian population and
the full implementation of the humanitarian response.
The continuation of hostilities also serves to underline
that conditions are not in place to allow the return of
refugees in conditions that respect international law.
The fight against terrorism is an indisputable crucial
issue for all of us, but it cannot be used to justify the
flagrant violations of international humanitarian law
that we are witnessing. Those who commit such acts
will have to be held accountable before the courts. We
call for the cooperation of all parties with the board
of inquiry and with the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most

S/PV. 8664

Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic.
The third point I would like to reiterate is our
support for the Syrian political process, which is the only
way out of war. Outside of the humanitarian response,
only an inclusive political solution can put an end to
the suffering of the Syrian people. Resolution 2254
(2015) remains our road map and must be implemented
in all its components. The launch of the Constitutional
Committee is a starting point, but progress must be
made parallel to other aspects of the political process.
That means creating a safe and neutral environment.
It means that weapons must be silent throughout the
entire territory. It also requires confidence-building
measures, specifically the release of detained and
abducted persons. In addition, there must be complete
clarity on the fate of victims of forced disappearances.
Such an environment is crucial for the holding of free
and fair elections, under United Nations observation, in
which all Syrians participate, including those who have
fled the war.
All of those elements are fundamental to a credible
political solution. Until such a solution is firmly in
place, France, like its partners in the European Union,
will not participate in financing reconstruction.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation thanks Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock for his briefing and commends the
efforts of the Secretariat and relevant agencies to
improve the humanitarian situation in Syria.
At present, many Syrians are still in need of
humanitarian assistance. Years of conflict have taken
a heavy toll on the country’s infrastructure and caused
many hardships, including a shortage of food, health
care and medicine. Military operations in northeastern Syria have exacerbated the fragility of the
humanitarian situation. The protracted conflict has also
caused negative impacts on the humanitarian situation.
As winter draws closer, the United Nations and all
humanitarian agencies should prepare to make a real
difference in the living conditions of the Syrian people.
Moreover, Syria’s humanitarian situation is closely
related to political, security and counter-terrorism
conditions. To resolve the humanitarian problem, we
need a holistic and integrated approach.
First, it is essential to respect and safeguard
Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity and to resolve issues by political and diplomatic

19-367297/17

S/PV.8664

The situation in the Middle East

means. A political settlement is the only realistic way
out of the Syrian conflict and the fundamental means
to improve the humanitarian situation in Syria. The
Syrian Constitutional Committee met for the first time
in Geneva in late October, followed by the meeting
of a core group of 45 members. The parties will start
the second round of discussions on 25 November.
China welcomes this development and supports the
United Nations, especially Special Envoy Pedersen in
continuing his good offices and efforts to respect the
principle of a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned process,
implementing resolution 2254 (2015) and reaching a
political solution that can accommodate the concerns
of all parties.
Secondly, it is necessary to intensify humanitarian
relief efforts, lift economic sanctions on Syria, move
ahead with the return of refugees and displaced
persons and support the Syrian Government in its
post-war reconstruction. The international community
should provide the United Nations with adequate
funding and resources to ensure the provision of
humanitarian supplies to people in need throughout
Syria. To fundamentally improve the living conditions
of the Syrian people, efforts must be made to improve
Syria’s economic situation, assist with the safe and
voluntary return of Syrian refugees, support the Syrian
Government in repairing and rebuilding housing,
people’s livelihoods, medical and education facilities
and clearing mines and other explosive remnants of
the war. China has provided Syria with food, medicine,
means of public transport, human resource training and
other assistance. A handover ceremony was held at the
port of Latakia in Syria on 24 October for the Chinese
Government’s assistance in Syria in the form of customs
inspection equipment and emergency food aid.
Thirdly, to consolidate gains on the counterterrorism front, efforts must continue to unify standards
and combat all forms of terrorism, in accordance with
Security Council resolutions and international law.
Eliminating terrorist forces is a necessary security
guarantee for the Syrian people to resume a peaceful
and ordinary life. At present, terrorist forces still
occupy a large part of Idlib. Terrorists threaten
the safety of civilians, destroy infrastructure and
worsen the humanitarian situation. The international
community should be committed to finding a holistic
solution to both counter-terrorism and humanitarian
challenges. All parties should refrain from any actions
that might erode counter-terrorism gains and work
8/17

14/11/2019

together to address risks associated with relocating
terrorists and prevent the resurgence of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. The Secretariat should pay
close attention to Syria’s counter-terrorism situation
and the movement of terrorists, look in earnest into
the issue of bringing terrorists to justice and propose
practical suggestions. When it comes to cross-border
humanitarian operations in Syria, it is imperative to
fully respect Syria’s sovereignty, take on board the
views of the Syrian Government, strictly follow the
requirements of Council resolutions and prevent abuse
of cross-border authorizations. Operations should
be conducted in compliance with the United Nations
guiding principles on humanitarian relief, the relevant
provisions of international law and the principles of
neutrality, impartiality and non-politicization. Crossborder humanitarian relief is a special relief method,
under specific circumstances, and the Council should
consider it as such in the light of the latest security
situation. The operation should be subject to United
Nations monitoring and could benefit from greater
transparency. We should enhance coordination with the
Syrian Government to ensure that only humanitarian
supplies enter the country and effectively prevent aid
supplies from falling into the hands of terrorist groups
and illegal armed groups.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): We also would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his
comprehensive update. My delegation also believes that
addressing the humanitarian challenges in Syria is a
matter of urgency. The humanitarian situation in Syria
requires our utmost attention and priority.
In the north-east and north-west Syria, we remain
concerned about the clashes and displacement, which
continue unabated. It is also extremely troubling
to learn that the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights has confirmed
31 civilian casualties in the north-east due to hostilities
since early October, as well as over 1,000 casualties
in the north-west. Millions of people are in need of
humanitarian assistance. Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock provided us with the numbers, which are
quite staggering. They are not merely statistics to be
put in regular reports — we are talking about people’s
lives, and it is important to ensure that those numbers
do not increase. It is also important that we improve
the situation through aid efforts to the greatest possible
extent. Indonesia wishes to highlight three points in
that regard.
19-36729

14/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

First, Indonesia welcomes the decreased hostilities.
However, various incidents continue to be reported. We
therefore appeal to all those with guns to permanently
cease hostilities and attacks affecting civilians. We
need a sustainable solution to the fragile conditions
on the ground. At this stage, we have to appreciate
positive developments of any scale that aim to lessen
the suffering of the Syrian people. It is our hope that the
relevant agreements will be continuously maintained
and implemented.
Secondly,
my
delegation
commends
the
efforts made by the United Nations humanitarian
team — despite the challenges they face — in
continuing to deliver humanitarian assistance to people
in need. With regard to the renewal of the cross-border
humanitarian response, we noted in Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock’s statement that there can be no
alternative to that if the United Nations is to reach
the millions of people in need. Indonesia strongly
believes that we should support the 4 million people
in need of humanitarian assistance who are currently
living in areas supported by cross-border operations.
In addition, my delegation would like to emphasize
the importance of effective and efficient cross-border
assistance with a strong monitoring mechanism. We are
ready to engage in the various activities of the Security
Council, including during the discussions on the draft
resolution on cross-border assistance.
That brings me to my third point, which is on the
critical importance of a common Council response
in addressing the humanitarian situation in Syria.
We might hold positions that sometimes oppose and
contradict one another, but that should not prevent us
from saving people’s lives. Dialogue and consensus
in the Council are critical to ensure a well-targeted
humanitarian operation in Syria and to further assist
the Syrian people in rebuilding their lives.
The conflict in Syria will never come to an end
if dialogue does not take the place of violence. We
know that dialogue is indeed challenging without
trust among all relevant parties. Indonesia therefore
commends the hard work of Special Envoy Pedersen in
facilitating dialogue and building trust and confidence
among all parties, along with the valuable support
of the international community. We are following
very closely the progress being made regarding the
intensive discussions in Geneva on the Constitutional
Committee, and we are looking forward to the next
round of discussions at the end of this month.

S/PV. 8664

Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): Allow me to
begin by thanking Mr. Mark Lowcock for his detailed
briefing, as usual.
Syria and its people are at a unique juncture, at
which the prospects for peace and stability are within
their grasp. As South Africa has stated previously, the
situation in Syria must be resolved through negotiations
and dialogue, and we continue to call on all parties
to exert every effort towards the full implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015). We see the recent launch
and first meeting of the long-awaited Constitutional
Committee in Geneva as an encouraging sign. However,
we must also remain cognizant of the impact of recent
developments along the Turkey-Syria border on the
progress achieved, both on the political track and on
the humanitarian situation.
South Africa remains gravely concerned about the
dire humanitarian situation in Syria and the negative
impact on the Syrian people of the recent hostilities.
Although we have noted the various peace agreements
and memorandums of understanding, and that the levels
of violence have decreased, clashes between parties
continue to further aggravate the dismal circumstances
that many civilians are already facing. The continued
threat of violence and destruction cannot be acceptable,
particularly with regard to the most vulnerable
members of society — women, children the elderly
and those with disabilities. South Africa reiterates
its call on all parties to comply with their obligations
under international law, particularly with regard to the
protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure.
The circumstances in which innocent civilians
find themselves behove us, as Security Council
members, to do more to ensure that their basic needs
and requirements are met. We must also ensure
that the recent developments in the north of Syria
do not jeopardize the United Nations cross-border
humanitarian operations. Let me take this opportunity
to pay tribute to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and its partners for the vital work
they do in challenging environments in order to ensure
that those in need receive the necessary, and in many
cases life-saving, assistance. The mandate for that
cross-border assistance is due for renewal at the end of
the year. South Africa will work with the co-penholders
and all interested parties to find common ground and
unity in that regard.

19-367299/17

S/PV.8664

The situation in the Middle East

In conclusion, South Africa calls on all parties to
exercise the utmost restraint to ensure a de-escalation
of hostilities, as well as for respect for Syria’s territorial
integrity and sovereignty. We also look forward to
Special Envoy Pedersen’s briefing on the progress
made in the work of the Constitutional Committee and
welcome the holding of the second round of talks at
the end of November. Every small step towards peace
and stability should be encouraged to the benefit of
all Syrians.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): Let me first thank
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his
informative briefing.
Every day, the situation in Syria becomes more
complex. But one thing remains constant — the enormous
suffering of the civilian population in Syria on a scale
that is unique in today’s world. As we are painfully
aware, civilians — including children — continue to
pay the highest price as a result of the ongoing hostilities
in the country. In recent times alone, dozens have
been killed and injured during simultaneous ongoing
hostilities in north-eastern and north-western Syria. We
once again reiterate our call on all parties to the conflict
to implement all ceasefire agreements and to ensure the
unhindered and safe access of all humanitarian actors
to the entire territory of Syria. Most important, access
must be granted in priority areas, including cross-border
deliveries of humanitarian assistance, in a manner that
ensures the safety of humanitarian personnel.
While much of the international community’s
attention is now focused on north-eastern Syria, in the
north-western part of the country, after a temporary
break from hostilities in Idlib in October, there has
unfortunately been a recent upsurge in air strikes
and ground-based strikes, including yet more attacks
affecting medical facilities. Faced once again with
those unacceptable attacks, we would like to strongly
emphasize the need for the full compliance of all parties
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. In that context,
let me express Poland’s support for the work of the
United Nations board of inquiry to investigate attacks
on United Nations-supported medical facilities in
north-western Syria. We also underline the obligation
borne by all parties to the conflict for the protection
of civilians and civilian infrastructure. The protection
of civilians should be at the centre of our debate. We
remain deeply troubled by the severe situation of
the most vulnerable victims of the Syrian conflict,
10/17

14/11/2019

especially children and women, members of religious
minorities and internally displaced persons. We must
put in place practical measures to effectively prevent or
minimize civilian casualties and incidental damage to
civilian objects.
Let me reiterate our strong support for the
cross-border assistance mechanism, which enables
humanitarian supplies to cross into Syria, provide aid to
those in urgent need and support basic service delivery.
Without that, it would be extremely difficult or — let us
be frank — impossible to ensure life-saving assistance
for millions and to reach those in need. Examples of
the usefulness of that mechanism could be multiplied,
but let me just recall the words of doctors working in
Idlib who told us that, without cross-border assistance,
they are simply not able to work. As we heard from
Mr. Lowcock, without the cross-border mechanism we
would face catastrophic humanitarian consequences.
Let me therefore join other Council members in calling
for the timely extension of resolution 2165 (2014).
Let me conclude by underlining that there can be
no military solution to the Syrian conflict. A political
agreement remains the only way towards peace. That
requires a genuine political transition in line with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex).
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes this meeting on the latest
developments in the humanitarian situation in Syria
and commends Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, on his comprehensive briefing.
My delegation notes with concern the persistence
of violence that has resulted in the loss of human
lives in north-east and north-west Syria. Côte d’Ivoire
strongly condemns those attacks on the population
and the destruction of civilian infrastructure, which
contribute to the deterioration of the situation and
hamper efforts to provide vital humanitarian assistance
to those in need.
It should be noted that the fighting thwarts ongoing
mediation initiatives and efforts, including the agreement
signed on 17 October between the United States of
America and Turkey on the safe zone in north-eastern
part of Syria and the memorandum of understanding
signed by Russia and Turkey on 22 October on border
control in Syria. Those agreements, the conclusion of
which my delegation welcomed, made it possible to
19-36729

14/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

stop the offensive against Kurdish forces in north-east
Syria and to significantly reduce hostilities.
My country urges all parties to put an end to violence
against populations and to respect their obligations
to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure, in
accordance with international humanitarian law and
human rights law. We also call on all other actors in the
Syrian crisis to proceed with the dialogue, with a view
to achieving de-escalation and a definitive ceasefire, a
necessary precondition for addressing the humanitarian
challenges in the region. In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire
welcomes efforts to ensure the continuation of crossborder humanitarian deliveries to the thousands of
people affected by the conflict. My delegation therefore
supports the renewal of the mandate of the cross-border
humanitarian aid delivery mechanism.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire calls on the
international community once again to maintain its
humanitarian assistance efforts in Syria and reiterates
its support for the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy
in his tireless efforts to find a peaceful and lasting
solution to the crisis. We hope that the Geneva talks
launched on 30 October among the Syrian parties will
provide the political space necessary to achieve that
objective, in order to enable the whole region to return
to peace, stability and development.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We also
thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for his valuable briefing.
Peru notes with regret the serious situation of
vulnerability that the civilian population is experiencing
in various areas throughout Syrian territory. That is
occurring despite the professionalism and sense of duty
of personnel from the United Nations and humanitarian
agencies, such as the Red Cross and the Red Crescent,
among others deployed in Syria. We are especially
alarmed by the increasing number of internally
displaced persons — 200,000 since 9 October — and
the precarious conditions that they have been facing,
which have been exacerbated by the harsh winter.
It is precisely the risks and suffering that Syrian
citizens face on a daily basis that make immediate
and unrestricted access to humanitarian assistance
imperative, through the efficient use of all available
modalities, including cross-border assistance. In that
regard, Peru highlights the sophistication and security
offered by the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism
for the Syrian Arab Republic at designated border
crossings, in terms of strictly controlling and verifying

S/PV. 8664

humanitarian deliveries. Those guarantees, together
with the lack of real alternative means of accessing the
more than 4 million people served under that modality,
lead us to support the extension of the provisions outlined
in resolution 2165 (2014) and subsequent resolutions.
We hope that this crucial issue will be addressed in
the coming weeks from the perspective of alleviating
human suffering. To that end, we believe that the
Council must remain attentive to developments on
the ground with a view to maintaining an effective
ceasefire in the north-west of the country, while
promoting its extension throughout the Syrian territory.
We also believe that it is crucial to continue prioritizing
the sustained meeting of the basic needs of the civilians
who remain in Al-Hol and Rukban, as well as promoting
comprehensive solutions to ensure their voluntary,
dignified and safe return.
Accountability is essential to preserving
international legality, just as it is essential to the
prospects for sustainable peace in Syria. We therefore
welcome the start of the work of the board of inquiry
established by the Secretary-General, which we hope
will help to clarify the facts and responsibilities in the
attacks perpetrated on facilities covered by the system
to prevent attacks on humanitarian targets.
I conclude by reaffirming that only the achievement
of a political solution, on the basis of resolution 2254
(2015) and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex),
will make it possible to overcome the humanitarian
disaster that continues to affect Syria, with full respect
for its sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Lowcock for his
briefing. We particularly appreciate the valuable
impressions that he shared with us following his recent
field visit. We listened very carefully to his remarks
on the cross-border humanitarian operation, which
provides assistance to approximately 4 million people
in the north of the Syrian Arab Republic.
In that regard, we express our strong commitment
to the renewal of resolution 2165 (2014) for another
year, which has saved the lives of millions of affected
people through the cross-border mechanism since 2014.
We believe that this has been a fundamental instrument
used by the Security Council to illustrate that, when
efforts and willingness are united towards a single
goal, it is possible to make decisions that impact the

19-3672911/17

S/PV.8664

The situation in the Middle East

lives and health of real people who would otherwise not
be able to survive.
We know that with each military escalation the
humanitarian needs of the population deepen and
increase. We therefore view with much regret a new
surge in hostilities in Idlib, where we are already seeing
camps for displaced persons reach maximum capacity
and where the imminent arrival of winter presents the
moral obligation to urgently satisfy those necessities.
With another winter, what will happen to the thousands
of people who, after the wave of hostilities that began
in April, are still without shelter? I wonder what would
happen if from January onwards it were not possible to
facilitate humanitarian access in order to provide them
with the provisions they need to shield themselves from
the cold.
Asking such questions would not be necessary if
the parties to the conflict fulfilled their responsibility
under international humanitarian law to protect the
civilian population and make their livelihoods viable.
The obstruction of and attacks on civilian health, water
and electricity infrastructure are a flagrant violation of
those principles and have an immediate negative impact
on people’s lives and dignity.
I take this opportunity to express our support for the
recently established board of inquiry into the incidents
in north-west Syria, and we hope that at least part of its
conclusions and recommendations will be made public.
The situation in the north-east of Syria has
become a matter of deep concern for the Dominican
Republic, in particular because of the consequences of
insecurity and uncertainty among the population, as
well as the hundreds of thousands who have had to flee
as a result of the recent hostilities. The humanitarian
needs of these people on the move go far beyond the
physical. There is also a psychological component that
will be incredibly difficult to overcome. And we must
focus attention on the millions of refugees currently
in Turkey. While recognizing Turkey’s immense
generosity and humanitarian vocation, we would like
to emphasize the importance of the arrangements for
repatriating millions of these refugees to the so-called
safe zone. These arrangements must not only be made
in close coordination with the relevant international
refugee entities, but also with a view to maintaining
these people’s security and dignity by ensuring their
meaningful participation in decisions about their future.
12/17

14/11/2019

Finally, we commend the holding of the first
meeting of the Constitutional Committee in October.
We reiterate our commitment to the broad political
process and the inclusive and renewed spirit fostered
by the Special Envoy. We insist that this element
of the process must be supported by even greater
confidence-building measures that can have a tangible
impact for the Syrian population. Achieving a national
ceasefire and releasing detainees and information on
missing persons are only a few examples of these kinds
of urgent measures.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): My delegation joins others in thanking
Mr. Mark Lowcock for his detailed and useful update.
We reiterate our full support for him and his work.
As Mr. Lowcock described, the overall picture
of the humanitarian and security situation in Syria
remains troubling, given that the civilian population
in the north-east of the country continues to suffer
terribly as a result of air strikes, land attacks, shootings,
executions and fatalities due to improvised explosive
devices and remnants of war. This deplorable situation
shows that the ceasefire agreed to last month by the
United States and Turkey in order to supervise the
withdrawal of Kurdish forces from the border between
Turkey and Syria continues to be violated. The security
situation in the north-west, particularly in Idlib, has
not improved either, with increases in both land and
air attacks, as well as deliberate bombings of medical
facilities, which constitute war crimes, as we have
frequently emphasized.
Considering this appalling situation, we must
continue in our efforts to de-escalate the situation and
protect civilians in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and international humanitarian law.
The Government of Equatorial Guinea is particularly
concerned about the precarious human rights,
humanitarian and security situations in Syria that
thousands of highly vulnerable civilians, including
women and children, are dealing with while being held
in inhumane conditions in the overcrowded Al-Hol
and Rukban camps. We urge the United Nations,
humanitarian organizations and the entire international
community to spare no effort in providing an adequate
response to help prevent further deterioration of the
humanitarian crisis in Syria. As UNICEF recently
highlighted, that will involve a response plan estimated
at $3 billion for improving water supplies, providing
sanitation and hygiene services and health and nutrition
19-36729

14/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

assistance and vaccinating thousands of children. While
the hostilities persist, my Government also affirms that
the delivery of cross-border humanitarian aid remains
a priority that must be guaranteed by the Security
Council. To that end, it would be very helpful if as
usual we were unanimous regarding the next renewal
of that aid.
Finally, we want to once again highlight the
significant progress that has been made in the political
process within the framework of the Constitutional
Committee, which continues to be the only viable
means of providing a lasting solution for normalizing
the situation in Syria, in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015).
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I would like to begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his
comprehensive and informative briefing. We agree that
we continue to see the most difficult humanitarian and
military situation in the territories outside the control
of the Syrian Government on the eastern bank of the
Euphrates and in the Idlib de-escalation zone and the
United States-occupied zone around Al-Tanf.
Our colleagues have given a number of fair and
critical assessments of the situation in north-eastern
Syria. We want to point out that the issues in this area
are not new and were not created by the Governments
of Syria, Russia or Turkey. To a significant degree, the
root cause of the destabilization in the area beyond the
Euphrates is its illegal occupation and the dangerous
experiment in demographic engineering introduced
there to spite the Syrian Government. Achieving strong,
lasting stabilization in Syria as a whole is possible
only if the sovereignty and territorial integrity of this
country is respected. Syria must be liberated from the
illegitimate foreign military presence there as soon as
possible, even if its oil resources, so important to our
American colleagues, are at stake. They belong not to
the United States but to the Syrian people, for whom
the actions of the United States are simply plundering
and pillaging. Incidentally, the restoration to Syria of
its oilfields would constitute a genuine contribution by
the United States to the humanitarian assistance efforts
for the people of Syria.
Russia has been trying to rectify the situation to
the best of its ability in order to avoid a humanitarian
catastrophe and civilian deaths. The situation in northeastern Syria has been brought under control thanks

S/PV. 8664

to the signing of a Russian-Turkish memorandum on
22 October in Sochi. Russian military police have begun
joint patrols of the zone along the border, while Syrian
Government troops have been sent to the agreed border
posts and Kurdish self-defence units have withdrawn.
Turning to the Idlib de-escalation zone, we once
again heard nothing, or nothing clear, in members’
statements about the main thing, which is that the area
continues to be a hotbed of international terrorism,
and that is precisely why Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi,
the leader of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), was hiding in Idlib province, while the socalled international coalition was even obliged to
launch strikes in the area earlier. We can see that our
colleagues are becoming increasingly convinced that it
is controlled by terrorists who are utilizing the civilian
population as human shields.
At the same time, militants continue to engage
in provocations and shell Government troops.
Approximately 600 such attacks were recorded in
October alone. One of the heaviest attacks took place
on 11 and 12 November, targeting Tal Turki, Madaya,
Khwein Al-Kabir and other villages in southern Idlib.
There was shelling of residential areas of Aleppo on
10 November in which a child was killed and dozens of
other people injured. There are reports of executions,
detentions and violent dispersals of demonstrations
by ordinary people protesting the terrorists’ control
in Idlib, as Mr. Lowcock mentioned. In the silence
about those crimes we see yet another attempt to divide
terrorists into good ones and bad ones. Whatever names
these groups go by — ISIL, Jabhat Al-Nusra, Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham — we want to once again warn against
flirting with jihadists for short-term interests, whether
by providing them with political cover or financial or
material support, and especially by portraying them as
so-called moderate radicals.
Today, unfortunately, we once again heard
accusations that the Syrian army and its allies conducted
air strikes on civilian facilities in Idlib. As we learned
from other media outlets, the source of that information
was once again the infamous White Helmets. We have
spoken in detail about the problem of the reliability
of the information shovelled out by media outlets
and regurgitated in our Security Council colleagues’
statements. On 16 September we held a detailed press
conference in which, based on irrefutable evidence,
we pointed out that some of the most serious-sounding
cases of alleged attacks on civilian targets in Idlib

19-3672913/17

S/PV.8664

The situation in the Middle East

by the Russian and Syrian armed forces had actually
turned out to be fake. However, as a number of our
colleagues’ statements today showed, that information
was ignored. It is of course far more convenient to talk
about the humanitarian problems in Syria without doing
anything to save civilians from terrorists.
For our part, we continue to work together with the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) with the aim of resolving the humanitarian
situation, including in the interests of making the
de-confliction mechanism more accurate. We have
frequently spoken about its existing problems. We
welcome the fact that mistakes were acknowledged — and
we hope that they were unintentional — in relaying
the coordinates and descriptions of alleged civilian
facilities that when verified turned out to be bases and
shelters for militants. Against that backdrop, we are
pleased that OCHA intends to review the methodology
for collecting the de-confliction mechanism data,
which is a step in the right direction.
We share the concerns expressed today about the
danger of an increase in the terrorist threat in various
parts of Syria that are not yet under Government control.
We call on those who maintained or established prisons
in north-eastern Syria not to shift the responsibility
of preventing jihadists of every stripe from spreading
throughout the region onto others.
Russia, together with the Government of Syria,
is taking steps to create the necessary conditions for
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs). Almost 2 million Syrian citizens have now
returned to their homes, of whom more than 1.3 million
were internally displaced. A total of 914 educational
and 212 medical institutions have been restored, and
electricity, water supply and industrial facilities are
also being built or restored, numbers that are irrefutable
proof of the effectiveness of the measures taken by the
Syrian authorities to create the necessary conditions
for the voluntary, dignified and safe return of refugees.
We call on international organizations, including the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and other relevant humanitarian bodies, to
step up their efforts to that end. Unfortunately, we have
seen that such activity is often artificially held up.
With the assistance of the Government of Syria and
Russia’s Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides
in the Syrian Arab Republic, together with the United
Nations and the International Committee of the Red
14/17

14/11/2019

Cross, efforts are continuing to resettle people from
the Rukban camp. However, owing to the efforts of
the armed groups in the area to maintain their control
there, that work has stalled. We hope that the problem
of refugees and IDPs there will be resolved as soon as
possible. As for the Al-Hol camp, the situation there
continues to be disastrous owing to humanitarian
agencies’ limited access and to funding shortages.
The President: I would like to ask the representative
of the Russian Federation to start wrapping up, as it has
been nearly been 10 minutes since he began.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I am about to conclude, Madam President.
Everything has got worse since a significant
number of refugees from other camps in the northeast moved there. Half of the residents are women and
children. It is high time to think about handing over the
illegally occupied territory to the Syrian authorities in
the interests of resolving the IDP problem.
Mine clearance continues to be a pressing issue.
We welcome the start of work on United Nations Mine
Action Service projects in Syria. Russia is involved
in demining in Syria both in a national capacity and
through its contribution to the Mine Action Service.
In that regard, we urge all countries that are genuinely
concerned about Syria’s humanitarian welfare to join
these and other humanitarian efforts and to deliver
humanitarian assistance to all Syrians, without
discrimination, politicization or preconditions. That
includes not only post-conflict reconstruction projects
but also lifting unilateral sanctions in the interest of
normalizing Syrians’ lives.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize that despite
various factors and spikes in tensions, the situation in
Syria continues to return to normal, primarily as a result
of the gradual restoration of increasing areas of territory
to the control of the legitimate Government. One
positive factor was the launch of Syria’s Constitutional
Committee in Geneva on 30 October. Its establishment
and launch of its work, with the decisive assistance
of the Astana format, are undeniable achievements
for the Syrian people. We welcome the first round of
inter-Syrian dialogue, which is aimed at defining the
country’s future. As the guarantor countries of the
Astana process, Russia, Turkey and Iran are ready to
continue to help the Syrian parties and Special Envoy
Pedersen in the quest for a political solution to the
Syrian conflict. We believe that the situation on the
19-36729

14/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

ground should not be allowed to influence the work of
the Committee.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I once again thank the Under-Secretary-General
and his teams on the ground.
The previous speaker referred to the normalization
of the situation in Syria. I have to say that what we
heard from the Under-Secretary-General today does not
sound much like normality to me. We continue to have
huge concerns about the situation on the ground and the
ongoing struggle to deliver humanitarian assistance,
which is still not straightforward, to put it mildly. From
what has been said, my understanding is that assistance
is used to punish or reward particular communities or
areas for their perceived loyalty. The situation on the
ground is therefore far from improved.
We share the sentiments of other colleagues who said
that it is vital that we renew resolution 2165 (2014) for
another 12 months. It is not a political tool but a lifeline
for those in desperate need. The United Kingdom is one
of the largest donors to the Syrian response, and we
will continue to work with the United Nations to ensure
that our funding supports a principled, predictable and
coherent response, prioritizing humanitarian needs
through both in-country and cross-border operations,
and to ensure that the current structures for supporting
that are maintained.
At this juncture, I want to echo what the
representative of France said about reconstruction. I
want to put down a marker with regard to our concern
about the humanitarian implications of recent events in
north-eastern Syria. We hope that the United Nations
can scale up its response in the area. Humanitarian
actors must have unrestricted access to people in need
and be protected from any violence. We share the
concerns of others about returns, which must be in line
with internationally agreed principles. We also share the
concerns of others about the operation of international
humanitarian law.
One of the speakers referred to salvaging
individuals from the hands of terrorists. I think that if
there is any salvaging being done it is by the rescue
workers clearing bodies out of places like Idlib, where
the situation looks less and less like a ceasefire every
day. We too remain deeply troubled by the reports
of renewed air strikes. Any further escalation in the

S/PV. 8664

violence will have inconceivable humanitarian costs,
so we appeal to all the parties to make sure they do
everything they can to avoid that. With regard to Idlib,
I want to take this opportunity to call on the SecretaryGeneral to make public the findings of the board of
inquiry’s investigation into attacks on United Nations
de-conflicted and supported infrastructure in northwestern Syria.
I want to conclude by joining the United States
representative in what she said about the White
Helmets and about the death of their founder, James
Le Mesurier, in particular. Were it not for this group
of Syrian volunteers, a great many more people would
have suffered and would still be suffering at the hands
of the Syrian authorities. We have heard Russia and
Syria make many charges against them. The Russian
Ministry of Foreign Affairs only recently referred
to Mr. Le Mesurier as a spy. In the wake of his sad
death, I want to take this opportunity to once again
state categorically that he was not a spy. He was a
humanitarian who was working for the good of the
people of Syria, which, if I may say so, is more than
their own Government has been doing.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would first like to
support and underline what you about the White
Helmets, Madam President. However, I would like to
ask a question of the Russian representative relating
to what you said about the board of inquiry and with
regard to the press conference that Russia gave some
weeks ago about the attacks conducted in Syria and
who was behind them. In that context, I note that today
there are news reports about the board of inquiry and
the possibility that Russia might be putting pressure on
the Secretary-General to keep its findings secret. I just
wanted to ask the Russian representative to assure us
that this is not the case and that he fully supports the
board of inquiry and the publication of its results.
The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I see that the representative of Germany still
reads the New York Times. We long ago turned to more
reliable sources of information and advise him to do
the same.

19-3672915/17

S/PV.8664

The situation in the Middle East

As we understand it, the board of inquiry is an
internal mechanism of the United Nations. Its report
will be presented to the Secretary-General and
it is for him to decide what to do with it. There are
corresponding procedures that the Secretary-General
has to follow. For the rest of it, the representative of
Germany can listen to our regular reports to the media,
press conferences and so forth. He can rest assured that
they are far more reliable than his sources.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): There is a big, raging elephant in Syria
that some Council members do not see. There is
an occupation by the United States, which is also
conducting an armed robbery of Syrian oil. There is
a Turkish occupation. There are operations designed
to change the demographics of some areas along the
border between Syria and Turkey. There is terrorism in
Idlib perpetrated by terrorist groups that are publicly
supported by their sponsors. Certain Governments,
some of which are unfortunately represented here in the
Council, are encouraging separatist groups in Syria in
a process similar to what their clumsy policies led to in
Iraq. There are Governments that are refusing to take
back their terrorists from Syria. Some are choosing
to ignore the big raging elephant in the room. All
they care about is moving forward with the extension
of the mandate in resolution 2165 (2014) on crossborder operations. The attempts to renew that mandate
reflect a sad reality in the Council, however. In other
words, the Council is not seeking to implement its own
resolutions, which all stress respect for the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria. We will come
back to this point later on. My delegation would like to
affirm the following points.
First, all Member States, inside and outside the
Council, must commit to respecting the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic, pursuant to the principles of international
law, the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and the Security Council’s resolutions on Syria, which
number approximately 25.
Secondly, the Security Council must assume its
responsibility to end the illegitimate presence of foreign
forces in my country. It must compel the Governments
of known States to end their attacks, their support of
terrorist groups, their sponsorship of separatist militias
16/17

14/11/2019

and their collusion with those militias to loot the assets
and resources of Syria, including Syrian oil, even
while some believe themselves to be the guardians and
brokers of that oil, in violation of the international law
and the Charter. It is essential to support the efforts
of the Syrian Government and its allies to combat
terrorism, pursuant to the relevant Council resolutions,
at a time when certain members of the Council are
doing everything they can to undermine the efforts
of the Syrian Government and its allies to combat the
terrorism of Al-Baghdadi’s Da’esh and Al-Julani’s
Al-Nusra Front in Idlib governorate.
Some countries have boasted of carrying out an
alleged operation in Idlib that led to the death of the
leader of Da’esh and a number of other leaders. That
alleged operation reaffirms what we and the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to
resolutions and 1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015) concerning
ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities have said, which is that terrorist
groups control Idlib. They are using its residents as
human shields. It is therefore our obligation as a State
to free our fellow citizens there from the control of
those groups. There are some on the Council who
have been hypocritical enough to present themselves
as heroes who killed Al-Baghdadi. At the same time
they have ignored the fact that they filled the halls of
the United Nations with indignation and mobilized the
Organization’s mechanisms against the Syrian State
when my country sought to eradicate that terrorist and
his group, as well as Al-Julani, the head of the Al-Nusra
Front, and others in Idlib. The same people targeted the
Syrian Arab Army as it was attempting to reach areas
to the east of the Euphrates River in order to eradicate
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, as has happened
at Al-Tharda Mountain in Deir ez-Zor, the area of
Al-Hajeen and elsewhere. Notice the link between
Al-Baghdadi, Al-Julani and Mr. Le Mesurier in Idlib.
Fourthly, there must be an immediate lifting
of the unilateral coercive measures imposed on the
Syrian people; those measures constitute an act of
economic terrorism. They are a collective punishment
against the Syrian people. They themselves rebut
the allegations and lies of those who imposed them
claiming that they had done so to benefit Syrians.
What kind of humanitarian act deprives Syrians of
milk, food, medication, medical equipment, healthcare requirements or even wheelchairs for the disabled?
19-36729

14/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Those are all very important things that Mr. Lowcock
does not see.
Fifthly, it must be recognized that the efforts of the
Syrian State and its humanitarian action partners, such
as the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, are the main factor in
improving the humanitarian situation despite the many
challenges they face. It must also be recognized that
United Nations and its agencies would have failed had
it not been for the cooperation, facilities and conditions
of safety and security that were provided to them by the
Syrian Government.
Sixthly, an end must be put to promoting the
violation of Syrian sovereignty through useless
cross-border operations and offices that are hostile to
Syria, such as the Gaziantep Office, whose continued
work represents a reward to Erdoğan for sponsoring
terrorism, occupying Syrian territory and continuing
to blackmail and threaten Europe and the world. There
must be engagement with the Syrian Government within
the framework of an ethical, realistic and credible legal
relationship, including cooperating with it as a key
partner in the humanitarian and development fields, free
from any political preconditions, dictates or attempts at
blackmail aimed at undermining reconstruction efforts
and the return of displaced persons.
Artificial terrorist groups must no longer be
qualified as humanitarian groups, as is the case with the
White Helmets terrorist group. European and American
newspapers two days ago reaffirmed that the founder of
the White Helmets, James Le Mesurier, was a British
intelligence officer. We have stated that fact time and
again, but some have tried to cover it up. The promotion
of information campaigns spreading lies concerning the
use of barrel bombs and chemical weapons got under
way, and shortly thereafter followed the appearance of

S/PV. 8664

the White Helmets. Iraq had been invaded and Baghdad
had been occupied, and shortly thereafter Al-Baghdadi
appeared. Some States deployed Al-Nusra Front
terrorists across the line of separation in the occupied
Syrian Golan, and shortly after that Al-Julani appeared.
Notice this sophistic link: the occupation of Iraq and
the invasion of Baghdad, and then we got Al-Baghdadi.
Terrorists are deployed in the Golan, then Al-Julani
appears. Claims are made of the use of barrel bombs
and chemical weapons, and shortly thereafter a British
intelligence officer named Le Mesurier appeared. All
of them are connected to Idlib.
The President: I will now make a very short
additional statement in my national capacity.
I wanted to say again that the late James Le
Mesurier was not a serving British officer. He did begin
his career in the British military; my Military Adviser
here served with him. He then left the armed forces,
became a humanitarian and founded Mayday Rescue
and the White Helmets. I want that to be on the record.
The second thing I wanted to do was address the
Syrian Ambassador’s point that if you have a crossborder resolution, that somehow contravenes Syrian
sovereignty and territorial integrity. It does not. We
have the resolution precisely because of sovereignty
and territorial integrity. In other words, we need
authorization. I did not want a misimpression to gain
currency there.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

19-3672917/17
