IX. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

5. Requests the Special Committee to be mindful of the
importance of reaching general agreement whenever it has
significance for the outcome of its work;
6. Decides that the Special Committee shall accept the
participation of observers of Member States, including
participation in the meetings of its working group;
1. Requests the Special Committee to concentrate its
work in the framework of its working group;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Committee with the necessary facilities and services;
9. Invites the Special Committee to submit a report on
its work to the General Assembly at its forty-first session,
containing, inter a/ia, the concrete results achieved
through the discussion of the elements referred to in paragraph 3 above;
I 0. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Report of the Special
Committee on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principle
of Non-Use of Force in International Relations".
112th plenary meeting
11 December 1985

40/71. Report of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work of
its eighteenth session, 33
Recalling that the object of the Commission is the promotion of the progressive harmonization and unification
of international trade law,
Recalling, in this regard, its resolution 2205 (XXI) of I 7
December 1966, as well as all its other resolutions relating
to the work of the Commission,
Recalling also its resolutions 320 I (S-VI) and 3202 (SVI) of I May 1974, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975,
Reaffirming its conviction that the progressive
harmoniz.ation and unification of international trade law,
in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of international trade, especially those affecting the developing
countries, would significantly contribute to universal economic co-operation among all States on a basis of equality,
equity and common interest and to the elimination of discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to the
well-being of all peoples,
Having regard for the need to take into account the different social and legal systems in harmonizing and unifying international trade law,
Stressing the value of participation by States at all levels
of economic development, including developing countries,
in the process of harmonizing and unifying international
trade law,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
on the work of its eighteenth session;
2. Commends the Commission for the progress made
in its work and for having reached decisions by consensus;
3. Calls upon the Commission to continue to take
account of the relevant provisions of the resolutions concerning the new international economic order, as adopted
by the General Assembly at its sixth and seventh special
sessions, and reaffirms the importance, in particular for
33 Ibid., Supplement No. 17 (N40117).
34 Ibid., annex I.

307

developing countries, of the work carried out by the Working Group on the New International Economic Order on a
legal guide on the drawing up of international contracts for
construction of industrial works;
4. Notes with particular satisfaction the completion
and adoption by the Commission of the Model Law on
International Commercial Arbitration; 34
5. Welcomes the work of the Commission on the legal
implications of automated data processing on the flow of
international trade as an activity of vital importance to
States at all levels of economic development, including
developing countries, and in this connection:
(a) Commends the Commission for its recommendation on the legal value of computer records 35 which, in
conjunction with the preparatory report submitted to the
Commission by the Secretary-General, 36 aids in clarifying
the legal issues;
(b) Calls upon Governments and international organizations to take action, where appropriate, in conformity
with the recommendation of the Commission 35 so as to
ensure legal security in the context of the widest possible
use of automated data processing in international trade;
6. Reaffirms the mandate of the Commission, as the
core legal body within the United Nations system in the
field of international trade law, to co-ordinate legal activities in this field in order to avoid duplication of effort and
to promote efficiency, consistency and coherence in the
unification and harmonization of international trade law,
and, in this connection, recommends that the Commission, through its secretariat, should continue to maintain
close co-operation with the other international organs and
organizations, including regional organizations, active in
the field of international trade law;
7. Reaffirms also the importance, in particular for the
developing countries, of the work of the Commission concerned with training and assistance in the field of international trade law and the desirability for it to sponsor symposia and seminars, in particular those organized on a
regional basis, to promote such training and assistance,
and, in this connection:
(a) Expresses its appreciation to those Governments,
regional organizations and institutions that have collaborated with the secretariat of the Commission in organizing
regional seminars and symposia in the field of international trade law;
(b) Welcomes the initiatives being undertaken by the
Commission and its secretariat to collaborate with other
organizations and institutions in the organization of
regional seminars;
(c) Invites Governments, international organizations
and institutions to assist the secretariat of the Commission
in financing and organizing regional seminars and symposia, in particular in developing countries;
(d) Invites Governments, relevant United Nations
organs, organizations, institutions and individuals to make
voluntary contributions to allow the resumption of the
programme of the Commission for the award of fellowships on a regular basis to candidates from developing
countries to enable them to participate in such symposia
and seminars;
8. Stresses the importance of bringing into effect the
conventions emanating from the work of the Commission
for the global unification and harmonization of international trade law;
9. Recommends that the Commission should continue
its work on the topics included in its programme of work;
35 /hid. Supplement No 17 (N41J 17), ,·hap. VI. sect. B.
16 A/CN 9,265.

308

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

10. Expresses its appreciation of the important role
played by the International Trade Law Branch of the
Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat, as the substantive
secretariat of the Commission, in assisting in the implementation of the work programme of the Commission.
112th plenary meeting
11 December 1985

40/72. Model Law on International Commercial
Arbitration of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the value of arbitration as a method of settling disputes arising in international commercial relations,
Convinced that the establishment of a model law on
arbitration that is acceptable to States with different legal,
social and economic systems contributes to the development of harmonious international economic relations,
Noting that the Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration 34 was adopted by the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law at its eighteenth
session, after due deliberation and extensive consultation
with arbitral institutions and individual experts on international commercial arbitration,
Convinced that the Model Law, together with the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign
Arbitral Awards 37 and the Arbitration Rules of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law38 recommended by the General Assembly in its resolution 31/
98 of 15 December 1976, significantly contributes to the
establishment of a unified legal framework for the fair and
efficient settlement of disputes arising in international
commercial relations,
I. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the text
of the Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law, together with the travaux preparatoires from
the eighteenth session of the Commission, to Governments and to arbitral institutions and other interested
bodies, such as chambers of commerce;
2. Recommends that all States give due consideration
to the Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration, in view of the desirability of uniformity of the law of
arbitral procedures and the specific needs of international
commercial arbitration practice.
112th plenary meeting
11 December 1985

40/73. Consideration of effective measures to
enhance the protection, security and safety of
diplomatic and consular missions and representatives
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 39
Emphasizing the important role of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives, as well as of missions
and representatives to international intergovernmental
organizations and officials of such organizations, in the
maintenance of international peace and the promotion of
friendly relations among States and also the need for
enhancing global understanding thereof,
37 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 330, No. 4739, p. 38.
38 United Nations publication, Sales No. E.77.V.6.

Convinced that respect for the principles and rules of
international law governing diplomatic and consular relations, in particular those aimed at ensuring the inviolability of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives, is a basic prerequisite for the normal conduct of
relations among States and for the fulfilment of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Deeply concerned about the continued large number of
failures to respect the inviolability of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives, and about the serious
threat presented by such violations to the maintenance of
normal and peaceful international relations, which are
necessary for co-operation among States,
Alarmed by the increase of acts of violence against diplomatic and consular representatives, as well as against
representatives to international intergovernmental organizations and officials of such organizations, which endanger
or take innocent lives and seriously impede the normal
work of such representatives and officials,
Expressing its sympathy for the victims of illegal acts
against diplomatic and consular representatives and missions, as well as against representatives and missions to
international intergovernmental organizations and officials
of such organizations,
Emphasizing the duty of States to take all appropriate
steps, as required by international law:
(a) To protect the premises of diplomatic and consular
missions, as well as of missions to international intergovernmental organizations,
(b) To prevent any attacks on diplomatic and consular
representatives, as well as on representatives to international intergovernmental organizations and officials of
such organizations,
(c) To apprehend the offenders and to bring them to
justice,
Noting that, in spite of the call by the General Assembly
at its previous sessions, not all States have yet become parties to the relevant conventions concerning the inviolability of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives,
Convinced that the reporting procedures established
under General Assembly resolution 35/168 of 15 December 1980 and further elaborated in later Assembly resolutions are important steps in the efforts to enhance the protection, security and safety of diplomatic and consular
missions and representatives,
Desiring to maintain and further strengthen those
reporting procedures,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Strongly condemns acts of violence against diplomatic and consular missions and representatives, as well
as against missions and representatives to international
intergovernmental organizations and officials of such
organizations, and emphasizes that such acts cannot be
justified;
3. Emphasizes the importance of enhanced awareness
throughout the world of the necessity of ensuring the protection, security and safety of such missions, representatives and officials, as well as of the role of the United
Nations in this regard;
4. Urges States to observe and to implement the
principles and rules of international law governing l.iiplomatic and consular relations and, in particular, to take all
necessary measures in conformity with their international
obligations to ensure effectively the protection, security
39 A/40/453 and Add.1-10.
