S/PRST/2015/4

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 January 2015
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7362nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 19 January 2015, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist acts”, the President of the
Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council condemns in the strongest terms the most recent
escalation in attacks perpetrated by Boko Haram, in particular, the 10 and
11 January 2015 suicide bombings in Maiduguri, Borno State and Potiskum,
Yobe State, reportedly involving children coerced by Boko Haram to act as
suicide bombers, the 3-7 January 2015 attacks in Baga, Borno State, which
resulted in the massive destruction of civilian homes and significant civilian
casualties, as well as the increasing attacks in the Lake Chad Basin region
along Nigeria’s borders with Chad and Cameroon and in the northern
provinces of Cameroon.
“The Security Council reaffirms that terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations is criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of its motivation,
wherever, whenever and by whomsoever committed. The Security Council
reaffirms that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnic group.
“The Security Council expresses its deep sympathy and condolences to
the families of the victims and expresses its sympathy to all those injured in
these attacks, and to the people and the Government of the Federal Repub lic of
Nigeria as well as the people and Governments of other affected countries.
“The Security Council strongly condemns and deplores all abuses of
human rights and, where applicable, violations of international humanitarian
law by the terrorist group Boko Haram, since 2009, including those involving
violence against civilian populations, notably women and children,
kidnappings, killings, hostage-taking, pillaging, rape, sexual slavery and other
sexual violence, recruitment of children and destruction of civilian property.
The Security Council expresses serious concern over the reported violations
and abuses of human rights and large-scale displacements of civilian
population, including into Nigeria’s neighbouring countries. The Security
Council recalls its decision to place Boko Haram on the Al-Qaida sanctions
list.
“The Security Council demands that Boko Haram immediately and
unequivocally cease all hostilities and all abuses of human rights and
15-00663 (E)

200115

*1500663*

S/PRST/2015/4

violations of international humanitarian law and disarm and demobilise. The
Security Council demands the immediate and unconditional release of all those
abducted who remain in captivity, including the 276 schoolgirls abducted in
Chibok, Borno State in April 2014. The Security Council recognizes that some
of such acts may amount to crimes against humanity and stresses that those
responsible for all abuses and violations of human rights and violations of
international humanitarian law must be held accountable. The Security Council
reiterates the primary responsibility of Member States to protect civilian
populations on their territories, in accordance with their obligations under
international law.
“The Security Council expresses its concern at the scale of the growing
humanitarian crisis caused by the activities of Boko Haram, which has resulted
in the large-scale displacement of Nigerians within the country and into
neighbouring Cameroon, Chad and Niger. The Security Council, in this regard,
commends the support provided to the refugees by the Governments of the
said countries, including with the assistance of humanitarian actors and
relevant United Nations entities, and calls on the international community to
provide its support in areas which require urgent attention.
“The Security Council expresses deep concern that the activities of Boko
Haram are undermining the peace and stability of the West and Central African
region.
“The Security Council takes note of the outcome of the 17 May 2014
Paris Summit, which underscored the commitment of the countries in the La ke
Chad Basin region, including with the support of bilateral and multilateral
partners, to enhance information sharing, coordination and joint operations, to
more effectively combat Boko Haram, as well as the outcomes of the follow up London and Abuja ministerial meetings. The Security Council also takes
note of the 7 October 2014 communiqué of the Extraordinary Summit of the
Lake Chad Basin Commission (LCBC) Heads of State, as well as the
25 November 2014 communiqué of the African Union Peace and Securit y
Council on the efforts of the LCBC Member States and Benin to combat Boko
Haram.
“The Security Council takes note of the decision of the LCBC Member
States and Benin to operationalise the Multinational Joint Task Force,
including through the establishment of a joint Headquarters and the
deployment of national contingents, to conduct military operations against
Boko Haram.
“The Security Council welcomes plans for a regional meeting in Niamey,
Niger, on 20 January 2015 to discuss the regional response to the threat posed
by Boko Haram. The Security Council urges the LCBC Member States and
Benin to undertake further planning toward the sustainable, viable and
effective operationalization of the Multinational Joint Task Force. The Security
Council, in this regard, urges them to identify the means and modalities of the
envisaged deployment, especially in the areas of intelligence sharing and joint
operations.
“The Security Council welcomes the assistance to the States in the region
already being provided by bilateral and multilateral partners and encourages

2/3

15-00663

S/PRST/2015/4

them to increase support to enhance the operational capacity of the
Multinational Joint Task Force, including through the provision of financial
and logistical assistance, relevant equipment and of modaliti es to increase
effective intelligence sharing to further the region’s collective efforts to
combat Boko Haram more effectively. The Security Council underlines that all
operations of the Multinational Joint Task Force must be conducted in full
compliance with international law, including international humanitarian law
and human rights law.
“The Security Council takes note of the Communiqué of the Government
of Chad, issued on 14 January 2015, which pledged active support in the fight
against Boko Haram. The Security Council welcomes the vote by the National
Assembly of Chad on 16 January 2015, which authorized Chadian armed
troops and security forces to assist Cameroonian and Nigerian soldiers in the
fight against Boko Haram terrorists.
“The Security Council underlines the need to bring perpetrators,
organizers, financiers and sponsors of these reprehensible acts of terrorism to
justice in accordance with international law and relevant Security Council
resolutions.”

15-00663

3/3
