UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/419
14 April 1999
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: FRENCH

LETTER DATED 14 APRIL 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to transmit to you herewith the text of a communication
dated 12 April 1999 which I received from the Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members
of the Security Council.

(Signed)

99-10583 (E)

140499

140499

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1999/419
English
Page 2

Annex
[Original:

English]

Letter dated 12 April 1999 from the Secretary-General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to
the Secretary-General

In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the
monthly report on Stabilization Force (SFOR) operations. I would appreciate
your making this report available to the United Nations Security Council.

(Signed)

Javier SOLANA

/...

S/1999/419
English
Page 3

Enclosure
Monthly report to the United Nations Security Council on
Stabilization Force operations

1.
Over the reporting period (21 February-20 March 1999), there were
approximately 34,500 troops deployed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, with
contributions from all 19 North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) allies and
from 17 non-NATO countries. The increase in numbers compared to the last report
reflects ongoing force rotation.
2.
The Stabilization Force (SFOR) continued to conduct surveillance and
reconnaissance by means of ground and air patrols, with combat aircraft flying
approximately 132 hours. Ground patrols were intensified in sensitive areas in
order to guarantee a secure environment, both before and after the Brčko
arbitration decision in early March (see below).
3.
SFOR continues to monitor entity compliance with Security Council
resolution 1160 (1998), which prohibits the transport of weapons into the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, by inspecting Government-owned factories and
weapons storage sites, and by monitoring crossing points on the border with the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. To date, no violations of resolution
1160 (1998) have been reported.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
4.
Over the reporting period, the parties remained substantially compliant
with most military aspects of the Peace Agreement. However, the period was
characterized by heightened tension, particularly in the Republika Srpska, owing
to the continuing political instability there, and to the 5 March Brčko
arbitration decision. On 16 March, around 20,000 people demonstrated in 30
cities across the Republika Srpska, ranging from 50 people in Pale to 6,000
people in Banja Luka, protesting against the Brčko arbitration and the removal,
on 5 March, of Republika Srpska President Poplasen by the High Representative.
SFOR troops monitored the demonstrations, all of which took place without
incident, and with no reports of violence.
5.
Tensions also arose within the Federation, particularly in Mostar, Stolac
and Capljina, following the 16 March car bomb attack in Sarajevo on Mr. Leutar,
a Bosnian Croat and the Federation Deputy Minister of the Interior, who
subsequently died as a result of his injuries. SFOR provided support to the
United Nations International Police Task Force (IPTF) and to the local police in
their investigations of this incident.
6.
Over the reporting period, SFOR troops conducted a total of 352 military
weapons storage site inspections: 83 Bosniac; 51 Bosnian Croat; 183 Bosnian
Serb; and 35 Federation. Two illegal weapons sites were discovered in Jahorina
and Kuda in Multi-National Division (South-East). In the site at Jahorina, SFOR
troops confiscated 250 hand grenades, 3 M-79 anti-tank weapons, one 120 mm
mortar, two 82 mm mortars, 4 anti-tank rocket launchers, four AT3 anti-tank
missiles and large quantities of ammunition. In Kuda, SFOR troops seized 80
/...

S/1999/419
English
Page 4

hand grenades, 7 anti-tank grenades, 6 rifle grenades, two M80 anti-tank rocket
launchers with 2 rockets, 3 sub-machine guns, 1 shotgun, 15 kilograms of
explosives, 68 mines and large quantities of ammunition. All the weapons seized
were subsequently destroyed by SFOR.
7.
The reduction period under the weapons and ammunition storage programme,
which ended on 28 February, resulted in the Entity armed forces closing
91 per cent of those sites required to be closed or consolidated (129 of 141
sites). The remaining 9 per cent will be closed or consolidated shortly.
8.
SFOR monitored 512 training and movement activities during the period:
133 Bosniac; 49 Bosnian Croat; 175 Bosnian Serb; and 155 Federation. Training
and movement bans were imposed on: the 3rd Corps of the Bosnian Serb Army from
27 February until further notice because of the involvement of personnel in the
smuggling of weapons; on the 1st Bosnian Serb Army Guards Corps from 21 to
23 February for non-compliance with senior officer appointments; on the 11th MP
Battalion of the Bosnian Serb Army from 26 February to 12 March for
non-participation in a programmed activity; and on the 1st Rapid Reaction
Brigade of the Bosniac Army from 26 February to 19 March for non-participation
in a programmed activity. In addition, the Republika Srpska Police
Anti-Terrorist Brigade (PATB) remains under the training and movement ban
imposed in August 1997.
9.
On 24 February, SFOR troops seized two lorry-loads of weapons at a
checkpoint near Brčko. Investigations revealed the involvement of active duty
personnel of the Bosnian Serb Army’s 311th Infantry Brigade in the attempted
arms smuggling, and COMSFOR subsequently ordered the disbandment of the Brigade.
This began on 2 March, with SFOR removing weapons and equipment belonging to the
Brigade for subsequent destruction.
10. Entity armed forces demining teams continued to conduct counter-mine
support operations in order to ensure their readiness for the new summer
demining campaign, which is due to begin on 19 April. Between 8 February and
14 March, despite the adverse weather conditions, nine demining teams in
Multi-National Division (South-East) conducted 101 mine-clearing operations,
removing 42 anti-personnel mines and 6 items of unexploded ordnance from 3,176
square metres of land.
Cooperation with international organizations
11. Within capabilities, and in accordance with its mandate, SFOR continues to
provide assistance to the international organizations in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
including IPTF, the Office of the High Representative, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
12. SFOR continues to provide support to the Office of the High Representative
in its efforts to open airfields and to expand civil air operations. The
Memorandum of Understanding for Mostar airport was extended during February to
permit the expansion of air cargo and airmail operations. Preparatory work for
the refurbishment of the Sarajevo air terminal is continuing, together with the
installation of airfield lighting.
/...

S/1999/419
English
Page 5

13. SFOR also continues to play an active role in supporting the efforts of the
Office of the High Representative to establish joint institutions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In this regard, SFOR, together with the Office of the High
Representative and OSCE, has been working to further develop the Standing
Committee on Military Matters (SCMM), inter alia, through the establishment of a
permanent secretariat for the Committee. This subject was due to be discussed
at the 9 March SCMM meeting, which was, however, cancelled owing to the
political situation in the Republika Srpska.
Outlook
14. SFOR will continue to monitor the situation closely in the light of ongoing
operations in Serbia and Kosovo. An influx of Kosovar refugees is likely to
increase tension. Isolated acts of intimidation and violence can also be
expected to continue as a result of the return of refugees and displaced
persons.

-----
