40

General Auembly-Twenty-eighth Session

1. Takes note of the report of the Executive Director
of the United Nations Institute for Training and Rese,arch;:i
2. Notes with satisfaction the increasing effectiveness of the Institute in the discharge of its responsibilities;
3. Expresses the hope that the Institute will have
·
greater and wider financial support.

2164th plenary meeting
9 November 1973
3081 (XXVIII). United Nations University

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2951 (XXVII) of 11 December 1972, by which it decided to establish the United
Nations University under certain objectives and principles,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1829 (LV) of 18 October 1973,
Having taken into account the resolution, comments
and observations of the Executive Board of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on the draft Charter proposed by the Founding
Committee of the United Nations Uoiversity, 4
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General,5
l. Adopts the Charter of the United Nations University contained in the second addendum to the report
of the Secretary-General 6 and invites the University
Council to consider the comments and observations
made in the General Assembly on the above-mentioned
Charter, in consultation with the Secretary-General of
the United Nations and the Director-General of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, and to submit its report to the General
Assembly, through the Economic and Social Council,
with a view to enabling the Assembly at its thirtieth
session to consider amendments to the Charter, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedures provided
for in the Charter;
2. Decides that the University Centre of the United
Nations University shall be located in the Tokyo metropolitan area in Japan;
3. Recommends that the University Council, in considering the location of research and training centres
and programmes of the University, as well as its associated institutions, take fully into account offers of
facilities and other types of contribution and, in particular, the views expressed by the General Assembly
concerning the need for support of research and training activities in the developing countries or for their
benefit;
4. Recommends further that the University Council
s.hould consider, as one of its priority tasks, the relationship between the University and the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research, including possible
areas of co-operation in research and training;
5. Endorses section 5 of the remarks of the Founding Committee of the United Nations University appended to the report of the Secretary-General ;7
3 Ibid.,

Twenty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/9014).

4 See A/9149/Add.1.
t1 A/9149 and Add.I and

e A/9149/ Add.2.
f Sec

2.

A/Sll49, &DJlCX I, appendix II.

6. Authorizes the Secretary-General, pen'ding the assumption of office by the Rector, to take all necessary
mea~ures to implement the provisions of the Charter
of the University. in consultation with the Direct?rGeneral of the United Nations Educational, Se1ent1fic
and Cultural Organization, including the wnvening of
such sessions of the University Council as may he fL'
quired, and decides that the expenses involved in the
implementation shall be met from funds, pn:sent and
prospective, of the University;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue efforts for raising the funds required for the dynamic
development of the University from Governments. and
from non-governmental sources, including foundat1om.
universities and individuals.

2192nd plenary meeting
6 December 1973

:l082 (XXVIII). Charter of Economi<· Uil,!hl~
and Duties of States

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, in its resolution 45 (III)
of 18 May I 972. 8 decided to establish a Working Group
of governmental representatives to draw up a draft
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States.
Recalling its resolution 3037 (XXVII) of 19 December 1972, by which it decided to enlarge the composition of the Working Group on the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States,
Reaffirming its conviction of the urgent need to establish or improve norms of universal application for the
development of international economic relations on a
just and equitable basis,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Working Group on the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States 9 and of the comments made thereon
as reflected in the report of the Trade and Development
Board on its thirteenth session; 10
2. Decides, in the light of the progress achieved,
to extend the mandate of the Working Group as estab·
Iished by resolution 45 (III) of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development;
3. Further decides that the Working Group shall
hold two sessions in 1974, each of three weeks' duration, as recommend-:d by the Trade and Development
Board in its decision 98 (XIII) of 8 September I 973; 11
4. Urges the Working· Group to complete, as the
first step in the codification and development of the
matter, the elaboration of a final draft Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, to be considered
and approved by the General Assembly at its twentyninth session;
5. Requests the Trade and Development Board to
examine at its fourteenth session, as a matter of priority, the report of the Working Group and to transmit
8 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, RerNt mid
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.Il.D.4).
annex I.A.
9 TD/B/AC.12/1
and Corr.I and TD/B/AC.12/2 and
Add.I.
10 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty·
eighth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/9015/Rev.1), part
three, chap. III.
11 Ibid., part three, annex I.

Resolutions adopted on the repOl't-' of the Second Committee

it to the General Assembly,, together with its comments
and suggestions;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-ninth session an item entitled "Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States".
2192nd plenary meeting
6 December 1973

308:{ (XXVIII). Study on the indexation of prices

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Trade and Development Board on its thirteenth session, 12
Recalling General Assembly resolutions 1995 (XIX)
of 30 December 1964, 2904 (XXVII) of 26 September 1972 and 3041 (XXVII) of 19 December 1972,
Recalling also resolutions 55 (Ill) of 19 May 1972,
80 (III) of 20 May 1972 and 83 (III) of 20 May
1972 of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, 13
Recognizing the importance of the interrelation between the reform of the international monetary system
and existing or prospective arrangements among countries, including those that involve int~rnational trade and
the flow of capital as investment or development assistance,
. Recalling the Declaration and Principles of the Action Programme of Lima, in particular paragraph 3
(a) (iv) of section B of the Programme of action, 14
Recalling also the Economic Declaration adopted by
the Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Algiers from
5 to 9 September 1973., 15
Bearing in mind the review and appraisal of the implementation of the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade
now being undertaken by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and by other bodies,
. Mindful of the fact that the structure and organizat10n of the global import-export tr~de is significantly
advantageous to the developed countnes,
1. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to prepare, after consultation with the President of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development,
a comprehensive study on the indexation of prices of
commodities produced in, and exported by, developing
countries and to examine ways and means whereby unit
p~ices of m~nuf~ctured imports from developed countnes and umt pnces of exports from developing countries could be automatically linked;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
to submit a report on the findings of the study to the
General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session, through
the Trade anCJ Development Board.
2192 nd plenary meeting
6 December 1973
12 !hid., part three.
1 ~ See Proceedinf:{s

of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Develorment, Third Session, vol. I. Rr11ort and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.IT.D.4),

annex I.A.
14 Ibid ..

annex Vlll.F.
and Corr.1, p. 57.

15 A/9330

41

308-1- (XXVIII). Reform of the international
monetary syste111

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2806 (XXVI) of 14 Decemb~r 1971, as well as resolution 84 (Ill) of 20
May 1972 of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, 16
Noting that the Chairman of the Committee on Reform of the International Monetary System and Related
Issues, established by the Board of Governors of the
International Monetary Fund, bas submitted a report on
the present status of the Committee's work and a First
Outline of the Reform,
Recogni-:.ing that the problems in the monetary, trade
and finance fields should be resolved in a co-ordinated
manner, taking into account their interdependence,
through appropriate consultations as envisaged in the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, with the full participation
of developed and developing countries,
l ._ Draws attention to the danger of harmful disruption of :-1orld trad~ and development, in particular
for devclopmg countnes, as a result of the continuing
uncertainty in _the international monetary sphere, and
welcomes the mtention of the Committee on Reform
of the International Monetary System and Related Issues to settle the issues of reform by '.H July 1974;
. 2. Stre~ses th~t the reformed monetary system should
?1m at universality and should take into account the
mterests of_ t~e i?ternational community as a whole,
thereby. ass1stm_g m the evolution of a system of world
ceonom1c relations based on the equalitv :md interest
of all countries;
,
3. Welcomes the provisions for full and effective
p_articipation of the developing countries in the discussions and in. the decision-making process of the reform
and emphasizes the role of the Committee on Reform
of the International Monetary System and Related Issues as the body fully responsible in all negotiations
on the reform;
4_. . I:ec?gniz<'s the need for an appropriate degree of
flex1b1hty m the new monetary system to take into account int~r alia, specifically, the special characteristics
a~d specific structural probkms of developing countries;
5. _Invites the International Monetary Fund to give
atte~t1on to _the concerns of the developing countries,
particularly m the forthcoming review of its current
quota, and through that, consequentially, voting structure;
6. _En_dorses further examination of proposals for
cstablishmg a new fund facility to provide longerte:m balance-of-payments finance for developing countries:
7. R e~ngni"-:.es the need for reviewing the methods
of <?Perat10n of the International Monetary Fund, in
particular the terms for both credit repayments and
"stand_-by" arrangements, the system of compensatory
fma.ncnw, and the terms of the financing of commodity
butter s:och. so as to enable the developing co,1ntrics
to ma1.:c more effectiw use of them;
H\ See Prnceedings of thP United Nations Confcr 1,ncc un
Tradr an:/ [),-1·clorml'nl. Th.'rd Session. v"I. T, T?r,":irr ,rnd
,1,,,·, .-. , \ UniL'd Nati,,ns publication, Sales N:i: E.7,.ll.fi.4),
:,rr,.,, I -·'.
