87th

United Nations
Jnited

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

lzama,
Nam,

THIR TY- THIRD SESSION

PLENARY MEETING

8l

Monday, 18 December 1978,
at 3.35p.m.

~$

Official Records
Igaria,
:ongo,
ltorial

New YORK
CONTENTS
Agenda item 126:
Establishment of an agency or a department of the United
Nations for undertaking, co-ordinating and disseminating
the results of research into unidentified flying objects and
related phenomena
.
Report of the Special Political Committee

Page
Agenda item 25:
Admission of new Members to the United Nations (concluded) ....................••......... " 1529

Lao
bique,
Soviet
I

s

Agenda item 62:
Operational activities for development (concluded):
(i) Confirmation of the appointmen t of the Executive
Director of the United Nations. Special Fund for
Land-locked Developing Countries . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 1535

none,

Agenda item 10:
Report of the Secretary-General 011 the work of the
Organiza tion .. " . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1553
Agenda item 13:
Report of the Interna tional Court of Justice

Agenda item 66:
United Nations University (concluded):
(a) Report of the Council of the United Nations University;
(h) Report of the Secretary-General
Report of the Second Committee
1535
Agenda item 68:
Human settlemen ts:
(a) Report of the Commission on Human Settlements;
(h) Reports of the Secretary-General
Report of the Second Committee

AGENDA ITEM 2S
Admission of new Members to the United Nations

(concluded)·
1535

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council has recommended the admission of the
Commonwealth of Dominica to membership in the United
Nations in document A/33/442. In this connexion, a draft
resolution has been submitted in document A/33/L.34 and
Add.I. May I take it that the General Assembly accepts the
recommendation of the Security Council and adopts the
draft resolution by acclamation?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 33/107).
2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
declare Dominica admitted to membership in the United
Nations.

Agenda item 55:
Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the PopUlation
of the Occupied Territories
Report of the Special Political Committee
.

The delegation of Dominica was escorted to its place in
the General Assembly hall.

Agenda item 56:
Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
.
Report of the Special Political Committee

I

I

. .• 1553

President: Mr. lndalecio LlEVANO (Colombia).

Agenda item 54:
United Nptions Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East:
(a) Report of the Commissioner·General:
(h) Report of the Working Group on the Financing of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East;
(e) Report of the United Nations Conciliation Commission
for Palestine;
(d) Reports of the Secretary-General
Report of the Special Political Committee
.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
General Assembly has just approved the admission of
Dominica to the United Nations. The membership of the
United Nations has thus reached 151, a fact which confirms
its universality and, also, the continuation of the decolo·
nization process initiated at the end of the Second World
War and promoted by our Organization.

1536
Agenda item 57:
Question of the composition of the relevant organs of the
United Nations
Report of the Special Political Committee
.
Agenda item 77:
Questions rcI;1 ting to informa tion:
(a) Co-operation and assistance in the application and
improvell1t~nt of national information and mass communication systems for social progress and development;
(b) Freedom of information:
(i) Draft Declaration on Freedom of In formation;
(ll) Draft Convention on Freedom of Information;
(e) United Nations pUblic information policies and activities: report of the Secretary-General
Report of the Special Political Commitkc
.

j

Page

4. It is a happy coincidence that it has fallen to a President
from a Latin American nation to welcome Dominica to our
Organization, since that beautiful Caribbean island belongs
to our own region.
5. Dominica, that island of 780 square kilometres and
75,000 inhabitants, has always fired our imagination
because it was discovered, on 3 November 1493, by
.. Resumed from the 1st meeting.
1529

Aj33/PV.87

1530

General Assembly - Thirty·Ulird Session - Plenary Meetings

Christopher Columbus himself, on his second expedition to
the new lands of the Americas.
6. Dominica has now achieved full independence, after a

bloodless struggle, thanks to the liberal atmosphere which
now prevails throughout almost all the world and the
intelligent policy of a Power whose rule at one time
extended to every corner of the earth.

7. On behalf of the General Assembly I welcome Dominica to our Organization and, at the same time, pledge to
it the full co·operation of the United Nations in promoting
the well·being of its people.
8. Various representatives have expressed the wish to
speak on this occasion, and I call first on the representa live
of El Salvador, who will speak on behalf of the States of
Latin America.
URQUIA (El Salvador) (interpretation from
Spanish): When the Security Council adopted resolution
442 (1978) recommending to the General Assembly that
the Commonwealth of Dominica be admitted to memo
bership in our Organization, I had the honour, in my
capacity as Chairman of the group of Latin American
States, to make a statement expressing the pleasure of the
representatives of the States of Latin America and the
Caribbean at the adoption of that earlier resolution recommending the admission of this island of the Antilles as a
Member of the United Nations.

9. Mr.

10. Now that Dominica has become a Member of the
United Nations as a result of the resolution just adopted
unanimously by the General Assembly, I wish to speak
again as the representative of our regional Group in order to
congratulate the people and the Government of Dominica
on their admission, after formal acceptance of the obli·
gations contained in the Charter, to membership in this
world Organization.
11. Dominica is a country which, after having first been a
Spanish possession and then a French possession, became a
British colony or dependent Territory and remained so
un tiI 1956 when, according to the statement made in the
Security Council by Mr. Richard, the Permanent Repre·
sentative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, it joined the Federation of the West
Indies. When that Federation was dissolved, it became an
Associated State of the United Kingdom.

12. The population of the island is for the most part
descended from its ancient people, the Caribs, as weB as
from other sources. The Catholic faith and the English
language predominate, but French is also generally spoken
as a second language in the form known as patois.

13. The pred9minance of the Catholic religion can be
traced back to the days of the island's discovery and
conquest. The island, which was given the name of
Dominica by Columbus, was the first land on which he set
foot on his second voyage, just as the island of Guanahani,
which he called San Salvado;-today Watling Island, in the
archipelago of the Bahamas-was the first he reached on his
first voyage, on 12 October 1492, the voyage for which he
was given the well-deserved name of "Discoverer". As is

j~
i li. It is regrettal

known, Columbus' voyages were undertaken in the service
of the Catholic monarchs of Spain, Ferdinand and lsabella,
and he was under special instructions to propagate the faith
which they and he professed.

! '!frful northen

did not chc
world, because
America" is not
I"ropriate na~e
f;3J1" are contmu
~Iionals, even b}
pjCnas Andre Mal

I io&Y

14. Giving the names of Sal Salvador and Dominica to
those islands was not the only way in which the celebrated
Genoese navigator manifested his devotion and his ad.
herence to the royal instructions he had received. There
were many other instances but I shall not go into them
because that would unnecessarily prolong my statement.

N, Because of I
~Iives of our co

tllI1 were calle d
~Yered the whol

15. I share the view of those who believe that Christopher
Columbus was a genuinely religious man. The fact that his
name in Latin, Christophorus Columbus, means "the dove
that bears Christ" made him feel that he was destined by
Providence to propagate the Catholic faith to distant lands
which it was his ambition to reach by sailing westwards.
Those lands, in his thinking, were none other than
Cipango-today Japan-and Cathay-today China-where
another notable Italian navigator, Marco Polo, had lived for
many years and which are described in his famous book as
the most brilliant, rich and fabulous known at that time.
Another revealing fact is that the laFgest of the three ships
which Columbus was given by the Spanish monarchs, for
his first expedition, was called La Gallega, and Columbus
rechristened it with a religious name the Santa Maria. It was
slightly larger than La Nifia and La Pinta, but, like the other
two, it was still small and not strong. It served as the
flagship and Columbus of course sailed on it.

II~ to apply the

of colonial times

mOl11alies of histo
tne ages. It v
~n of the world
~~nized by the
ilnls. There wer,
Mltico and in pa
~ro who, as is kr
I~ inhabitants 0
~l[ descendan ts
[uropeans and th€
iIItican Jose Vasc
001

11. It is a very (
mfiuenced by Cl
~!Cned the East
Ill, gave him in
honarchs tha
Iocument stated:

16. It is therefore not surprising that, upon reaching an
enchanting island of the group known today as the
Windward Islands in the Lesser Antilles of the Caribbean
Sea, which, as I said, occurred during his second voyage,
Columbus gave it the name of Dominica, both because it
happened to be a Sunday and because his father was called
Domenico, and, above all, because those names, which are
in fact but one name, in Latin mean Lord, an equivalent of
the name San Salvador, which had been given a year earlier
to the island of Guanahani. This does not mean, however,
that it was not also Columbus' desire, as was natural, to
please his protectors and sponsors, Ferdinand and Isabella.
17. Columbus died believing that he had realized his
dream and ambition; to reach the East Indies-Asia-by
sailing, not east from Europe as his predecessors had done,
but westwards, which is what he did. He did not under·
stand-in fact he never knew-tha t by that route Europe
and the East Indies were separated by an immense land and
island mass which was later to be known as the West Indies
and, still la ter, as America.

18. Another Italian, Amerigo Vespucci, was concerned in
th(~ enterprise. He made four trips to places which his friend

Columbus had not visited. It was Amerigo Vespucci who
revealed to Europe that what was involved was a third
continent, different from Europe and the East Indies or
Asia, and according to prestigious historiqns it was for that
reason that this hemisphere was given his name in the
feminine form, America. That is why we call our part of the
world today, very rightly, the Americas, meaning North
America, Central America and South America, including
the Caribbean which some eaU insular America.

"Ferdinand an
Cutille, Arag6n
liJey believed 0
May, or Chim
IiJe great esteem
Mve for us and I
10 have news of
, our Admiral Chr
we are enjoying g
They ~gned that
~len", in Granad

OOctun:nt is naive
m~ shows ho w f
~~ to convince hi
ll. AlthOUgh Cc
~1]JOse, his was a
,hade obvious it
friou~y rejected
"lnters of the time.
i ~e earth was nai
.~ lruly neroic to en
'j Ine precarious con
.1

'I n. The discover
. ~llIinica and ot
! Words, the discov
~al the modest
~nl,at least fund

I
;l
111'

ik

rvice
>eHa,
faith

I

:a to
:ated
i ad·

Ibere

87th meeting - 18 December 1978

19. It is regrettable that the distinguished founders of this
powerful northern federation in which we find ourselves
today did not choose a different name for this part of the
world, because the expression "the United States of
America" is not really correct. "America" is not the
appropriate name either although "America" and "American" are continually used to refer to this country and its
nationals, even by distinguished foreigners of great culture
such as Andre Malraux, to take but one example.

lhem

t.

20. Because of the geographical error of Columbus, the
natives of our countries of Latin America and the Caribbean were called Indians, and the name "West Indies"
covered the whole area. Charles V called the laws which
were to apply there the "Laws of the Indies", and the law
of colonial times was known as "Indian Law". These are
anomalies of history which have been perpetuated throughout the ages. It would appear that the inhabitants of this
part of the world when it was discovered, conquered and
colonized by the Europeans were the indigenous inhabitants. There were some among them like the Mayans in
Mexico and in part of Central America, and the Incas in
Peru who, as is known, had an admirably advanced culture.
The inhabitants of Latin America and the Caribbean and
tlleir descendants intermarried in certain regions with
Europeans and they were the foundation of what the great
Mexican Jose Vasconcelos called "the cosmic race".

Ipher
,t his
dove
d by

lands
'ards.
than
{here
d for
ok as
time.

ships

>, for
mbus

t was

other
~ the

21. It is a very curious fact that Ferdinand and lsabella,
influenced by Columbus' persistent belief that he had
reached the East Indies-that is, Asia-by travelling to the
west, gave him in triplicate a kind of passport directed to
tile monarchs that he might visit in his first voyage. That
document stated:

Ig an
: the

Ibean

rage,

"Ferdinand and Isabella, the king and the queen of
CastiIle, Arag6n and Leon, to the Great King:"-for
they believed one of them to be the Great Khan of
Cathay, or China-HWe have learned with satisfaction of
the great esteem and affection that you and your subjects
have for us and our nation. We also know that you wish
to have news of us and that is why we are sending you
our Admiral Christopher Columbus bearing the news that
we are enjoying good health and splendid prosperity."

Jst it

:alJed
hare
nt of
3rlier
lever,
L1, to
l>ella.

I his

I-by

lone,
lderrope
land
lilies

~d in
ricnd
who
third
~s or
that
I the
fthe
forth

Iding

r

i

I

They signed that document HI the King" and HI the
Queen", in Granada on 30 April 1492. Perhaps that unique
document is naive but it does reflect the ideas of the time
and shows how far the distinguished navigator had been
able to convince his sovereigns.
22. Although Columbus did not achieve his primary
purpose, his was a fantastic feat beyond any doubt, because
it made obvious that the world was round, a thesis that was
seriously rejected by distinguished geographers and astron·
omers of the time, who stubbornly clung to the belief that
the earth 'was flat and not spherical. Furthermore it was
truly heroic to embark on such a trip across the ocean in
the precarious conditions prevailing at the time.
23. The discovery of Guanahani, or San Salvador, and
Dominica and other places in our hemisphere-in other
words, the discovery of America-proved to the old world
that the modest but persevering Genoese navigator was
right, at least fundamentally right in his thinking.

1531

24. One may say that his feat is comparable to that of the
North American astronauts who, for the first time, set foot
on the moon on 20 July 1969. It could be compared to the
courage, fortitude and heroism of Neil Armstrong and his
companions. But it must be recognized that the feat of
Colombus, and his men was perhaps even more heroic
because they undertook this adventure in three fragile
vessels which could have sunk at any time without any
help other than that provided by Providence alone whereas
the astronauts, benefiting from the marvels of modern
technology, were in constant communication with experts
who from the earth kept a close watch day and night on
their expedition and gave them the necessary observations
and indications. With the rudimentary knowledge of the
fifteenth century, what help, what guidance, what consolation could the courageous crewmen of the ships of
Columbus expect from Spain at that time?
25. With the admission of Dominica to membership in the
United Nations, thanks to the determination of its people
and the goodwill of the United Kingdom, one step forward
has been taken towards the decolonization of American
territory and towards universality for our Organization,
which, because that is its vocation, we now call the world
Organizatio n.
26. The Latin American group is pleased, through me, to
bid welcome to the representatives of that most beautiful
island in the Caribbean which has today become a member
of the international community. As it was my pleasure to
say in the Security Council, the representatives of Latin
America who have sponsored the draft resolution on the
admission of Dominica are prepared to welcome them with
open arms into our regional group.
27. The PRESIDENT (interpretation [rom Spanish): I
now call on the representative of Iraq, who will speak on
behalf of the group of Asian States.

Mr. de Pinies (Spain), Vice-President, took the Chair.
28. Mr. AL·ATIYYAH (Iraq) (interpretation [rom
Arabic): My delegation is happy to welcome, on its own
behalf and on behalf of the group of Asian States, the
admission of the Commonwealth of Dominica to membership in the United Nations. In conveying our sincere
congratulations to Dominica, which has just acceded to
independence and Iibcrty, it is our fervent hope that we
shall see it making its contribution alongside the rest of the
third world in the consolidation of peace, security and
progress in the world.
29. The admission of the Commonwealth of Dominica
into the United Nations has permitted our Organization to
make even further progress towards its goal of universality,
as prOVided in the Charter of the United Nations. Similarly,
its admission permits us to register one more success in the
elimination of imperialism I'n our happiness at seeing
Dominica become a Member of our Organization, we
should give thought to the struggles o~ other peoples in
Africa and Asia and strengthen them since they are aimed
at bringing about independence and liberty.
30. The admission of the Commonwealth of Dominica to
membership in the United Nations makes our Organization

1531

General Assembly - Thirty-third Session - Plenary Meetings

more universal, and to this new Member we wish to convey
our best wishes and congratulations, in the hope that the
new Member will co-operate with the other Members in the
service of peace and humanity with a view to fighting
successfully towards the elimination of imperialism and
repression throughout the world.
31. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
now caU on the representative of Romania, who will speak
on behalf of the group of Eastern European States.
32. Mr. MARINESCU (Romania) (interpretation from
French): The proclamation of independence is a great event
in the history of a country, and admission to membership
in the United Nations is recognition of the international
standing of a new State.
33. Now Dominica has' been admitted to membership in
the United Nations, and I am particularly pleased, as
Chairman for the present month of the group of Eastern
European States, to welcome this solemn event and to wish
the people of Dominica every success in free and independent development and economic and social prosperity_
Every new country that becomes independent gives us
pleasure because we see that the sacred right of each people
to determine its political status and to develop without
restraints in freedom, equality and dignity has been
recognized. Every new accession to independence is one
more step towards the final elimination of t he outmoded
and corrupt system of colonial domination.
34. The admission to membership in the United Nations
of Dominica is particularly important and significant as we
try to bring about the fuJl universality of our Organization.
This is the hundredth State that has become a Member
since the founding of the United Nations. The principle of
the universality of the United Nations ref1ects the right of
all States, great and small, to participate in the search for
and adoption of solutions of the maj or problems confronting the contemporary world, and that principle has
noW been reconfirmed and strengthened. On this happy
occasion, it may be appropriate to reaffirm our faith in our
Organization as an indispensable instrument in bringing
about co-operation among all States in the world, and we
wish to reaffrrm our attachment to its noble purposes and
principles.
35. We extend a warm welcome to the delegation of
Dominica and we pledge it our full support and cooperation.

other States of welcoming the Commonwealth of Dominica
as the one hundred and fifty-first Member of the United
Nations. The admission of the Commonwealth of Dominica
follows the successful conclusion of another cllapter in the
decolonization process in which the United Nations has
played an important role, in co·operation with the former
administering Power. It represents another step in the
direction of making the United Nations a truly universal
Organization of independent and sovereign States.
39. When Dominica achieved independence on 3 November this year, it acceded to a new and important
stage in its long history. It is a logical ex tension of this
development that the new State of Dominica has also
applied for and been accepted to membership in our world
Organization. We take this opportunity to express to the
Government and people of Dominica our warm wishes for
further prosperity and well·being.
40. We look forward to working with the Commonwealth
of Dominica in fulfilling the principles and purposes of the
United Nations.
41. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
now call on the representative of Mauritania, who will
speak on behalf 0 f the group of Arab States.
42. Mr. TAY A (Mauritania) (interpretation from French):
It is a particular pleasure for me, on behalf of the Arab
group of States, to welcome Dominica to membership in
the United Nations. The admiSSion of all new States is cause
for satisfaction and pride for all Members of our Organization and in particular for the former colonial countries.
The admission of Dominica to the international family is
proof that our Organization is becoming increasingly
universal.
43. It is our hope that, immediately fonowing the celebration 0 f the thirtieth anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, this universality will be
SWiftly realized and that our Organization will see its
membership increase every day with the admission of new
members through the liberation of all countries in Africa, in
Asia and throughout the world which are still under the
colonial yoke.
44. Once again, on behalf of the Arab group we should
like tQ welcome the Commonwealth of Dominica to the
United Nations.

45. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): [
36. As the representative of Romania, I am pleased to
now call on the representative of the United States of
associate in these warnl congratulations the people of America, the host country.
Romania who cherish feelings of friendship and solidarity
with young States which have embarked on their free and
46. Mr. PETREE (United States of America): As the host
independent development and whose ranks have now grown
Government, the United States is pleased to welcome the
with the admission to membership in the United Nations of
Commonwealth of Dominica as the one hundred and
Dominica.
- fifty-first Member of the United Nations. We ex tend our
congratula tions to the representatives of Dominica and
37. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
welcome them to the important work of the United
now call on the representative of Norway, who will speak
Nations. We assure them of the full co-operation of the
on behalf of the group of Western European and other
United States in this endeavour and extend to them the
States.
warm greetings of the American people.
38. Mr. VRAALSEN (Norway): I have the honour and
pleasure on behalf of the group of Western European and

47. My Government was pleased to send a delegation of
leading Americans to Dominica's independence celebrations

..
87th meeting - 18 December 1978

Dominica
le United

Dominica

pier in !he
llions has

he former

:p in !he
, universal

1533

on 3 November. We noted with appreciation Prime Minister
Patrick R. John's reading from our own Declaration of
Independence during his inaugural address. We are confident that the dedication of the people of Dominica to the
United Nations goals of pe ace and freedom and the welfare
of mankind will facilitate our joint task

56. It is therefore with great pleasure that my delegation
welcomes the Commonwealth of Dominica as a Member of
the United Nations.

48. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
now call on the representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

57. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Span~h): I
now call on the representative of the Congo who will speak
on behalf of the group of African States.

49. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom delegation is delighted to welcome the Commonwealth
of Dominica as a Member of the United Nations. I am
particularly pleased that Dominica, the one hundredth new
Member to be admitted since the original foundation of this
Organization, should be a member of the Commonwealth;
the seventh in the Caribbean region and the second
Commonwealth member to be admitted this year.

58. Mr. GANGA-MBALA (Congo) (interpretation from
French): On behalf of the group of African States I should

friendly relations which have existed between our two
countries.

on 3 No·

important
)0 of litis
: has aho i
our world i
ess to the
wishes for

I

Iloowtalth I··
lses of !he

.JI

uanWl}: I
who "'iD

i

1 French}:

I:

. the Anb

bership ill

es is C3.1&

U~~nr: I

IIereasin!ly
family is '.",.

, the cele-

UnivtrW
will ~
ill see ill

r

~.

>0 of new

Africa,in
under I~

lie $hould

Cl. 10 tilt

It7niJhI: I
StIles of

,S lhe hosl

leame l~
Idred and
dend (}lJr

mica and

United
cm of lIIe
them I~

be

:gation of
lebnlliolls

r

1

50. My country's long-standing relationship with the
people of Dominica has been very close. I believe that it has
been beneficial to both parties. We look forward to
maintaining friendly ties with the Commonwealth of
Dominica as it takes its place among the independent
nations of the world.
51. I am pleased that Mr. Arlington Riviere is able to be
here today to represent the Government of the Commonwealth of Dominica. I am sure that he will be able to
report to his Government on the warmth and enthusiasm
with which his country's admission to the United Nations
has been greeted.

like to extend congratulations from this rostrum to the
Commonwealth of Dominica on its admission to our
Organiza tion.
59. As everyone knows, the African countries welcome
each newcomer with great satisfaction. We hope that this
new admission will greatly contribute to the defence of
peace and the fundamental freedoms spoken of in the
Charter of the United Nations.
60. We hope that the people of Dominica will fmd a
welcome here, and we are sure that they can count on the
co-operation of the African group in the noble mission
which each of our Sta tes undertakes upon admission to the
United Nations.
61. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call
on the representative of the Dominican Republic.
62. Mr. ESQUEA GUERRERO (Dominican Republic)

(interpretation from Spanish): The delegation of the
52. I am confident that the Commonwealth of Dominica
will rise to the task of fulfilling the duties entailed in
membership in this Organization and that Dominica has a
valuable role to play here. I offer to the Government and to
the people of the Commonwealth of Dominica the sincere
congratulations of my delegation and my Government on
their accession to membership in the United Nations.
53. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
now call on the representative of Canada.
54. Mr. BARTON (Canada): The delegation of Canada, as
a sponsor of the resolution before the Assembly, wishes to
extend its warmest congratulations to the Commonwealth
of Dominica on this occasion and heartily welcomes it as
the one hundred and fifty-first Member of the United
Nations.
55. This occasion is of particular interest to us because of
our long-standing and traditional ties with the Commonwealth Caribbean, ties which have given us a special
relationship with Dominica. THese Commonwealth ties have
given us a shared history, long-standing contacts in many
spheres of activity and thus a better understanding of each
other. In recent years these bonds have been strengthened
by the movement of peoples between our two States and
by our dedication to assisting the Government of Dominica
to develop its economy. We have watched with pleasure as
Dominica has achieved independence and, as it now moves
to take its place in the community of nations, we look
forward to enjoying, at the international level, the close and

Dominican Republic would like to take this opportunity to
greet and to welcome to this Organization the new State of
Dominica.
63. Nevertheless, the delegation of the Dominican Re·
public would like to take this opportunity to stress that the
name of this new country gives rise to confusion with our
own, causing possible misunderstandings for the communications media, the system of identification and interna tiona! tourism.
64. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
now take pleasure in inviting the Permanent Secretary to
the Prime Minister of Dominica, Mr. Arlington Riviere, to
address the General Assembly.
65. Mr. RlVIERE (Dominica): The Prime Minister, Colonel the Honourable Patrick R. John, and the Government
and people of the Commonwealth of Dominica extend
compliments to all States Members of this United Nations
General Assembly herein assembled and have the honour to
express their deepest appreciation of the decision taken
here today: a decision to accept the Commonwealth of
Dominica, the world's newest nation, into membership in
this prestigious and august body; a decision, the profound
nature of which will have far-reaching implications for the
development of our third-world nation.
66. The Prime Minister has asked me to offer his sincerest
apologies for his absence here today at a time when a major
step in the political advance of the Commonwealth of

lSJ4

General As.scmbly - Thirty-thi.d Session - Plenary Meetings

Dominica which his GoYernment proudly leads, is taking
place. Emergency domestic affairs associated with a scheduled meeting with the House of Assembly on Thurnlay, :!]
December, demands the presence 0 f all his Ministers and
himself. He has asked me to state, however, that at the
appropriate time he will himself seek to address the General
Assembly. Meanwhile he has charged me, the Ambassadordesignate of Dominica to the United States, with the
responsibility of representing his Government on this
important occasion. I am indeed honoured to be afforded
this unique opportunity to be associated with this historic
moment in the political, cultural and socio-economic
development of my country.
67. The Commonwealth of Dominica, as the General
Assembly must be aware, is situated in the sunny tropical
Caribbean between the French islands of Guadeloupe and
Martinque. Having been discovered and then occupied by
Spain-albeit for a short period-France and Great Britain,
its people have been exposed to the effect of these several
cultures_ This interre~ction of cultures coupled with the
stout character inherited from the indigenous natives, the
fierce and warlike Carib Indians, resulted in the evolution
of a people with a varied attitudinal expression and a fierce
determination to be the artificers of their own fortunes,
utilizing several avenues. Onc such medium of expression is
the United Nations, through which the Commonwealth of
Dominica expects, along with its colle-agues. to make a vital
contribution to international affairs as a third-world nation.

68. ,our having been just accepted as a Member fulflls this
ambition. 1bis day Monday, 18 December 1978, must
hereafter be recognized as one of the important muestones
in the annals of the historical, political and socio-cconomic
development of the Commonwealth of Dominica. the
world's newest nation, the onc hundred and fifty-first
Member of the United Nations.
69. It is most appropriate and fitting-indeed the fundamental principle of gratitude demands--that hea rtfelt
thanks be offered to those who made this realization
possible. [t is with a mixed sense of pride and humility,
therefore, that the Commonwealth of Dominica extends la
you, Mr. PreSident, and the other distinguished representatives, its warm and sincere thanks for having accepted
it into the United Nations. In particular, special thanks go
to the Security Council for having recommended our
acceptance to the General Assembly. That act surely
reflected its confidence in our ability tn fulfil the requirements of membcrsh.ip in this Organization.

spontaneity with which their sentiments were expessed is to
me gratifying. I thank them.

78. 1

72. During our future deliberations they will fmd that we
share similar problems and aspirations. Together we will
fInd the solutions. We will co-operate to the fullest possible
extent towards the achievement of these ends. The
Commonwealth of Dominica will, I assure the General
Assembly, strive to be equal to the faith 30 conclusively
expressed in it and, in so doing, will subscribe to the
principl~s enshrined in the United Nations Charter.

It wh

Ihe n

flt&;
It~

~

&dcpc

73. I wish here to reiterate my earlier statement that at an
appropriate time the Prime Minister will address the
General Assembly in greater detail on policy matters of
most profound international C(Jocern. However, at this
important stage I would be failing in my duty were I not to
give my assurance to you, Mr. President, and representati'les
of this General Assembly that the Commonwealth of
Dominica stllnds cnmmitted to upholding the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Cluuter as clearly enunciated in Articles I and 2

0lm1

~ COl

Oil
laJ
~.

T

VJIIi

Secret!

P

~lion

rfts {,

lhallM

74. As a Member of the United Nations our people are
determined to work with other Members-·-and here I take
the privilege to quote from the United Nations Charter:

b)' the

"_ .. to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war, which twice in our lifetime has brought untold
sorrow to mankind, and

/1 \l>J

Al:tml
.r,ole~

"to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the
dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal
righ 15 of men and women and of nations large and small,
and

.
"to promote social progress and better standards oflife
in larger freedom".

I
I

~. 11

.l.1ltml

Cumm.

UUI

H •••

!

76. In the realization of these resolutions success is
assured Occ-",u$C of the application of a combined effort.

71. Our warmcst thlnk~ at\' nff\'rr,1 to ylllL Mr. President
and to the other group represenlatiws for the c:-.:prcssions
of we[com~ to till' COlllllHmwcalth lIf Dominica. The

77. I fervently pray that the Almighty God will shower
generously upon us his divine gu~dance. May the United
Nations progress from strength to strenglh. .

"to ensure, by the accpetance of principles and the
institution of n1t'thods, that amlCd force shall not be
used, save in the common interest, and
"to employ international machinery for the promotion
of the economic and social advancement of all peoples".

tythe
g1. ()
lrl1iIY

"to unite au r strength to maintain intcrna tional peace
and security, and

70. Secondly, our lasting appreciation goes to the United
Kingdom for perfonning the traditional role of moving
resolutions of membership. Having had us under its tutelage
for quite some time now and more recently over the past
11 years when we managed our own internal affairs. tha t
country, more than any other, must be aware of our
readiness to accept this responsibility. To all other delegations which havc suhscrihed to the resollJt ion. in par·
ticular the sponsors of the reSlllut inn, Dominica rccmus
grateful apprcda t ion.

l'el

I ~J Re

75. In order to accomplish these objectives the people of
the Commonwealth of Dominka are further determinedand again I resort to the United Nations Charter:

to practice tolerance and live together in peace
with one another as good neighbours. and

rlitt-d
If! Re

~~OO

.lJImJi

~

! /)ro/i
, t. T
m1ul
rtu"
blion
~

'Rt:!

87tb meeting - 18 December 1978

78. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): As
the representative of Dominica must appreciate, I am
pleased to be presiding over the Assembly at this meeting,
at which he has addressed us for the first time as the
representative of a new Member State: I congratulate him
whole·heartedly, and wish Dominica a prosperous life as an
independent country.

.pessed is to

lnd that we
her we will
.est possible
ends. The
he General
:onclusively
ribe to the
er.

AGENDA ITEM 62
Operational activities for development (concluded): *
(i) Confinnation of the appointment of the Executive
Director of the United Nations Special Fund for
Land-locked Developing Countries

t that at an
ddress the
matters of
er, at this
~re I not to
'esenta tives
1wealth of
lrposes and
lady enun·

79. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
now invite representatives to turn to a note by the
Secretary-General relating to the confinnation of the
appointment of the Executive Director of the United
Nations Special Fund for Land-locked Developing Countries {A/33/513]. In his note, the Secretary-General states
that he is not submitting an appointment for confumation
by the General Assembly. May I consider that the General
Assembly takes note of the irlfonnation contained in this
note?

people are
here I take
harter:
scourge of

It was so decided (decision 33/317).

~t untold

:hts, in the
the equal
and small,:

AGENDA ITEM 66
United Nations University (concluded): *
(a) Report of the Council of the United Nations Uni·
versity;
(h) Report of the Secretary·General

lrds oflife

REPORT OF THE SECOND COMMITTEE (A/33/463)

people of
tennined-

80. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
Assembly will now consider the report of the Second
Committee on agenda item 66 [A/33/463]. We shall now
take a decision on the two draft resolutions recommended
by the Committee in paragraph 10 of its report.

r in peace

8L Draft resolution I is entitled "United Nations Uni·
versity". The Second Committee adopted that draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to do the same?

)na1 peace

s and the
III not be

Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 33/108).
82. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Draft
resolution Il is entitled "Establishment of a University for
Peace". The Second Committee adopted tha t draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to do the same?

Jromotion
peoples".

mccess is

~ffort.

Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 33/109).

ill shower
le United

* Resumed from the 85th meeting.

1

1535

AGENDA ITEM 68
Human settlements:
(a) Report of the Commission on Human Settlements;
(h) Reports of the Secretary-General
REPORT OF THE SECOND COMMITTEE (A/33/40S)
83. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): With
regard to this item the report of the Fifth Committee
concerning the United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation will be before the Assembly later. I Since
no representative wishes to speak at this stage, the
Assembly will now take a decision on the draft resolutions
recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 13 of
its report {A/33/405j.
84. Draft resolution I is entitled "Living conditions of the
Palestinian people". A recorded vote has been requested.

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Ballamas, Ballrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Bunna,
Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cape
Verde, Central African Empire, ChUd, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia
Against: ·Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, El Salvador, Fiji, Finland, Germany, Federal Republic of, Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Portugal, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay
Draft resolution I was adopted by 109 votes to 2, with 24
abstentions (resolution 33/110P

1 Subsequently distributed as document A/33/536. See the 91st
meeting.
2 The delegation of SwaziJand subsequently informed the Secretaria t that it wished to have its vote reCOrded as having been in
favour of the draft resolution. The delegation of France subsequen tly informed the Secretariat that it wished to have its vote
recorded as an abstention.

-

1536

General Assembly - Thirty-third Set,sion - Plenary Meetings

85. The PRESIDENT (illterpretatfon from Spanish): Draft
resolution II is en titled "I nternational co-operation in the
field of human settlements", The Second ('offilllittee
adopted. that draft resolution without a yote. May 1 take it
that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IT was adopted (resolution 33//11 t

86. The PRESIDENT (inrerpretativn from Spanish): I call
on the representative of Mexico, who wishes to explain his
Yote.

87. Mr, NAVARRETE (Mexico) (illterprerarion from
Spanish): As it did in the Second Committee, the delegation of Mexico voted in favour of draft resolution I,
entitled "Living conditions of the Palestinian people",
which has just been adopted. We wish to reaffirm the
statement we made on 28 November last in the Second
Committee,]
AGENDA ITEM 54

United Nations Relief and Works Agency far Palestine
Refugees in tlle Near East:
(a) Report of 1he Commissioner-GeneraI;
(b) Report of the Working Group on the Financing of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East;
(c) Report of the United Nations Conciliation Commission
for Palestine;
(d) Reports of the Secretary-Ceneral

REPORT OF THE SPECIAL POLITICAL COMM1TIEE
(A/33j374)
AGENDA ITEM SS
Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population
of the Occupied Territories

REPORT OF THE SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE
(A{33{439)
AGENDA ITEM 56
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peace-keeping opemtions in all their aspects
REPORT OF THE SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE
(A/33j451)
AGENDA ITEM 57

Quest ion of the composition of the
relevant organs of the United Nations

REPORT OF THE SPECIALPOLlTICAL COMM1ITEE
(A/33{S 10)
3 S« Of/icid Re.. :ords ut tile (lemrai Assemhlv Thirn'.tllird
Seuio1l, Second COlnlllitlee. 491h m<:cting, para.·h,
Second CommJJlce. Sessional Fascicle, l'urrig<:udu1l1.

,--

:lnd ihid"

AGENDA ITEM 77
Questions relating to information:
(a) Co-operation and assistance in the application and
improvement of national information and mass communication systems for social progress and devel.
opment;
(b) Freedom of information:
(i) Draft Declaration on Freedom of Information;
(ii) Draft Convention on Freedom of In fonnat ion;
(c) United Nations public information policies and activities; report of the Secretary-General
REPORT OF THE SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE
(A{33{S 11)

AGENDA ITEM 126

Establishment of an agency or a department of the United
Nations for undertaking, CCH)rdiIUlting and disseminating
the results of research into unidentified flying objects and
related phenomena
REPORT OF TIlE SPE(')AL POLITICAL COMMITTEE
(A/33fSI'2)
~R_ Mr. MUBAREZ (Ye-men), Rapporteur of the Special
Political ('ommiltee: Fot the last time, it is my privilege as
Rapporteur of the Special Political Committee al the
thirty-third session (lf the Gent-raJ Assembly to present the
reports of tlult Committee. Those included in the agenda
for this plenary meeting relate to six of the II items
allocated to the Special Political Committee, Three of those
items we re de ferred until the end of the Committee's work
in -order (0 al[ow as much time as possible for consultations
among interested delegations,

RC/. The first repmt which I now present to the General

Assembly reta tcs to agenda item 54 conc~ ming lINRWA

f A/33/374/. In considering agenda item 54. the Special
Political Committee was assisted by the Commissioner'
General of UNRWA, Mr. Thomas McElhiney. The Committee devoted 11 meetings to the consideration of this
problem. hearing over SO statements in its debate. Six draft
resolutions we re submitted to the Committee. all of which
wcre adopted. They appear as draft resoluti~lns A to Fin
paragraph 21 of the Committee's report. and I commend
them to the General Assembly for adoption.
()o. The second item. item 55. relating to the- report of the
Speo:ial Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting
the Human Rights of the Population in the Occupied
Territories, could not be considered until late in the session,
when the Committee devoted seven meetings to the
question, following the introduction by the representative
of Sri Lanka of the report of the Special Committee on
Israeli Praclil:es. Some 40 delegations took part in the
debate, and the Committee received three draft resolutions
on the item. TIle three draft resolutions were all recom·
mended to the General Assembly, and can be found as draft
resolutions A B and C in paragraph IS of the Committee's
report! A/33/439] , which I have the honour to present for
adoption by the General Assembly.
I

=

--

IZl and
!i corn_

devel_

..

nn-

activ.

United
inating
::ts and

TEE

)pecial
llege as
at the
~nt the
agenda
items
r those
s work
rations

ieneral
.... RWA
ipecial
sionerCom-

::Jf this
... draft
which

o Fin
lmend
of the
:-ecting
cupied
ession ,
() the
ltative
lee on
in the
utio ns

eco 1l1; draft
ittee'S
n t for

87th meeting - 18 December 1978

91. The third item on today's agenda from the Special
Political Committee is item 56 [A/33/451] , entitled
"Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects". TIlls item was also
not taken up until late in the session, and the Committee
devoted four meetings to its consideration. Thirty-four
delegations took part in the debate, and only one draft
resolution was submitted to the Committee, which was
adopted by a roll· call vote. The text of the draft resolution
which the Committee recommends to the General As·
sembly for adoption appears in paragraph 6 of the Com·
mittee's report.

1537

Special Political Committee on agenda item 54 [A/33/
374j.
96. I shall now call on those representatives wishing to
speak in explanation of their votes before the vote.
97. Mr. RAM ATI (Israel): My delegation feels that delegations to the Assembly session might, even at this late
stage, wish to re-examine some of the tex ts before they cast
their votes, and I refer particularly to draft resolutions A,
C, E and F in paragraph 21 of the report of the Special
Political Committee.

92. Item 57, concerning the question of the composition
of the relevant organs of the United Nations, was con·
sidered by the Committee at three meetings in November
and once again at the Committee's last meeting on
8 December. Extensive consultations were held by the
Chairman of the Special Political Committee with members
of the contact group established in accordance with General
Assembly decision 32/427 of last year and with the
Chairmen of the various regional groups of States. As the
Committee's report [A/33/510] indicates, it proved impossible to reach a consensus on this item, and the
Committee rejected a motion to extend the mandate of the
contact group. Accordingly, the Committee adopted by
vote the draft resolution submitted by the group of Asian
States, as amended by the African group. The text of the
draft resolution recommended for adoption by the General
Assembly appears in paragraph 14 of the report.

98. With regard to draft resolution A, entitled" Assistance
to Palestine refugees", my delegation will abstain in the
vote because this draft resolution could be read in a way
which would give an incorrect interpretation of General
Assembly resolution 194 (Ill). Moreover, after the adoption
of resolution 194 (UI) in 1948, Arab actions in the wake of
the 1948-1949 war led to a massive migration ofJews from
Arab countries to Israel, which exceeded in number that of
Arab refugees from Israel. The problem of these Arab and
Jewish refugees, which arises from a de facto exchange of
population, can be solved realistically and equitably only
by negotiations, as called for by Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). Since negotiations
based on these Security Council resolutions are in progress,
General Assembly recommendations could impede rather
than facilitate agreement.

93. Item 77, which the General Assembly allocated to the
Special Political Committee for the first time at this session
comprises three separate subitems which had formerly bee~
dealt with by the Third and Fifth Committees. The Special
Political Committee was unable to begin its consider'dtion
of these issues until 29 November, and thereafter it
considered them in the course of five meetings, hearing over
40 statements during the debate, as well as the introduction
of reports by the Assistant Director-General of UNESCO
and by the Under-Secretary·General for Public Information.
~ollowing the debate and intensive consultations among
mterested delegations, the Committee was able to adopt by
consensus the three draft resolutions and the draft decision
which appear in paragraphs 19 and 20 of the report of the
Special Political Committee [A/33/511] , which I commend to the General Assembly for its adoption.

99. With regard to draft resolution C my delegation will
also abstain in the vote because of its political implications.
Israel favours every necessary assistance for the education
of refugee children, but it feels that this good purpose
should not be subverted into yet one more act of political
hostility. My Govemment is more interested than some
others in good education for Arab refugees and makes
considerable financial allocations to provide education for
refugee students in all the areas administered by Israel.
Israel has expanded vocational training centres in Judaea,
Samaria and Gaza from two in 1967 to 24 by 1976. It is of
great importance for the.future stability of our region that
the refugees should be integrated into a compatible society
as productive and normal citizens. The role of education in
this process is self-evident. As an example of my Government's positive interest in higher education for the Arab
population, including the refugee population, my delegation wishes to refer to the three Arab universities
mentioned in the draft resolution before us. Those univer·
sities did not exist when the Jordanian. Government was in
control of Judaea and Samaria. A "fourth institution of
university standard for Islamic studies has recently been
opened and is now awaiting recognition by competent
Islamic authorities. My Government hopes that affluent
countries will be encouraged to assist higher education not
only for Palestine refugees but also for other refugees in
many societies whose need is no less.

94. The last report of the Special Political Committee, to
be found in document A/33/512, relates to agenda item
126, the question submitted by Grenada concerning un·
identified flying objects and related phenomena. Following
the presentation made before the Committee by the
delegation of Grenada at two meetings held on 27
November, extensive consultations were held which resulted in the Committee's adoption by consensus of the
draft decision contained in paragraph 9 of the report. I
commend this draft decision to the General Assembly for
adoption by consensus.

Pursuant to role 66 of the roles of procedure it was
decided not to discuss the reports of the Special Political
Committee.
95. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
General Assembly will now consider the report of the

100. With regard to draft resolution E, my delegation feels
that this draft resolution defies elementary reason. Is it
really the desire of Governments that Israel should force
refugees ou t of decen t housing and back into primitive
shelters? Is it really the wish of Governments represented
here that Israel should plant refugee shelters and refugee
families on roads that have been cut through previously

1538

!;

General Assembly - Thirty-third Session - Plenary Meetings

inaccessible jungles of airless shelters? My delegation
understands why certain Governments would like the Gaza
Strip to revert to conditions of lawlessness and bloodshed.
Those Governments have been unhappy to see tranquility
and prosperity replace terrorism there. The more terrorism,
the more those Governments are pleased. But is it truly the
intention of the majority of Member States that Israel
should by its own deeds coerce refugees to form once again
an infrastructure for terrorism? It is said that votes on
draft resolutions do not always reflect the true positions of
States Members of our Organization. We simply cannot·
believe that the Governments supporting the draft resolution now before us-except for a small group of extremists-really want it implemented.
10 1. My delegation will also vote against draft resolution
F. The matter under consideration should be dealt with in
accordance with Security Council resolution 242 (1967).
Negotiations are in progress in accordance with that resolution and also Security Council resolution 338 (1973).
Indeed, initial agreement has been reached on the creation
of a continuing committee to decide by agreement on the
mOdalities of admission of persons displaced from the West
Bank and Gaza in 1967, together with necessary measures
to prevent disruption and disorder. My Government, which
has already made possible the return of 50,000 persons
displaced in 1967, approaches these negotiations with all
goodwill. The draft resolution before us could therefore
hardly be more ill-timed or inappropriate. An attempt by
the Gensral Assembly to prescribe solutions to problems
which are the subject of negotiations between the parties
concerned would not be a helpful move and would not
serve any good purpose. Operative paragraph I should be
carefully studied by those voting on this draft resolution. It
would constitute a new and dangerous precedent contrary
to international law and the United Nations Charter and
would be inconsistent with the sovereign rights of States. It
seeks to encourage attitudes and positions which are neither
correct nor responsible and are prejudicial to good norms
of intemationallife. Furthermore, the demands formulated
in it are contrary to the basic requirements of Israel's
security and to practical possibilities and are therefore
unrealistic. For aU those reasons, my delegation will vote
against this draft resolution.
102. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I should like to
explain my vote. As is known, I very rarely sponsor draft
resolutions, including those dealing with Palestinian or any
other refugees-and, incidentally, I am not a sponsor of
those draft resolutions.
103. However, [ know how much the Palestinian people
suffered not only from 1947 and 1948 and thereafter but
also during the period of the British Mandate to the point
where, finally, although they were the Mandatory Power,
the British authorities had to throw the whole question of
Palestine into the lap of the United Nations, since they had
been bankrupted by the Second World War. And who was
not bankrupted by that war? Only the defeated countries,'
Japan and West Germany, were not bankrupted. So, in
fairness to our British friends, I should say that the whole
world became bankrupt, fiscaIly and fmancially. I say this
so that my good British colleagues do not think I am using
slanderous terms against them.

104. I happened to participate in 1947 in the meetings at
Lake Success. I worked very hard together with FariB
EI-Khouri of Syria-a former Prime Minister of Syria and
before that, during the days of the Ottoman Empire the
deputy of Syria in Istanbul-pleading with Mr. W~eD
Austin, the Permanent Representative of the United States
in the United Nations, to take up the matter of Palestine
with his Government in order to submit it to the
Trusteeship COWlcilfor a little while so that, perhaps, with
further efforts we nught find a satisfactory formUla.
105. The Arabs always have had sympathy for the Jews
because of what they suffered, even before Hitler, because
our Jews were really Arabs; they were Semitic. The others
were the Khazar Jews who had been converted to Judaism
in the eighth century and whose ancestors had never laid
eyes on the land of Palestine. We are not delVing into the
history of the question, but I have to touch upon it so that
my colleagues here can understand how the refugee
problem came to be created.
106. Mr. Warren Austin was a most reasonable man and
said he would take the matter up with his Government.
Faris El·Khouri was not speaking just for Syria and I was
not speaking only for Saudi Arabia; we were speaking on
behalf of all the Arab peoples. Mind you, not "people" but
"peoples". There are various differences in the culture of
the Arab peoples, but we have a common denominator of
culture that makes us say "people" when, in fact, there are
"peoples".
107. What happened was that Mr. Austin was rebuffed. He
told us gently and confidentially that Mr. Truman, the
President of the United States was intent on the parti·
tioning of Palestine, Mr. Truman who was 6,000 or 7,0CIJ
miles away from Palestine knew the politics of his own
country very well. He went against the advice of his own
State Department, saying of them, "Who are these striped·
pants boys to give advice to the President of the United
States? n. He told them to take the matter up again. "TeU
me," he asked, "how many Americans of Arab or Pales·
tinian origin do I have in my constituency? " It was on this
basis that he wanted partition so that he might get votes.
This is why I have .since then called this democracy by
subscription and contribution.

108. Our Soviet friends were represented by Mc. Grornyko
who, incidentally is a good friend of mine although he is a
Communist and I represent a monarchy. Years later J
reminded him of this. I went to see him and asked why he
wanted to precipitate a vote. I suggested we put the
question of Palestine before the Trusteeship Council until
we could come to a satisfactory solution that would serve
the interests of both the Jews and the Palestinians.
109. Parenthetically, I should say that many of those
Palestinians had been Jews and they had converted to
Christianity in the Roman days when Jesus emerged. Then
they became disenchanted with Byzantium when Palestine
was ruled from Byzantium. It so happened that Islam
emerged on the scene about 14 centuries ago and many of .
them finally became Moslems. But originally many of them
were Semitic Jews, not like those Khazar Jews of Eastern
and Central Europe.

•
87th meeting - 18 December 1978

110. Mr. Gromyko, for reasons of his own, wanted the
vote on partition to be taken immediately. Thus, the
Palestinian people were the victims of both the Americans
and, to a lesser extent, the Soviets. They were the dominant
Powers in 1947. They had many clients, which later caused
my good friend Vyshinsky to refer to the solidarity vote as
the mechanical vote.

le meetings at
~ r with Fam
of Syria and
1 Empire, the
h Mr. Warren
United States
,r of Palestine
it it to the
perhaps, with
'mula.
for the Jews
[itler, because
,c. The others
:d to Judaism
lad never laid
lving into the
,pon it so that
the refugee

'Ible man and
Government.

'cia and I was
e speaking on
"people" but
:he culture of
nominator of
fact, there are

i rebuffed. He

Truman, the
on the parti000 or 7,OCIJ
:s of his own
:e of his own
these stripedIf the United
) again. "Tell
lIab or Pales·
It was on this
¥It get vo res.
emocracy by

~r. Gromyko
hough he isa
(ears later I
Isked why he
we put the
Council until
would serve
'IllS.

my of those
converted to
nerged. Then
lIen Palestine
i that Islam
and many of
lany of them
rs of Eastern

I
'

Ill. Why all this preface? Because it touches on the
question of the refugees. We are dealing here with the
Palestinian refugees. The representative of Israel, who they
tell me is about 45 years old or so, must have been a boy at
the time and he must have been indoctrinated from then on
by his Government. He speaks, not of Palestinian refugees,
but of Arab refugees so as to confuse the matter. He talks
about terrorism in 1948. That was the terrorism that was
perpetrated by the Zionists in Deir Yasin. They also
bombed and destroyed the King David Hotel, killed Lord
Moyne, and even massacred Count Bernadotte. The British
sent commissions and advised the Government of the
United Kingdom to go slowly.

112. And this gentleman from Israel refers to the Arab
refugees in order to confuse the issue. The Palestinians were
an Arab entity. They happened to have the common
denominator of the Arab culture, leaving aside religion,
since some of them were Christians, some of them were
Sephardic Jews, and the majority happened to be Moslems.
As I have already said, many of those Moslems had been
Sephardic Jews.
Mr. Urquia (El Salvador), Vice-President, took the Chair.
113. This extraneous element was treated badly in
Europe, for whatever reason. I leave aside Hitler because
they were badly treated even before Hitler, in the Dreyfus
affair. Dreyfus was a Jew who was sent to Devil's Island in
the Caribbean and who, thanks to Emile Zola-who wrote a
series of articles in the French press at the turn of the last
century, one of which became so famous that its title is still
cited, namely, J'accuse-was fmally liberated. I will not go
into the treatment of Jews in the Middle Ages nor later,
after the Dreyfus affair.
114. But those Jews had a Central and Eastern European
Khazar ideology. Khazars were'monotheistic peoples and
lived near the Caspian Sea. Very many of them were
converted to Judaism because they did not want to become
Christians and come under the thumb of Byzantium, which
was very strong then, and because the Moslems did not have
any missionaries. So they thought it would be la mode
to belong to a monotheistic religion, and that is how they
became Jews. They used religion as the Christians had done
dUring the Middle Ages and the Moslems during the
Caliphate later on as a motivation for a political end. Both
the Christians and the Moslems in the area failed miserably
because nationalism superseded religion, and it is a people's
culture and economic interests that determine their nationality. Hence the French Jews-many of whom I knew
during the 1920s-are as French as any Frenchman. The
British Jews-many of whom I knew as friends-were as
English as any Englishman. But the Khazars came and told
them, "Being Jews, you are a people apart; you are a
chosen people". And here we are fighting time and again
against discrimination. Was God practising discrimination in
creating the Jews?

a

1539

115. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
Excuse me, Sir, I have been informed that you have been
speaking for more than 10 minutes. I am of course always
delighted to listen to your statements because they are
always eloquent and teach us in the United Nations a good
deal, but we are pressed for time and are now involved in
explanations of vote. So I would appreciate it if you could
come to the end of your statement. I would appreciate it
very much, Sir.
116. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I jUst want to tell
you, Sir, that I apologize; nobody warned me that the rule
was 10 minutes, but I do not want any privileges. I know
the rules. I appreciate your graciousness towards me.
117. To continue: in other words, those refugees who
figure in draft resolutions A, B, C, D, E and F are the
victims of those Khazars who have the audacity to come
here and tell us that it is the refugees who are the terrorists.
118. Today we voted for the admission of Domirlica as a
Member of the United Nation,S. What is the population of
that country, 75,OOO? There were 3 million Palestinians
who had their own entity before the Khazars came from
what is called the north-eastem tier of Asia and perpetrated
so many atrocities in the Holy Land, the land of Jesus
Christ, the land of peace, whose people welcomed tourists.
The Palestinians were a very peaceful people until those
Khazars came and created the problem with the help of the
British.and others later on.
119. Those refugees are the responsibility of the United
Nations, which made them refugees by acting on a false
premise, that of partition. It is the duty of the United
Nations to look after the refugees. We non-Palestinian
Arabs are doing a lot. This is why I have explained my vote,
and I exhort everybody to support these draft resolutions
unanimously, if possible, or at least by a large majority.
120. The PRESIDENT (interpretation/ram Spanish): The
General Assembly will now proceed to take a decision on
the six draft resolutions recommended by the Special
Political Committee in paragraph 21 of its report [ A 1331

374/.
121. Draft resolution A is entitled "Assistance to Palestine
refugees". In the Committee, it was adopted by 108 votes
to none, with 1 abstention. A recorded vote has been
requested.

A recorded vote was taken.

In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Empire, Chad, Chile,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, C;uba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador,
Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Germany,
Federal Republic of, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic

1540

General Assembly - Thirty-thild Session - Plenary Meetings

Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, liberia, Libyan Arab lamahiriya, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mal'dives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics; United
Arab Ifmirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Cameroon, United
Republic of Tanzania, United ~tates ofA~e~~at.-Uru.&uay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia

"

Against: None
Abstaining: El Salvador, Israel
Draft resolution A was adopted by 136 votes to none,
with 2 abstentions (resolution 33/112 A).
122. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
Draft resolution B is entitled "Assistance to persons displaced as a result of the June 1967 hostilities". The Special
Political Committee adopted that draft resolution by
consensus. May I consider that the General Assembly
wishes to adopt draft resolution Bby consensus?

; ,

Draft resolution B was adopted (resolution 33/112 Bl.
123.. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish).
Draft resolution C is entitled "Offers by Member States of
grants and scholarships for higher education, including
vocational training, for the Palestine refugees". In the
Committee, draft resolution C was adopted by a vote of
III to none, with 2 abstentions. A recorded vote has been
requested.

A recorded vote was taken.

",,

In f(l)iour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Empire, Chad, Chile,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic
Republic, Germany. Federal Republic of, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People's Democratic Republic, lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Mal dives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlan~s, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda:
Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra leone, Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,

Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Tb';
land,. ~ogo, Tri~idad an.d !obago, T~isia, Turkey, Uganda,
UkrainIan SOVIet SOCIalIst Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britai~ and North.ern Ireland, United Republic of
Cameroon, Uruted Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia

Against: None
Abstaining: United States of America, Israel
Draft resolution C was adopted by 136 votes to none
with 2 abstentions (resolution 33/112 C).
'
124. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
Draft resolution D is en titled "Working Group on the
Financing of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Ne ar East". The report of the
Fifth Committee on the administrative and financial impli.
cations of that draft resolution is contained in document
A/33/493. The Special Political Committee adopted draft
resolution D by consensus. May I consider that the General
Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution D?

Draft resolution D was adopted (resolution 33/112 Dj.
125. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We
shall now vote on draft resolution E, entitled "Palestine
refugees in the Gaza Strip". In the Committee it was
adopted by a vote of 109 to I, with 2 abstentions. A
recorded vote has been requested.

A recorded vote was taken.
In f(1Vour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argen·
tina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet So·
cialist Republic, Cape Verde, Central African Empire, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, German
Democratic Republic, Germany, Federal Republic of,
Ghana, Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Uberia, Libyan Arab lamahiriya, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda,
Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thai·
land, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Cameroon, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Vo~ta.
Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire,
Zambia

&$
87th meeting - 18 December 1rn 8

Against: Israel
Abstaining: Canada,
States of America

El Salvador, Guatemala, United

Draft resolution E was adopted by 136 votes to 1, with 4
abstentions (resolution 33/112 E).

IQtes

126. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
Finally we come to draft resolution F, entitled "Population
and refugees displaced since 1967". In the Committee draft
resolution F was adopted by a vote of 95 to 4, with 18
abstentions. A recorded vote has been requested.

to ttOnt,

'Om

.~
-..panis/t
I.
,.

...

.1rO\1h

l:" on \he
Works A.
erep
genc:y
fin o.tt of the
a.n CIa] pli.
i .m
lJTl'

dOCument

adOPted dnft
lal
_I
, the Ce ne,.,

33//12 DJ.
I Spanish): Wc

tied "Palestine

unittee it wu
absten tions. A

\ngola, ArgenI, Bangladesh,
ia, Botswana,
ian Soviet So-

Empire, Chad,
Cuba, CyplUS,
ark, Djibouti.
ItOrial Guinea,

A recorded vote was taken.
I

In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan; Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cape Verde, Central
African Empire, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Cuba. Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic
Yemen, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, German
Democratic Republic, Ghana, Greece, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran,
Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Cameroon, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire,
zambia
Against:

Australia, Canada, Israel, United States of

mhi a, Ge IT\l!Jl
RepU blie oi,

America

iti, Hooduw.

Abstaining: Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Denmark, El Salvador, Finland, France, Germany, Federal Republic of,
Guatemala, Iceland, Ireland. Italy, Luxembourg, Mongolia,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Papua New
Guinea, Swaziland, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland

Iraq. lrehn~,
:enya, J{uwall.

Ion. Lesotho,
lJ~dagascat,
g, fl'lJ'
••

.

MllunflUS,

lla,

~e pal ,

Newer.

oman.

,rwa)', PtlU.
lJ'ap,UaY, d1,
. RwaJl
BllI~,

lIhlll,

senep.

su dJn,

I.ani' a, 'fb1i.
tepu bl~' <Is,
ltKe)' • f ~viel

on 0
gd()lll
tite d ~b1jC cl.

:d ReP vo l\!'
Uppt:,t ~,
lOslllV. lt '

Draft resolution F was adopted by 115 votes to 4, with
22 abstentions (resolution 33/112 F). 4

127. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
now call on those representatives who wish to explain their
votes after the vote.
128. Miss MUCK (Austria): The Austrian delegation has,
as in previous years, given full approval to the resolution
concerning assistance to the Palestinian refugees, as Austria
4 The delegation of Mongolia subsequently informed the Secretariat that it wished to have its vote recorded as having been in
favour of the draft resolution.

1541

has always been concerned about the tragic situation of the
Palestinian refugees and displaced persons ever since the
origin of that problem.

129. The Austrian delegation, however, wants to point out
that the approval of paragraph 3 of resolution 33/112 A
should by no means be interpreted as a reservation
concerning the hospitality which Austria is at present
granting to UNRWA. As is known to the States Members of
the United Nations, Austria, motivated by her sincere desire
that UNRWA may fulfil its important task without interruption and with the greatest efficiency, has .offered
facilities in Vienna to serve as part of the UNRWA
headquarters. The office facilities and services which have
been offered to UNRWA, and which were taken over last
summer by that organization, will be available to it as long
as needed. We are satisfied that the removal of a portion of
the UNRWA headquarters office and staff could take place
without difficulties. Austria hopes that it has thus given
additional support to the benefit of the Palestinian people
and will continue to act accordingly in the future.
130. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): UNRWA was created in

1950, two years after the Palestinian catastrophe. Its role,
as envisaged by the United Nations, was to help the
Palestinians to keep body and soul together pending their
repatriation to their homeland in Palestine in accordance
with resolution 194 (Ill), adopted on 11 December 1948
by the General Assembly, which asserted and has continued
to assert every year for the past three decades the
inalienable right of the Palestinian refugees to repatriation,
as a first choice, or to compensation for those who may not
wish to exercise that inalienable right.
131. This should be the fundamental framework for and
core of what the General Assembly should regard as the real
and final solution to the problem of the Palestinian
refugees. The Assembly is morally and legally bound to do
so, because anything else is a mere palliative so long as the
plight of the Palestinian refugees, who number 1,750,000
human beings, is inhumanely prolonged.

132. When we read of the targeted budget of $140 million
or so-which is rarely subscribed in full-let us judge it
against the loss of uncounted tens of billions of dollars
suffered by the Palestinians in lost earnings, property, land,
assets and the opportunities for gainful employment which
every country affords to its people.
133. Under the present budget the share of a Palestinian
refugee is no more than 21 cents a day. Would you believe
that? Yet it is a simple question of mathematics, It might
not be out of order for the Special Unit on Palestinian
Rights in the United Nations to make some calculations as
to the disastrous and cumulative losses incurred by the
Palestinian refugees over the past three decades. The study
should not be confined to income from properties conflscated by the Israelis, but should cover the comprehensive
loss of national income for 30 years.

134. I think the figures would be astronomical even by
present-day standards. The difference between a proposed
$140 million agency allocation and the tens of billions of
dollars which the Palestinians have been unlawfully deprived of can only be judged by the colossal sacrifices and

1542

General Assembly - Thirty-thlJ:d Session - Plenary Meetings

sufferings-invisible sometimes though they may be-of the
Palestinian people.
135. The representative of Israel has referred to a transfer
of population, talking about what he calls "a Jewish refugee
problem". My delegation strongly objects to this parallel.
The Jews who emigrated to Palestine from the Arab
countries concerned did so voluntarily or at the behest of
the Jewish Agency. r declare here before the General
Assembly that the very same Arab States are willing to take
back every Arab of the Judaic faith who may wish to be
repatriated to his indigenous and ancestral homeland-to
whichever country he wishes. Is Israel willing to accord the
same treatment to the indigenous Palestinian population of
Palestine? There is no such thing as Jewish refugees. The
Jewish people can go back tomorrow if they wish to; and
the Arab States have declared so in no uncertain terms.
136. Even in Security Council resolution 242 (1967),
which the Palestinian leadership has rejected because in it
the Palestinians are treated as refugees, what exactly is said
about the refugees? The resolution talks about an equitable
solution to the problem of the Palestinian refugees. What is
"equitable" in anybody's comprehension? Is it equitable to
deny somebody repatriation to his home, to his house, to
his farm, to his homeland? Equity cannot be expressed in
terms of dollars and cents. It concerns the sense of
belonging, the sense of identification and the inalienable
right to repatriation to one's homeland. So that even within
Council resolution 242 (1967), an equitable solution to the
problem would be interpreted as according the Palestinians
the inalienable right to go back to their country, if they so
choose.
137. I wish to emphasize here that Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) did not in any way invalidate
General Assembly resolution 194 (Ill) which mandates the
repatriation of the Palestinian refugees. The best proof of
this is that we supported that resolution long before the
Security Council adopted resolution 242 (1967) and continued to do so long after the adoption of the latter 11
years ago.
138. The representative of Israel has talked about education. r think that, if Jordan is proud of anything, of any
contribution it may have made to the Palestinians' cause, it
is in the field of education where every Palestinian is
entitled to education, where there is almost universal
education and where there has been an upsurge of
education to the point which is almost unequalled throughout the world.
139. The universities that the representative of Israel has
referred to existed as colleges long before Israel was created
in 1948. The Al-Nagah College at Nablus was called
"college" because in those days-we are talking about 30 or
40 years ago-we could not afford to make them universities; but they existed all the same. Many of the Arab
leaders throughout the Arab world, including Arab North
Africa, received and obtained their education in that
college. The Bir Zeit University also antedates the creation
of Israel. And the third, of course, is Bethlehem, which was
a college, but which is now being expanded into a
university .

140. But let the representative of Israel reply to what I;;
going to say to him, namely, that the Israeli OCCUpation
authorities have expelled the President of the Bir Zeit
University. They have also ...
141. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
call on the representative of Israel on a point of order.
142. Mr. RAMATI (Israel): The representative of Jordan
has now asked me to reply to him. I understood that the
debate was over and that this was meant to be an
explanation of vote.
143. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): I will be very brief. I was
about to fInish.
144. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
representative of Jordan was explaining his vote and, as he
has just told us, he will be very brief in the remainder of his
statement. So I ask him to continue speaking.
145. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): Not only has the President
of the Bir Zeit University been expelled, but many
professors as well. The General Assembly knows how the
students at those universities are being treated. This is
something that everybody knows from simply watching
television and reading the newspapers.
146. The fmal point is in reply to what the representative
of Israel has told our General Assembly regarding the demo·
Iition of the shelters of the refugees in the Gaza Strip. This
reminds me of history, of the year 1936, when the British
military authorities demolished a whole quarter in the Arab
city of J affa. They destroyed that section of the town on
grounds of security. The Palestinians-the inhabitants-went
to the Supreme Court. There was a British Chief Justice
who was a man of considerable integrity. I remember him
and the judgement he gave, when he admonished his own
Government and said that it had. been cowardly in
explaining why it had demolished that town. It had
demolished it for security reasons, not because it wanted to
carry out new town planning for the area.
147. It is the same thing with our refugees in the Gaza
Strip. Those refugees do not belong there. They want to go
back to their towns and villages throughout· Palestine.
Therefore, they are satisfied to remain in those shelters fOT
the time being. This is part of the price which a refugee has
to pay in order to be accorded the inalienable right to
repatriation.
148. The PRESIDENT ((nterpretation from Spanish): We
shall now proceed to consider the report of the Special
Political Committee on agenda item 55 [A/33/439].

149.: I shall now caU upon representatives wishing to speak
in explanation of their votes before the vote.
150. Mr. RAMATI (Israel): Israel will vote against draft
resolution A in paragraph 15 of the report because it makes
assertive recommendations on a legal question. The Gener1l1
Assembly is a political body which cannot assume the role
of an intemational court.

87th meeting - 18 December 1978

to what I am
i occupation
the Bir bit

151. The fourth Geneva Convention 5 applies to national
territories under occupation in time of war. That is not the
situation in our area. The question of the status of the
territories to which the draft resolution refers is awaiting
fInal disposition by negotiation and agreement. Some of
those areas were never recognized as part of the territory of
any independent State. Furthermore, the Armistice Agreements signed by Israel and all its Arab neighbours in 1949
specifically deny the status of political or territorial
boundary to all armistice lines in the area in question which
were delineated without prejudice to rights, claims and
positions of either party in the final peace settlement.

Spl11lish): I
order.
ve of Jordan
:>od that the
t to be an

brief. I was
I

oanish): The

:e and, as he
ainder of his

he President
but many
IWS how the
ted. This is
ly watching

presentative
Lg the demoa Strip. This
. the British
in the Arab
he town on
:tants-went
hief Justice
lember him
led his own
owardly in
vn. It had
t wanted to

n the Gaza
. want to go
t . Palestine.
shelters for
refugee has
,le right to

'}{mish}: We
the Special
19].

ng to speak

~ainst draft

se it makes

'he General
ne the role

I.

152. It is likewise relevant and significant to note that the
position of Arab Governments in this matter is ambiguous,
since none of them has considered appointing Protecting
Powers.
153. In consequence of all these factors, it cannot be
stated that Israel is an occupying Power within the terms of
the fourth Geneva Convention. However, for humanitarian
reasons, the Israel Government is in fact guided by the
humanitarian provisions of the Convention in its treatment
of the civilian population and, in several importan t respects,
it even goes beyond the requirements of the Convention.
154. Regarding draft resolution B, in view of Israel's
position concerning the fourth Geneva Convention, which I .
have just explained, and also since final territorial dispositions are still to be made by negotiation and agreement
in the areas referred to in this draft resolution, my
Government cannot accept the assertion that Israeli settlements should be disallowed in them. In addition, Judaea,
Samaria and Gaza were integral parts of the territory
mandated by the league of Nations to Britain to establish
therein a Jewish national home, and Jewish settlements
existed in them until they were invaded by neighbouring
States in 1948 in defiance of the United Nations and its
Charter. In those areas the question of foreign sovereignty
does not arise. Furthermore, morally and historically Jews
cannot be excluded from any part of their own homeland.
155. No less important than all these considerations is the
security aspect guiding the establishment of settlements.
The settlements are intended to help to create a situation of
interdependent security and a measure of security depth in
areas from which vital regions of Israel can be put in mortal
danger.
156. Israel's settlements have not displaced any local
residents, and they have been established largely in desert
areas, which their inhabitants are developing to the benefit
of all who live in the vicinity.

1543

to a secondary position. It concentrated instead on an
attempt to establish some sort of connexion between the
humanitarian element mentioned in the Conunittee's mandate and the political declarations the Committee decided
to make in its report. Those declarations have become the
main part of the report, and their purpose is to support
extreme Arab positions. Those positions found expression
in the debate in the Special Political Committee. They call
explicitly for the dismantling of Israel. My Government
indignantly rejects the false and unfounded accusations
contained in this draft resolution. Operative paragraph 5 (g)
is particularly slanderous. The International Committee of
the Red Cross, which has every facility to talk with
detainees privately, has not substantiated these crude
allegations. Other sections of operative paragraph 5 are
equally devoid of truth and are utterly ridiculous. The only
purpose of operative paragraph 10 is to continue to flood
the United Nations with reports deliberately hostile to
Israel. It would be much more constructive to discontinue
the piling up of these abusive resolutions and instead to
support the peace negotiations which are aimed at, among
other things, establishing self-government in Judaea, Samaria and Gaza, so that the inhabitants will be able to
demonstrate their own ability to' protect and advance
human rights.
158. Mr. SARCE~O MORGAN (Guatemala) (interpretation from Spanish): As it did in the Special Political
Committee, when that Committee was considering the item
entitled "Report of the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories", my delegation will
abstain in the vote on draft resolutions A and B and will
vote against draft resolution C, all of which appear in
document A/33/439, because we consider that whatever
decision may be taken by the Assembly, even with the best
of intentions, it may make more difficult the negotiations
on the Middle East conflict being held by the parties
directly affected and concerned.
159. Over the years international law has recognized
negotiation as one of the most effective means of solving
international conflicts. Consequently, the international
community has adopted that procedure as a civilized means
of settling disputes, with positive results.
160. The Government of Guatemala, in accordance with
its fervent and' traditional p'ursuit of peace and in corn·
pliance with rules of international law, believes that the
negotiations will result in a just and fair settlement
acceptable to the parties.

157. Draft resolution C is a glaring example of the vicious
campaign of slander to which Israel is exposed in the
United Nations. The Special Committee to investigate what
are called Israeli practices affecting human rights in Judaea,
Samaria and Gaza, was designed from the start as a tool
with which to wage political warfare against Israel. The
latest report of that Corrunittee [A/33/35] avoided listing
easily refutable allegations. In fact it relegated human rights

161. Mr. El·CHOUFI (Syrian Arab Republic) [interpretation from Arabic): The delegation of the Syrian Arab
Republic will vote in favour of the draft resolutions
submitted by the Special Political Committee to the
General Assembly, namely, draft resolutions A, B and C
concerning Israeli practices in the occupied Arab territories.
Contrary to the allegations of the Zionist representative, we
believe that the General Assembly and the United Nations
in general have the right to discuss and pass judgement on
the inhuman Israeli practices to which the population of
the occupied territories is subjected.

5 Geneva Convcn tion relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949.

162. In this connexion, we have received consistent
information during the past several weeks which points to

1544

General Assembly - Thirty-third Session - Plenary Meetings

the escalation of violent Israeli practices, including the
demolition of dwellings which has taken place in the
villages of Kafr QallU and Silwad as well as the imposition
of the curfew in more than one area. Students have been
arrested, in particular the students of the University of Bir
Zeit.
163. For these reasons, we feel that the Secretary-General
of the United Nations should be requested to provide the
General Assembly with all the information available to him
concerning those Israeli activities which are directed against
the civilian population of those areas.
164. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): In explaining my vote I
wish to emphasize the following points. The occupied
territories are not-and { repeat are not-a no-man's la.nd. In
1950 there was juridical and complete unity between the
East and West Banks of the River Jordan, pending a fmal
solution. That was specifically stated in the Act of Unity
adopted concerning the two banks of the River Jordan. The
Jordan anny and the other contingents from the neighbouring Arab armies did not enter Palestine to destroy
Israel, as the representative ofIsrael has claimed. They went
there for a humanitarian rescue operation to stave off the
massacre of the remnants of the population. They never
crossed into the territory allocated to Israel under General
Assembly resolution ISI (II).
165. The representative ofIsrael has also said that nobody
recognized the unity of the two banks of the River Jordan.
I should like to remind him that the entire United Nations
admitted Jordan as it then existed, a united Jordan, to
membership in the United Nations in 1955. That was
recognition in toto. But assuming, for the sake of argument,
that that unity has been abrogated-although internationally and juridically it has not; the United Nations has
not adopted any resolution abrogating that unity-whatever
the Arabs agreed to among themselves is their own business.
The only legal alternative, assuming that unity has been
abrogated, is the implementation of resolution 181 (II),
under which a Palestinian Arab State would have been
established which would have been far larger than the
occupied West Bank. That resolution, tragically, was not
implemented either by the United Nations or by the
departing and disintegrating Mandatory Power, the United
Kingdom, in 1947.
166. It is therefore misleading to state that the occupied
territories are not juridically occupied territories. They are
and will continue to be so until a fmal solution to the
problem of Palestine, which goes far beyond that of the
West Bank, is carried out in letter as well as in spirit.
167. The representative of Israel has just stated that Israel
has every right to continue to colonize the occupied
territories. If it does have that right, why does the
representative of Israel not say that that is its ultimate aim,
to obtain and carry out a total annexation of the occupied
territories? Why does he not present us with this fact?
Every Palestinian knows it in his heart of hearts because he
sees it with his own eyes; he does not have to rely on
reports. ',Almost one third of the West Bank has already
been sequestered and confiscated from its lawful owners.
Where will the Palestinians live if this colonization con.
tinues?

168. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We
shall now vote on the three draft resolutions recommended
by the Special Political Committee in paragraph IS of its
report [A/33/439] and grouped under the title "Report of
·the Special Conuruttee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Mfecting the Human Rights of the Population of the
Occupied Territories". We shall vote first on draft resolution A. A recorded vote has been requested.
-

A recorded vote was taken.

In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African
Empire, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Germany, Federal
Republic of, Ghana, Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, La~ People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Upper Volta, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia
Against: Israel

Abstaining: Guatemala

Draft resolution A was adopted by 140 votes to 1 wirh 1
abstention (resolution 33/113 A).
169. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We
shall now take a vote on draft resolution B. A recorded vote
has been requested.

A recorded vote was taken.

In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Bunna, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Cape Verde, Central Afri~an
Empire, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Germany, Federal

---

87th meetlng - 18 December 1978

~);We
oJllffiended
11 15 Of its
"RePort of
i Practices
00 of the

~t reso-

)Ia. A.rgenI-aogladesh,
Bot;swana,
SoVIet So-

il

African

:osta Rica,
nCO.

,.r"

Den-

Egypt,

::e. Gabon,
y. Federal

,,'

Republic of, Ghana, Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Uberia, Libyan Arab Ja mahiriya , Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Mala wi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauri·
tania; Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Nepal: Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania,
Rwanda, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of Tan·
zania, United States of America, Upper Volta, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia

ana, Haiti.
Iran. Iraq,

Against: Israel

w, Kenya.

Abstaining: Guatemala

Lebanon,
K.Cmbourg,

Ita, Mauri-

Draft resolution B was adopted by 139 votes to 1, with
1 abstention (resolution 33/113 B).

zambique,

Niger, Nilpua

New

Portugal.
I Principe.
• Somalia,
" Sweden,

d and To-

170. The PRESIDENT/interpretation from Spanish): We
shall now take a decision'.on draft resolution C. The Fifth
Committee's report on the administrative and financial
implications of this draft resolution appears in document
A/33/520. A recorded vote has been requested.

A recorded vote ~~s taken.

t Sod alist

lited Arab
Northern

.epublic of
, Uruguay.

lambia

o 1 with 1
tnish): We
lcded vote

'la, Argenangladesh.
Botswana,
SoViet

so-

;) African
Osta Rica.

nen

[)en-

'x-, Egypt.
:.e, Gabon,
Y, Federal

In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, 'Angola, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan-, ,Bot·
swana, Bulgaria, Bunna, Burundi, Byei'Qrussian Soviet' Socialist Republic, Cape Verde, Central AfriCan Empire, Chad,
China, Congo, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic
Yemen, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Equa-torial Guinea,
Ethiopia, Gambia, Gennan Democratic Rep4blic, Ghana, Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary, Indi~, Indonesia,
Iran, Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
MaUritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United
. Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of Tanzania,
Upper Volta, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia
Against: Guatemala, Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Canada,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gennany, Federal Republic of, Haiti,
Honduras, Icelan d, Ireland, Italy, Ivory Coast, Japan,
liberia, Luxembourg, Malawi, Mexico, Netherlands, New

1545

Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Samoa, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
Venezuela

Draft resolution C was adopted by 97 votes to 3, with 38
abstentions (resolution 33/113 C).
171. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
General Assembly will now consider the report of the
Special Political Conunittee on agenda item 56

/A/33/451].
172. I shall now call on representatives who wish to
explain their vote before the vote.
173. Mr. CERGA (Albania): The Albanian delegation has
already had occasion to state its position in the Special
Political Committee during that Committee's consideration
of agenda item S6 concerning the comprehensive review of
the whole question of peace-keeping operations in all their
aspects. On this occasion, the delegation of the People's
Socialist Republic of Albania wishes to reaffmn the
position of its Government, namely, that the draft resolution contained in paragraph 6 of docwnent A/33/4S1
does not reflect the main menace to peace and security in
the world: that brought about by the warmongering
policies of the super-Powers and other imperialist Powers.
Furthermore, the draft resolution contains ideas and
formulations which do not serve the cause of peace and
international security.

174. We feel that the attempt being made to present as
positive and helpful the role played up to now by the
United Nations forces is deceitful and fraught with dangers.
Therefore, the People's Socialist Republic of Albania has
been and is against the creation or stationing of such forces
in various regions of the world.
17 S. For several reasons, some of which I have just stated,
the delegation of the'People's Socialist Republic of Albania
will vote against the draft resolution.
176.- ,Mr. LOZINSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Rus~n): The Soviet delegation will vote against the draft resolution submitted to
the General Assembly concerning" the question of United
Nations peace-keeping operations>-b~cause it is incompatible with the fundamental principles of the Charter.
177_ In that draft no account is taken of the key role of
the Security Council in the practical establishment and
daily management of the peace-keeping operations or of
measures taken for the preparation of such operations. Nor
can we accept this way of approaching the fmancing of
United Nations peace-keeping operations since provision is
made for only one method of apportioning expenditures.

178. The delegation of the Soviet Union is deeply concerned a t attempts made to impose by means of a vote a
position which is unilateral and contrary to the United
Nations Charter in respect of peace-keeping operations.
179. As experience has shown, particularly in respect of
the United Nations Operation in the Congo, this is a field of

,.... "!'"

I

15%

'I

United Nations activity which is of vital importance for the
destiny of the States Members of the United Nations and
for the Organization itself. That is why the only acceptable
and effective method for considering questions relating to
United Nations peace-keeping operations is that whereby
decisions are worked out by negotiation in strict compliance with the United Nations Charter. Recognition of this
can be seen, particularly, in the fact that the work of the
33-mernber Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations on the comprehensive review of the whole question
of United Nations peace-keeping operations has been
carried out on the basis of the principle of consensus. It is
obvious that any decision on United Nations peace-keeping
operations which is contrary to the United Nations Charter
-despite the number of votes that may be cast in its
favour-remains illegal, null and void.

,.
!
" j'
~

,I

General Assembly - Thirty-third Session - Plenary Meetings

185. I wish to emphasize therefore that the draft resolution is no substitute for efforts by the Special Committee
on Peace-keeping Operations to establish principles and
guidelines for the United Nations peace·keeping operations.
186. Secondly, the draft resolution is in no way a
substitute for the pursuit of the peace-making process
through immediate action on the part of the Security
Council. This is an operation for fighting brushfires, and
we corrunend the United Nations soldiers and officers for
having done their duty in so .exemplary a manner. But we
do feel that this is no substitute for the peaceful settlement
of disputes as envisaged in the United Nations Charter.
187. Thirdly, peace-keeping operations ought to be directed towards the evacuation and replacement of the
armed forces of any aggressor, with a view to denying it the
opportunity of reaping the fruits of its aggression.

180. The adoption of the draft resolution now before us
would risk creating further difficulties for the Special
Committee and of rendering null and void the progress
188. Fourthly, United Nations peace-keeping operations
already made in elaborating the principles governing peaceshould lead to immedia te action by the Security Council. I
keeping operations by that Committee. Any attempts to
know that we are all accustomed to saying that occupying
make use of resolutions of this kind when it comes to
forces should withdraw "forthwith" and "irnmediately"practical considerations of establishing. ftnancing and
which makes me allergic to those two words, because
carrying out peace-keeping operations can only render far
"forthwith" and "immediately" may mean in 10 years.
more difficult the decisions of the Committee and hamper· . Therefore, we do not believe that peace-keeping operations
the work of the Security Council.
should be a substitute for effective and immediate action
by the Security Council and, if need be, the application of
181. To prevent such a deplorable turn of events, the
the provisions of Chapter VII of the United Nations
delegation of the Soviet Union appealed to the sponsors of
Charter, which empowers the Security Council, as the
the liraft resolution and to a number of other delegations,
highest executive organ of the United Nations, to see to'",it
declaring its readiness to accept a compromise solution
that there is no aggression.
'
whereby the draft resolution would not be put to the vote
in the plenary Assembly, but would be transmitted with all
189, Nevertheless, we stiJl support the draft resolution as a
relevant infonnation directly to the Special Committee for
contribution to peace-keeping in areas around the world.
that Committee to take into account in its work. However,
the sponsors of the draft resolution preferred to bring it
190. Mr. HACHEME (Benin) (interpretation from
before the plenary Assembly, thus indicating their lack of
French): The use made of United Nations peace-keeping
willingness to seek a compromise solution on the subject.
forces here and there throughout the world is prejudicial to
182. In these circumstances, all responsibility for possible
complications in the consideration of United Nations
peace-keeping operations and for the blocking of ways to
further progress in drafting guidelines for such peacekeeping operations will fall to those who have preferred to
thwart persistent and constructive efforts at reaching a
consensus by unilaterally imposing their own anti-Charter
conceptions and views.
"

183. Mr. NUSEfBEH (Jordan): While my delegation
supports the draft resolution laboriously prepared with the
co-operation of representatives of various regional groups, I
wish to be honest with my colleagues and my inner self by
reiterating our understanding and interpretation of the
draft resolution on a comprehensive review of the whole
question of peace-keeping operations in all their aspects.

184. We would commend the efforts to fight brushfires
i.

', ..

which have been made in various parts of the world to bring
about a cessation of hostilities, fighting and destruction. At
the same time, my delegation feels that the draft resolution,
if it stands by itself, may give a false impression of peace
and security. We have been living with these kinds of
peace-keeping efforts for the past 30 years. but they have
not brought us one iota nearer either to peace or to justice,
let alone to a cessation of fundamen tal conflicts.

international peace and security, which we wish to maintain. International imperialism bears the full responsibility
in this respect.
191. The delegation of the People's Republic of Bertin
believes that by adopting this draft resolution we would be
getting ahead of the work of the Special Conunittee on
Peace-keeping Operations, whose report we are still awaiting. In keeping with my country's well-known attitude
towards peace-keeping operations, the delegation of the
People's Republic of Benin will not participate in the voting
on the draft resolution in document A/33/45I, on the
comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspec ts.
192. Mr. ElrCHOUFI (Syrian Arab Republic) {interpretation from Arabic}: My delegation will abstain in the
vote on the draft resolution under discussion which has
been submitted by the Special Political Committee to the
General Assembly. We believe that a draft resolution of
such importance should be acceptable by all Member States
in view of its special significance for international peace.
193. The other reason for our having reservations on this
draft resolution is that its operative paragraph 2 provides
for the responsibility of all Member States, in accordance

87th meeting - 18 December 1978

;th the Charter, to share equitably the fInancial burdens
of such operations. We believe that the Charter of the
United Nations was fonnulated in order to protect countries from becoming the victims of aggression. Conse·
quently, there should be a basic distinction between the
aggressor and the victim of aggression. In vie:-- of .th~ fact
that my country, like other Arab countries, IS a Vlctim of
continued Israeli aggression, we cannot accept the principle
of equal participation in the costs of future United Nations
peace.keeping operations.
194. Mr. Al.-ELFI (Democratic Yemen) (interpretation
from Arabic): My delegation will abstain in the vote on the
draft resolution concerning the comprehensive review of
the whole question of peace-keeping operations jn all their
aspects for the following reasons.

to'~~

mt ar'~
lYingitlhe

195. First, we attach great importance to United Nations
peace·keeping operations on condition that they are camed
out in conformity with .the basic principles of the United
Nations Charter.
.;....- ~ .-

Operatioos
.CounCIl,]

oceuplil.!
:diattJy'-

196. Secondly, we feel that the subject under discussion is
very important and requires further consideration and
review. Such a task has already been entrusted to the
Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations, made up
of 33 members, established by the General Assembly in its
resolution 2006 (XIX). There is no doubt that insisting on
putting this dnft resolution to the Yote impedes the work
and the task of the Special Committee. Moreover, the
discussion of this question now would create further
complications and affect the agreement reached within that
Committee.

I, becall!e

10 yean.
OperatiClIl
iate acti~l
lication ~
d Naoool

n, ~ tJi

) seet6~
\

lution III
world.

197. Thirdly, the draft resolution in some of its terminology is ambiguous and, consequently, we have some
doubts about the real intentions behind the insistence on its
being put to the vote. Moreover, the fact that divergent
views are held on this draft resolution would make its
implementation very difficult.

m from

:e-kupinl
udjcj~ to

to main·

onSlbnily

of BeJlin
wouldll

I

utlee 00

ill awail·
aWfuli
) of ~e
le votinl

, on Ihe

f peace·

I (inlet

nintbe
hich hll

e to Ihe

ltioo of
:r States
:ace,
on IhIJ

lrovi'dei

)rdanGC

198. Fourthly, we in principle do not accept the assumption of any responsibility for the frnancial costs of such
operations. We believe that the aggressor should bear the
financial burden arising out of his aggression. The aggressor
should not be rewarded for his aggression; such a course is
rejected by the United Nations Charter as well as by
international law and custom.

I

199. Fifthly, we also in principle believe that the United
Nations should intensify its efforts to put an end to the
aggression and occupation of which some countries are the
victims and also eliminate the consequences of such
aggression and occupation on the basis of the principle of
the non-use of force in international relations and the
application of the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter.
The United Nations should concentrate on that aspect
instead of setting its seal on faits accomplis.
200. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We
shall now vote on the draft resolution recommended for
adoption by the Special Political Committee in pa~agraph 6
of its report [A/33/451]. A recorded vote has been
requested.

1547

A recordedllote was taken.
In favour: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Burma, Burundi, Canada, Cape Verde,
Central African Empire, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Cyprus, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Gennany,
Federal Republic of, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, lebanon, lesotho, Liberia, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines,
Portugal,. Qatar, Rwanda, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra leone, Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Surinarne, Swaziland, Sweden, Thailand, Toga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Upper Volta, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia
Against: Afghanistan, Albania, Bulgaria, Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Cuba, Czechoslovalda, German
Democratic Republic, Hungary, Mongolia, Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
Abstaining: Algeria, Angola, Congo, Democratic Yemen,
Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Guinea.Blssau, Iraq,
Madagascar, Malawi, Morocco, Mozambique, Paldstan,
Poland, Romania, Sao Tome and Principe, Syrian Arab
Republic, Yemen
The draft resolution was adopted by 106 votes to 11,
with 19 abstentions (resolution 33/114).

201. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
shall now call on those representatives wishing to explain
their vote after the voting.
202. Mr. DERESSA (Ethiopia) (interpretation from
French): At the time when the Special Political Committee
had reached the end of its consideration of agenda item 56,
a comprehensive review of peace-keeping operations, we
voted against the draft resolution then contained in
document A/SPCj33jL.l9.
203. In so doing, my delegation wished to convey its total
disagreement with the way in which the draft resolution
had been introduced in the Committee, namely without
taking due account of the point of view of an. important
group of countries which includes a permanent member of
the Security Council. My delegation regrets that such a vital
question as that of maintaining peace was used to promote
the political interests and manoeuvres of a specific group of
coun tries. My country has always been fully involved here
in the United Nations in all discussions on peace-keeping
and would have preferred the present resolution to receive
the consent of all Members of the Assembly, as is proper in
such a case, and be adopted by consensus.
204. That has not happened, and my delegation very
much regrets it. Furthermore, my delegation would like to

I

I

i

I

\I

'r

-,

•

!

General Assembly - Thirty-third Session - Plenary Meetings

1548

emphasize that the draft resolution as.prese~ted he~e was
the outcome of an initial proposal which, qwte obvIously,

represented an ill·disguised desire to circumvent the United
Nations Charter and particularly to impede the work of the
Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations in determining and working out guiding principles.
205. Having thus expressed our lack of satisfaction in the
Committee, my delegation, in view of certain positive
aspects which can be detected in the final wording of the
draft resolution and aware at the same time of the need for
such a draft resolution to be adopted by consensus, chose
here in the plenary meeting to abstain in the vote.

. ,;!
!

206. Mr. MUBAREZ (Yemen) (interpretation from
Arabic): My delegation wishes to explain its vote on the
draft resolution entitled "Comprehensive review of the
whole question of peace-keeping operations in all their
aspects". While it contains several positive points, we were
not able to support it in its present form for the following
reasons.
207. First, as my delegation has stated on several previous
occasions when expressing the views of the Yemen Arab
Republic, our position is based on the rejection of the use
of United Nations forces to assist aggression or to prolong
the occupation of others' countries by force. The Government of the Yemen Arab Republic has noted with regret
that the United Nations forces in the Middle East have not
been used to put an end to the continued Israeli aggression
against the Arab people of Palestine and the neighbouring
Arab countries; nor have they been used to put an end to
the Israeli occupation of the Arab territories. These forces
have merely been sent to separate the combatants, and it
seems that the presence of such forces has become a
substitute for the search for a solution to the Middle East
problem. For this reason, we believe that the Special
Committee should expedite its work for an early completion of agreed guidelines to govern the cbnduct of the
peace-keeping operations of the United Nations before
taking any further steps in that direction.
208. Secondly, we have rejected and refused any procedure which would mean that the cost of peace·keeping
operations in the Middle East or in any other part of the
world would be paid for out of the United Nations budget.
TIlls position emanates from our belief that the aggressor
should bear the full cost of such operations and should
assume full responsibility for his aggressive actions. It is
illogical and against the principles of justice that the
intemational community should bear the responsibility on
behalf of the aggressor. Such a course of action would
encourage the aggressor, and this would be at variance with
the spirit and letter of the Charter.
\

209. For all these considerations, my delegation has
abstained in the vote on the draft resolution.
210. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
Before we proceed to consider the next item, the representative of Norway has asked to be allowed to make a brief
statemen t.
\
211. Mr. ALGARD (Norway): In a meeting today that
was arranged by the President of the General Assembly

with all the Chainnen of the regional groups, I raised;
question of having item 57 postponed until tomorrow. The
reason for that is that there are certain proposals Swimming
around-if I might use that expression-that could fonn the
basis for a consensus on this question and that 1 think
would be an advantage to all groups.
212.' I would therefore appeal for a postponement of this
question until tomorrow. That would give the regional
groups some time to explore the possibilities that are still
there.
213. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): As
you have heard, the Chairman of the group of Western
European and other States is requesting postponement of
agenda item 57 until tomOrrow afternoon. If there is no
objection it will be so decided.
214. Mr. MOHAMMED (Iraq) (interpretation from
Arabic): We understand that the reports of the Special
Political Conunittee on item 57, as well as 'the report of the
Rapporteur, are ready. Since the Committee has adopted
the resolution on the item, in the name of the Asian group
and according to the wish of other groups, we request that
the vote on the draft resolution take place at this meeting,
if possible.
215. Mr. SARALTA (Chad) (interpretation from French):
The delegation of Chad, which followed this question
during the month of November, is surprised today to learn
that the group of Western European and other States is
requesting postponement.
216. We agree completely with the Asian group that we
should follow the normal procedure and vote today.
217. Mr. BIKOUTA (Congo) (interpretation from
French): As Chairman of the African group for the month
of December, I wish briefly to state that the decision that
has just been taken by a meeting of the Chairmen of
regional groups cannot be considered by our group to be
fmal or binding. We have a discipline in our group which we
cannot overlook. Since it was not possible to inform the
African group of the decision of the Chairmen of the
regional groups, I simply wish to recall that agenda item 57
was duly discussed in the Special Political Conunittee and a
decision was taken. Accordingly, we endorse the statements
just made by the representatives of Iraq and Chad. We also
express our surprise at the request for postponement of
agenda item 57. Of course, we would not oppose any
decision which would permit the General Assembly to save
time. But, unfortunately, we are not at all convinced of the
timeliness of such a decision.
218. That is why we are tempted to wonder whether such
a decision is the result of error. If so, it is not too late to
remedy it, if we wish to avoid a regrettable precedent. In
brief, Mr. President, we would like to urge you not to all~w
such a propitious occasion to pass for us to take a deClSlon
on agenda item 57.
219. Mr. UGARD (Norway): I am somewhat surprised
that other groups are against this very modest request. for a
mere 24-hour postponement, which was intended to give us
a little more time to reach a consensus, since there are some

87th meeting - 18 December 1978

raised a
ow. The
rimming
'orm the

] think
t of this

regional
are still

ish): M
Western
ment of
re is no

from
Special
1 of the
l.dopted
n group
lest that
neeting,

!

rrem:h):
luestion
to learn
aates is
that we

from

: month
:on that
men of
.p to be
hich we
lrm the
of the
item 57
:e and a
temenlS
We also
nent of
>se any
to save
d of the

ler such
late to
Jen!. In
:0 allow
iecision

Jrpriscd
:st for a
, give us
re some

1549

proposals in the air that offer the possi bility of such a
consensus.

possible and if the representative of Norway were to press
his proposal I wouId have to put his proposal to the vote.

220. The group of Western European and other States has
carefully considered this question and considers it to be one
of major importance. We have, over the year when these
matters have been discussed in the contact group, sought a
consensus that wouId reflect the characteristics of the
regional groupings which underlie so much of the business
in the United Nations. We have based our work on three
principles which have obtained hitherto, namely, consensus,
avoidance of disadvantage to individual regional groups, and
the need to resp~ct the principle of regional groupings
rather than pure arithmetical considerations.

227. Mr. RIDS (panama) (interpretation from Spanish): I
shouId just like to know just when the Assembly session is
scheduled to end. Twenty-four hours has been mentioned;
that would mean 7 o'clock tomorrow evening. So I think
that first we should clarify this.

221.. The resolution now before us, however, wouId
simply imply a reduction of chairmanships of the main
committees allocated to the group of Western European
and other States and to that group alone. We believe that an
arithmetical approach alone is not appropriate in determining the distribution of such posts.
222. We have been willing to go along, however, with the
proposal which takes care of the African request. As I said
earlier, there are elements that, in our opinion, would make
a consensus impoSSible today. Our group feels deep regret
that the Chairman of two of the main groups today will not
go along with such a postponement, thereby taking away
the opportunity we have today for trying to reach a
consensus on this extremely important question to all of us.
223. Mr. ONG (Singapore): r support the proposal of the
representative of Norway to the effect that, since there is a
possibility of arriving at a consensus on this subject, we
should allow 24 hours for our regional groups to try to find
a consensus, if possi vIe.
224. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): r
would request representatives to forget for a moment that J
am the President of the General Assembly because r would
like to say a few words in my capacity as Chairman of the
group of Latin American States.
225. What the representative of Singapore has just said
seems to me to be very prudent and appropriate. Without
taking sides as regards what might be proposed tomorrow
by the group of Western European and other States and
without knowing exactly what its intention is, I believe that
the appeal addressed to all delegations that we postpone the
vote until tomorrow with the purpose of carrying out
certain negotiations which could eventually lead to a
consensus solution of the question of the composition of
United Nations organs is an appeal that it would be fitting
to heed. Like the representative of Singapore, ] do not see
that there would be any harm in postponement. On the
contrary, if we were to achieve what was not achieved
earlier in the relevant committee and if we were to succeed
in arriving at a consensus, it would be best for every one of
us, because we should strive to maintain a conciliatory
spirit among all delegations.
226. I join in the appeal, and I as~( whether the Asian and
African groups would reconsider and agree to a postponement of the question. Of course, if this should not be

228. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
shall give the representative of Panama a reply that is not
quite final. From talks with the President of the General
Assembly and with the Secretary-General it has appeared
that it will not be possible to conclude the work of the
General Assembly tomorrow. Members know that there
have been administrative difficulties which have compelled
us to postpone and delay meetings and so we shall have to
allocate the whole of tomorrow at least to hard work. A
delay of 24 hours, from now, has been spoken of, but it
need not necessarily mean exactly 24 hours. The item could
appear in the agenda for tomorrow afternoon. This is all I
can tell the representative of Panama.
229. Mr. BENAVI DES (peru) (interpretation from
Spanish): My delegation presumes that the appeal you
made as Chairman of the Latin American group corresponds to a decision taken by that group.
230. In this connexion, the delegation of Peru was not
consulted regarding the postponement of this item. 'This
being so, my delegation would at least wish to request that
this meeting be suspended for a few minutes so that it
could have talks with other delegations of the Latin
American group.
231. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
There is a request for a suspenSion of the meeting for a few
minutes. I wouId, of course, be very happy to meet with
my Latin American colleagues to talk with them.] have not
consul ted with many delegations; I have the opinions of
two or three, but my intervention was on a personal basis; I
believe, however, that a good majority of the Latin
American delegations, taking a conciliatory attitude, wouId
be inclined to approve what r took the liberty of doing. The
representative of Peru has an objection however, and he has
every right to 0 bjec!.
232. Mr. RIDS (panama) (interpretation from Spanish):
Mr. President, at this stage and with all that remains for us
to do, I think that a suspension would really delay our
work, and if the delegation of Norway presses its proposal I
think that we wouId need to put it to the vote. ] th1nk that
each delegation already has an opinion, so we could decide
it by a vote.
233. Mr. ALGARD (Norway): I have made an appeal to
the other groups to have this postponed. I have a feeling
that the other groups think that there is some devious
design behind such a postponement. I can only assure
everyone that we have some ideas with which we should
like to approach other delegations in order to achieve a
consen sus. In all honesty 1 really thought that that was
what all groups here were interested in: that we solve this
question on the basis ofa genuine consensus for the future.
Ifl am mistaken, I can only regret it.

-

-

err
1550

General Assembly - Thirty·third Session - Plenary Meedn&1

234. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I believe our Norwegian collc3gue is wrong about one thing: he stated that
he does not want to be devious: even if he tried, he could
not be devious, he is such an honest man. I am sure that I
speak for most of my colleagues when I say that nobody
can have any doubt as to the sincerity, devotion and
dedication to the United Nations of the representative of
Norway, whom I have known fo'r many year.;.
235, Having said thllt-and I am not speaking as a member
of any group but 3S a member of the United Nations whose
duty and whose allegiance in such matters is to the United
Nations rather 111an to one group or another- I should like
to state that this whole question is, strictly and objectively
speaking, like a stonn in a teacup.

236. As the representative of Norway mentioned, it
perhaps should be decided by consensus. If for some reason
or other this is not possible, then let me tell representatives
here the following. The post of chainnan, and even that of
president, is a most thankless task. I have been here 33
years. Many people have asked me why I did not become
chairman of this or that committee and, when I was
elaborating the principle of self-detennination. some whispered in my ear "You will be President", hoping to
neutralize me by getting rid of me in the Committee as a
member of the United Nations proletariat.
237. What I mean to say is that we are gmng undue
importance to Ule position of chairman. Although he is
usually a capable gentleman, the chairman's power is
neutralized. Representatives should no't think that [ am
insinuating that the chairman likes to be in a high place; we
need chairmen and presidents. But they have to be
altogether carefUl not to apply their own nationaJ policies.
Otherwise, they are not fit to be presidents or chairmen.
This is why I say it is :l storm in a teacup.
238. I think that we have already spent about $30,000
worth of the time of the meeting, including my own words
which form part of the expenses, discussing something on
which we should not be so rigid. Therefore, let us heed !.he
good advice of our friend, regardless of his leanings. rus
solidarity with the West is his, or Ius Govemment's,
business. I see that the Scandinavian group sometimes voles
with the Western countries because of their proximity. If
there is "flu" going around, they catch it. not willingly, but
because they are all in the same boat with the Western
Powers. Once in a while they get rid of the "flu" and
abstain in a vote.
239. So, let us follow the very modest request of our
colleague from Norway to postpone further discussion this
evening, because, I am afraid, it may become fruitless. As
our American friends say, lel us sleep on the matter until
tomorrow, hoping that no one will reopen the debate.

240. Incidentally and parenthetically, Asia, to which I
belong, has the biggest population in the world. But we
should not go by numbers of population if we want to go
by the democratic method of one Member, one vote. The
Soviet Union an d the Americans excrci~ power. Their
caravan is marching, figuratively speakjng. We are like the
dogs that bark, but they do what they wan!. Regardless of
tha t, J say [et us sleep on it.

241. I propose that we adjourn discussion of this question
until tomorrow, because any continued debate on it will, I
am afraid, be fruitless and will cost us money.
242. Mr. PIZA-ESCALANTE (Costa Rica) (jnterpretaticn
from Spanish): I should like to make two very brief
remarks. The President, as Chairmm of the Latin American
group has offered the members of the group a chance to
understand the situation which led him to propose
postponement of the discussion.

243. In the Committee the group as a bloc voted in favour
of the draft resolution which we are now considering, and
this was after consultations with the Chairman of the
group, who enjoys our confidence. Since he is now
proposing a recess in order that we may gain infonnation,
we have the right to be informed and he has the right to
inform us.
244. [should not have a clear cons.cience if we were to
proceed to a vote when new circumstances have arisen
which the Chairman of the group believes he should report
to the group. Therefore I should like to insist on the
desirability of having a brief recess so that he may report to
the members of the Latin American group.
245. On the other hand, with the authority which we all
have becauSl: we voted in favour of the draft resolution, I
think that a postponement of 24 hours is not an outrageous
postponement if the group of Western European and other
States has something to propose or wishes to attempt to
arrive at a consensus. In the Committee we tried very hard .
to arrive al a consensus on a subject which is indeed
delicate and which should be solved by consensus. If there
is still the possibility of a consensus, then I think the short
time requested of us, 24 hours, should be granted.
246. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
caU on the representative of Saudi Arabia on a point of
order.
247. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): [ should like my
proposal-·that we should delay taking a decision until
tomorrow-to be put to the vote. But first I want my good
coUeague from Costa Rica to note lhat if a consensw is not
arrived at, as I am sure it will not be, if this is the attitude
not only of some of the Latin American group but perhaps
also of the Arab group or of the Western group or any
other-·and this i! why [ say I am talking independentlythen we may put the matter to a vote and resolve the issue.
My proposal comes first, which is to postpone this
question, not necessalily for 24 hours. but until tomorrow,
and see if the groups can come to a consensus in the
morning. If they cannot reach a consensus, then the
question will be put to the vote.
248. In my own humble opinion, it is not worth all the
expenditure and debate because, 3S I said. it is not worthy
of any group to think that if one group or the other does
not get what it wants it will try to protract the debate.
249. With all due respect to my colleagues from Latin
America, from Asia and from Africa, I ask forthwith that
we now postpone this item. If anyone votes against lhis and
the proposal is defeated, of course, I am in the hands of the
Assembly.

-

'avour

~ and

'f !be

now

aliOlj,
ght Ib

ere to
arilea

report
IIlIbe

IOrt 10

we all
lion, I

IgeOUl

lothtJ

Qpt to

Yhard,

indeed
f there

:short

'sil): I
int of

:e my
until
,good
is not
tituik

rrhaps
Ir ltIy
ntiyisslll,
lthil

lnoll',
ntlle
n th~

ill tile
'orthy
I does
Latin
b that
is and

oftbe

87th meetiDa - 18 December 1978

250. Mr. ALGARD (Norway): In order to dispel any
confusion [ think 1 should bring to the attention of
Members the actual proposal that has been made to us,
which is that we should accept the draft resolution adopted
by the Special Political Conunittee as it is with two
amendments. According to those amendments, the group of
Western European and other States would be allotted one
additional vice-presidency, and paragraph 3 of the draft
resolution would be deleted. That is the proposal that has
been made and which we should like to explore.
251. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
should like to thank the representative of Costa Rica for
the suggestions he made and to tell him the following.
Actually the idea of a brief suspension of thIs meeting for
the Latin American group to be able to have brief
consultations was not the proposal of the President nor of
the Chainnan of the Latin American group. It was the
proposal of the representative of Peru. The representative
of Costa Rica was right in saying that, although 1 was
speaking on behalf of the group in making a conciliatory
appeal, without saying whether the Latin Americans were
in favour or against such a proposal, it would be desirable
for the Latin American group to have an emergency
meeting to agree on a position.

1551

meeting for Latin American consultations. The representative of Peru has said that he would prefer to add his vote
to those who believe that we should postpone consideration
until tomorrow; so, there is no proposal for suspension.
257. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I must thank my
coneagues from Peru and Costa Rica for being very
reasonable and for saying that they would like to see this
question postponed till tomorrow, until they have had an
opportunity-so to speak-to sleep on the amendments that
were submitted by our colleague from Norway. r do not
wish to protract the debate, which has noW become not
substantiye but procedural. Since it is procedural, any
procedural proposal has precedence. Therefore, Mr. Presi·
dent, will you kindly forthwith, without giving anyone else
the right ·to speak, find out whether the majority would
like-as the representative of Peru and others have men·
tioned-to consider the item, as you wisely suS$Csted, Sir,
·tomorrow? If the Members want to stay until 10 o'clock,let
them address themselves to other subjects. H they want to
adjourn, that is another question altogether. But now,
forthwith, may I ask you, Sir, to put my procedural
proposal to postpone this item, as you wisely mentioned,
not necessarily for 24 hours, but till tomorrow or whenever
it is possible to handle this question again?

252. So, on the one hand, we have the original proposal of
the representative of Norway, as Chairman of the group of
Western European and other States, endorsed by the
representatives of Singapore and Saudi Arabia, that we
postpone discussion of the item until tomorrow, though
not necessarily for 24 hours. I said that the item could
appear on the agenda for tomorrow afternoon. And, on the
other hand, we have the proposal of the representative of
Peru-I do not know whether he is maintaining it-to the
effect that, before we take a decision on the matter, the
Latin American group should hold a brief meeting to arrive
at a i oint position.

258.· Since this kind of procedural proposal has pre·
cedence, may 1 beg you, Sir, ·to put it to the vote or to ask
whether anyone has any objection-whichever you deem it
necessary. If nobody has any objection to what I have
suggested and to what our Norwegian colleague has asked
of us, it can be ascertained. Then, you will either adjourn
the meeting or, if our colleagues are not tired, we can
resume this meeting, after we take a Yote or jf no one has
any objection, to deal with other questions.

253: Mr. BENAVIDES (peru) (interpretation from
Spanish): First of all, ] wish to express my gratitude to the

260. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
thank the representative of Saudi Arabia, who has given us
an explanation that is completely satisfactory to the
President. I am most grateful to him.

representative of N,-way for having informed us of the
amendments which his group intends to submit so as to
allow the Assembly to arrive at a consensus.

254. We are in favour of this delicate problem being solved
by consensus, but now that we have been informed of the
proposals, we believe that a short time would not be
sufficient for due debate and analysis. In these circumstances-and I am speaking on behalf of the delegation of
Peru-we are in favour of postponing the discussion until
tomorrow.

259. This is all [ beg you to do, Sir, because it is costing us
money here.

261. The President now has two choices. We have already
had a debate on the procedural issue. We have heard
opinions for and against. I do not know whether those who
were against have been persuaded to join in a consensus
decision to postpone consideration of the question of the
composition of the United Nations organs until tomorrow,
at the morning or afternoon meeting, but if I hear no
objection it will be so decided. It seems to me that there is
a consensus.

255. Mr. EL-JEAAN (Kuwait): If I am following the
discussion correctly, I think there was a proposal to adjourn
the meeting; as 1 understand, this proposal would take
precedence. My delegation would favour such a proposal
because I think with an adjournment we would not be
faced with the. difficulty of postponing a question. It would
simply be a question of adjOUrning the meeting. Then when
we met at the next meeting-either tonight or tomorrowthe first item we would take up would be the item we are
now discussing.

262. Mr. CUEVAS CANCINO (Mexico) (Interpretation
from Spanish): The proposal of the representative of
Norway is very serious. It comes when we are about to vote
in the Assembly and my delegation would not wish this to
be repeated. We should like you, Mr. Presid~nt,.therefore,
to put it to the vote and if the proposal IS rejected, we
should like the debate to be closed and a vote to be taken
on the draft resolution.

256. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanfsh): We
no longer have a proposal by Peru for a suspension of the

263. Mr. MOHAMMED (Iraq) (interpretation from
ArabiL:): After having listened to the proposal made by the

t ..

't,
"

{

I

I

!
I.

1552

General Assembly - Thirty·third Session - Plenary Meetings

representative of Norway, we propose that we suspend the
meeting for 10 minutes, so as to conduct further consultations.
264. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We
have before us two proposals: either that we vote on
postponement of the item or, as the representative of Iraq
has just proposed, that we have a brief recess, to have
consultations and then come back and take a decision on
the other matter.
265. If there is no objection, we might suspend the
l
meeting for 10 minutes.
266. Mr. RIOS (Panama) (interpretation from Spanish): I
am sorry but I must object to suspension of the meeting for
10 minutes, which would in reality be 20 minutes or longer.
It seems to me that there is not enough time to consider the
matter.
I
267. You, Mr. President, have said th4t at 10.30 a.m.
tomorrow there is to be a meeting of the'Latin American
group on important matters. I believe that this is an
important matter which the group could consider calmly
and undoubtedly come to a decision with greater ease. 'that
is why I object to suspension of this meeting.
268. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
Although I do not like to do so, I shall have to apply the
rules of procedure. Rule 76 states: "During the discussion
of any matter, a representative may move the suspension or
the adjournment of the: meeting." Nobody has requested
adjournment, but suspension has been requested. The rule
continues:
"Such motions shall not be debated but shall be
immediately put to the vote. The President may limit the
time to be allowed to the speaker moving the suspension
or adjournment of the meeting."

~~a, C~echoslovakia, Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiop~
FIJI, Finland, France, Gabon, German Democratic Rf.
public, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan
Lao People's Democratic Republic, l..esotho, Liberia, Lux:
embourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Malta, Netherlands, New aa.
land, Nicaragua, Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Samoa, Saudi
Arabia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Suriname
Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda'
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia
Against: Algeria, Angola, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin,
Bhutan, Burundi, Congo, Cyprus, Democratic Yemen
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Haiti:
India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Kenya, Madagascar, Malclives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozam.
bique, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Qatar, Rwanda, Sri Lanka,
Swaziland, Togo, United Republic of Cameroon, Zaire,
Zambia
Abstaining: Afghanistan, Ghana, Israel, Ivory Coast,
Jamaica, Kuwait, Mongolia, Nepal, Philippines, Sao Tome
and Principe, Senegal, Sudan, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta
The proposal to postpone consideration of agenda item
57 was adopted by 73 votes to 38, with 16 abstentions.
Mr. Barton (Canadil), Vice-President, took the Chair.
272. The PRESIDENT: I invite now Members to turn
their attention to the report of the Special Political
Committee on agenda item 77, concerning questions
relating to information [A/33/51l]. The Assembly will
now take a decision on the recommendations of the Special
Political Conunittee in paragraph] 9 of the report.

The proposal was rejected by 80 votes to 30, with 15
abstentions.

273. Draft resolution A is entitled "Co-operation and
assistance in the application and improvement of national
information an d mass conununication systems for social
progress and development". Ifwas adopted by consenSUS in
the Special Political Committee. May I take it that the
General Assembly adopts draft resolution A?

270. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The

Draft resolution A was adopted (resolution 33/115 A).

269. The representative who proposed suspension has
already spoken, so r shall immediatly put to the vote the
proposal to suspend the meeting for 10 minutes.

Assembly will now vote upon the other procedural motion,
on which there has been much insistence. It was first
submitted by the representative of Norway, supported by
the representatives of Singapore and Saudi Arabia.

271. Several items on this meeting's agenda remain to be
discussed, so I think we should proceed to vote upon the
procedural motion to postpone until tomorrow the discussion of the question of the composition of the relevant
organs of the United Nations. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium, Botswana, Bulgaria, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa

274. The PRESIDENT: Draft resolution B is entitled
"Intemational relations in the sphere of information and
mass communications". Since this draft was adopted by
consensus in the Special Political Committee, may 1
consider that the General Assembly adopts it?
Draft resolution B was adopted (resolution 33/115 Bt
275. The PRESIDENT: Draft resolution C is entitled
"United Nations public information policies and activities".
The report of the Fifth Committee on the administrative
and financial implications of that draft resolution is to be
found in document A/33/524. The Special Political Committee adopted draft resolution C by consensus. May I take
it that the General Assembly adopts it?

Draft resolution C was adopted (resolution 33/115 ct

87th meeting - 18 December 1978

, Ethiopia,
Icratic Re·
}uatemala,
rn, Jordan,
beria, Lux, New Zeaapua New
Iloa, Saudi
SUriname,
y, Uganda,
of Soviet
d Kingdom
I States of

a
sh, Benin,
ic Yemen,
nea, Haiti,
" Maldives,

), M07.am·
Sri Lanka,
Jon, Zaire,
)ry Coast,
Sao Tome
i Tobago,

:ta
genda item

'ltions.
Chair.
·rs to turn
J Political
questions
~mbly will

the Special
t.
ration and
)f national
for social
msensus in
t that the

U5A).
is entitled
1ation and
dopted by
:e, may I

115Bt
is entitled
activi ties".
linistrative
)n is to be
tical Corn·
May I Lake

115 et

276. The PRESIDENT: In operative paragraph 5 of the
resolution just adopted, the General Assembly requests the
President of the General Assembly to appoint the members
of the Committee to Review United Nations Public
Information Policies and Activities on the basis of equitable
geographical distribution. The President will be consulting
on the matter and will report to the Assembly in due
course.
I

277. I now request representatives to turn their attention
to the recommendation of the Special Political Committee
concerning item 77 (b) "Freedom of Information" in
paragraph 20 of its report /AI331511]. That recommendation was also adopted by consensus in the Committee. I
take it that the General Assembly adopts the draft
recommendation.

1553

item 126 [AI331512]. The draft decision recommended
by the Special Political Committee entItled "Establishment
of an agency or a department of the United Nations for
undertaking, co-ordinating and disseminating the results of
research into unidentified flying objects and related phenomena" is to be found in paragraph 9 of its report, The
draft decision was adopted by consensus in the Special
Political Conunittee. I take it that the General Assembly
adopts the draft decision.

The draft decision was adopted (decision 351426).
AGENDA ITEM 10
Report of the Secretary-General on the
work of the Organization

The recommendation was adopted (decision 331425).
278. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Austria, who wishes to speak in explanation of her vote.
279. Mrs. NOWOTNY (Austria): Austria gladly participated in the consensus just achieved on this important item
on our agenda. Austria recognizes the fact that the
developing countries have only a small share in the news
collection and news transmission process and that there is a
need to change the situation of dependence of those
countries in the field of information and communication
and to replace it with relationships of interdependence and
co·operation. The correction of certain imbalances, however, cannot be achieved by government control of the
news media. Freedom of information and opinion are basic
rights which include freedom of the media in all its various
dimensions. The enj oyment of those rights presupposes free
access to the sources of information as well as a free and
uninhibited flow of information, which also includes free
distribution of information. These freedoms, protected by
the Austrian Constitution, do not allow for any possibility
of influencing the media by legal or administrative
measures. We would not be able to support any initiative in
that direction.

281. The PRESIDENT: The Assembly will now consider
agenda item 10, concerning the Secretary-General's report
on the work of the Organization /AI3311]. It has been
customary for the Assembly merely to take note of the
annual report of the Secretary-General, which has been
referred to on several occasions dUring the course of this
session. Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Assembly wishes to follow this practice.

It was so decided (decision 33/427)"

AGENDA ITEM 13

Report of the International Court of Justice
282. The PRESIDENT: The Assembly will now consider
the report of the International Court of Justice covering the
period from 1 August 1977 to 31 July 1978 / AI3314]. As
no representative wishes to speak, I propose that the
General Assembly take note of the report of the International Court of Justice.

It was so decided (decision 33/428).
280. The PRESIDENT: The Assembly will now consider
the report of the Special Political Committee on agenda

The meeting rose at Z50 p.m.
