A/60/PV.92

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixtieth session

92

nd plenary meeting
Friday, 30 June 2006, 9.25 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Eliasson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Sweden)

The meeting was called to order at 9.25 p.m.
Agenda items 46 and 120 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of
and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/60/L.59)
The President: The General Assembly will
resume its consideration of agenda items 46 and 120 in
order to take action on draft resolution A/60/L.59.
It is now more than nine months since our leaders
adopted the World Summit Outcome. It is high time
and gratifying indeed that we now can agree on the
effective implementation of the decisions of the
summit in the development area. After all,
development was at the heart of the world summit.
I have emphasized on several occasions that
implementation of our commitments in the field of
development and the full realization of the Millennium
Development Goals remain fundamental tasks for the
United Nations. With the adoption of the draft
resolution before the General Assembly —
A/60/L.59 — members will, during the sixtieth session,
have taken important steps with respect to all three
pillars of the United Nations, that is, development,

peace and security, and human rights. We have shown
that those pillars are mutually reinforcing.
This draft resolution is a result of your efforts, of
your creative thinking, of your flexibility and of your
ability to find possible ways forward. Let me commend
you for having set aside your differences to reach an
agreement acceptable to all. This text is yours, and I
am proud to endorse it.
I would like to express my sincere appreciation to
the two co-Chairmen, Ambassador Verbeke of Belgium
and Ambassador Diarra of Mali, for having steered this
process to a successful conclusion. I would like also to
thank the two facilitators, Paul Lolo of Nigeria and
Carlos Ruiz Massieu Aguirre of Mexico, for their
tireless efforts to reach compromises and develop
viable formulas.
It is now our responsibility to translate into
action, in good faith, the words of the commitments
undertaken. Let us do so bearing in mind the sombre
realities in the world as well as the millions of people
whose lives and future we can and must improve.
Let me conclude by reminding members that we
still have to reach an agreement on the draft resolution
on reform of the Economic and Social Council. I had
hoped that we would be able to do so before the
beginning of the substantive session of the Economic
and Social Council. However, time will not allow us to
do so.
There are, as members well know, only a few
outstanding issues in the draft resolution. The co-

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

06-41738 (E)

*0641738*

A/60/PV.92

Chairmen will be in touch with members some time
after the session of the Economic and Social Council in
Geneva in order to come to a conclusion on reform of
that Council before the end of the sixtieth session. A
strengthened Economic and Social Council is in the
interest of all Member States and is crucial for the
standing of the economic and social issues on the
agenda of the United Nations.

by the World Summit Outcome so as to fully realize
and implement the commitments of all major summits
and conferences in the economic, social and related
fields, including the Millennium Development Goals,
and help create an environment that would strengthen
global political will as to the need to improve the lives
of the more than a billion people who still live below
the poverty line.

Before we proceed further, I should like to
consult the Assembly with a view to proceeding
immediately to consider draft resolution A/60/L.59. In
that connection, since the draft resolution was only
circulated earlier today, it would be necessary to waive
the relevant provision of rule 78 of the rules of
procedure.

With the adoption of this draft resolution, the
question will remain whether we have succeeded in the
task set for us by our leaders to mainstream
development as the most important central pillar of the
United Nations agenda.

The relevant provision of rule 78 reads as
follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed
or put to the vote at any meeting of the General
Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated
to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Assembly agrees with this proposal.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/60/L.59.
I shall now call on those representatives wishing
to make statements in explanation of position before
action is taken on the draft resolution. May I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Mr. President, I
wish to thank you for having convened this meeting.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China.
Today we are completing a process which started
eight months ago, in which our leaders, through the
World Summit Outcome, laid the foundation for
enhancing development. Commitments were made and
systemic issues agreed upon, and all that was needed
was full and timely implementation.
The Group of 77 and China had hoped that the
follow-up to the World Summit Outcome would lead us
on a path that would enhance the momentum generated

2

This draft resolution does not fully reflect the
issues of implementation that it should have. In many
cases, it is but a reiteration of already agreed language
from the World Summit Outcome and therefore does
not succeed in maintaining the political will and
momentum of the World Summit Outcome.
Without concrete action to implement all the
commitments on trade, agricultural subsidies and the
transfer of vitally needed resources to developing
countries which the developed community has already
committed itself to achieving, we will not achieve our
goal to fully realize, by 2015, the outcomes of all
major summits and conferences, including the
Millennium Development Goals and the World Summit
Outcome.
The draft resolution also fails in that there is no
political will from our partners to create an equitable
and balanced financial, economic and social global
order, which is necessary for creating a framework for
implementation in an integrated, coordinated and
comprehensive approach in the global partnership for
development. The draft resolution, therefore, does not
take the concept of national responsibility further into
the realm of implementation, in the context of how
developing countries can be assisted so as to enable
them to achieve the internationally agreed development
goals, including the Millennium Development Goals.
Much as we appreciate the fact that this draft
resolution will be adopted, the Group of 77 and China
has two regrets. The first is that there was reluctance to
improve the structure of the draft by slightly reordering
the paragraphs after we had agreed on it. That is a pity,
as willingness to continue the process under facilitation
could have resolved in a few hours the whole issue of
the placement of paragraphs and would have resulted

06-41738

A/60/PV.92

in a far better draft resolution that the one we will be
adopting.
Our second regret concerns the fact that, during
the negotiations, the generous offer by His Royal
Highness the Emir of Qatar to host a review conference
on the implementation of the Monterrey Consensus
was left out of paragraph 62 because there was an
objection on the part of our partners. The irony, of
course, is that the General Assembly had already
accepted, in resolution 60/188, the offer made by the
State of Qatar to host that review conference. We are
pleased, however, by the emphasis on the need for
adequate and substantive preparation for the review
conference that is contained in the draft resolution that
we will be adopting today, and we will work hard
during the sixty-first session to make sure that the offer
made by Qatar becomes a reality.
It is our hope that, with the adoption of this draft
resolution — imperfect as it may be — in the coming
years all the commitments will be implemented in a
timely manner so as to create a better life for all those
millions of people who so desperately need to be lifted
out of poverty.
On behalf of the Group of 77 and China, I would
like to thank the co-Chairmen, the facilitators and our
partners for all the hard work they did to ensure that
we could have this important draft resolution before us.
We want to acknowledge the cooperation of our
negotiating partners in making it possible to adopt this
draft resolution by consensus, albeit many, many
months later.
Finally, let me pay tribute to my colleague from
Austria, whose term as representative of the presidency
of the European Union (EU) ends tonight, and I
welcome the new representative of the EU presidency,
my neighbour, the Ambassador of Finland, and wish
him all the best in this whole process.
Mr. Al-Sulaiti (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I am
grateful for this opportunity to explain our position on
draft resolution A/60/L.59.
The State of Qatar has been an ongoing partner in
international efforts to bring about development,
particularly concerning the combating and eradication
of poverty, as well as the promotion of development
worldwide in a more just manner. Attaining those goals
will have a positive impact on stability and on the
maintenance of international peace and security.

06-41738

As a member of the Group of 77 and China,
which it chaired in 2004, the State of Qatar is
particularly interested in international development.
The State of Qatar has thus presented international
initiatives and supports all such initiatives in the area
of development. We were honoured to host the Fourth
Ministerial Conference of the World Trade
Organization, which led to the adoption of the Doha
Development Agenda within a multilateral framework.
We also hosted the Second South Summit in 2005, at
which we presented an initiative to establish a
development fund.
At the meeting on financing for development held
in the context of the 2005 High-level Plenary Meeting
of the General Assembly (see A/60/PV.3), His
Highness Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani, Emir of
the State of Qatar, presented an initiative to host in
Doha the first follow-up conference for the
International
Conference
on
Financing
for
Development, on the basis of paragraph 73 of the
Monterrey Consensus. We have also proposed the
convening in 2007 of the first review conference, with
a view to bringing about more progress in the area of
development. The initiative of His Highness the Emir
enjoys the support of many heads of State or
Government who participated in the high-level meeting
on financing for development. That support was
reflected in the statement of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of developing countries following the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly. Furthermore,
in resolution 60/188, on follow-up to and
implementation of the outcome of the International
Conference on Financing for Development, the General
Assembly welcomed Qatar’s initiative.
We had hoped that paragraph 62 of the draft
resolution before us would clearly state that the first
review conference would be held in the State of Qatar,
since resolution 60/188 had welcomed Qatar’s
initiative. It is regrettable that the draft resolution that
we are about to adopt omits any reference to that
initiative.
While we are disappointed that the paragraph
proposed by the Group of 77 and China was not
included in the draft resolution, we stress that, out of
respect for the President of the Assembly and the Chair
of the Group of 77 and China, we will join the
consensus on the draft resolution before us. We hope
that this omission will be corrected, and that His
Highness the Emir’s initiative will be activated during

3

A/60/PV.92

coming negotiations on preparations for the review
conference.

The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/60/L.59.

The President: I note the explanation of position
by the representative of Qatar, referring to
paragraph 62 of draft resolution A/60/L.59, on
preparation for the review conference on the
implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, as set out
in General Assembly resolution 60/188. As we are all
aware, resolution 60/188, inter alia, welcomes the offer
of the Emir and the Government of Qatar to host the
conference, and we note that this offer has been
reiterated today by the representative of Qatar.

The Assembly will now take a decision on
A/60/L.59, entitled “Follow-up to the development
outcome of the 2005 World Summit, including the
Millennium Development Goals and the other
internationally agreed development goals”.

Mr. Al-Anazi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
We support the statement made by the representative of
South Africa on behalf of the Group of 77 and China
with respect to the generous offer of His Highness the
Emir of the State of Qatar to host the first review
conference of the Monterrey Consensus on financing
for development, in the capital of Qatar, Doha. That
offer had been welcomed by the General Assembly in
resolution 60/188 on follow-up to and implementation
of the outcome of the International Conference on
Financing for Development. We look forward to the
adoption during the sixty-first session of a resolution
that will follow through on the Emir’s initiative,
particularly in the light of the intensive efforts made by
the State of Qatar to support international endeavours
for development and poverty eradication. We shall
therefore join the consensus on draft resolution
A/60/L.59.

The President: I shall give the floor to those
representatives wishing to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted.

Mr. Suález Salvia (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to take the floor on behalf
of Argentina and Guatemala. Our delegations associate
themselves with the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of South Africa on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China. As medium-income countries, we hail
the consensus achieved on the important draft
resolution before the General Assembly in document
A/60/L.59. We believe that, for medium-income
countries, it marks an important step and we appreciate
it as such.
Our delegations also wish to reiterate our thanks
to the Emir of Qatar for his offer to our heads of State
and Government to host the follow-up conference of
the Monterrey summit in the city of Doha. Our
delegations commit themselves to work constructively
to achieve consensus on that generous initiative.

4

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/60/L.59?
Draft resolution A/60/L.59
(resolution 60/265).

was

adopted

Mr. Wallace (United States of America): First of
all, Mr. President, I want to commend you for your
ceaseless encouragement to finish work on this
important resolution on development, a resolution that
proved difficult not because of fundamental
disagreements between members, but because of the
complexity of the issues we had to address. The final
product is a good one. Faithful to both the substance
and the spirit of the world summit, it demonstrates
clearly our commitment to work together in partnership
to stimulate growth, economic freedom, social equity
and the rule of law.
Commitment, of course, is not enough. As we
have heard over and over again during our discussions,
implementation is the key. The true test will be the
extent to which the resolution actually leads to more
effective and focused work by Member States and the
United Nations system to give people hope,
opportunity and the tools to succeed.
I would like to commend the Co-Chairmen,
Ambassador Ribeke and Ambassador Diarra, for their
work. They guided us with wisdom throughout the
process. I would also like to praise the work of the
facilitators, Paul Lolo, who helped us move from
general discussions to serious negotiations and
consensus on some of the hardest issues, and Carlos
Ruiz, who suggested many of the final compromise
packages with thoughtfulness and creativity.
I would like to note for the record that the United
States understands that the reference to the
International
Conference
on
Population
and
Development and to the Beijing Declaration and

06-41738

A/60/PV.92

Platform for Action and the use of the phrase
“reproductive health” in the resolution do not create
any rights and cannot be interpreted to constitute
support for or endorsement or promotion of abortion.

Mr. Al-Muharraqi (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I
wish at the outset to express my support for the
statement made by the representative of South Africa
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.

Lastly, we, too, would like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Austria, a friend of all
Member States, for his tremendous service representing
the presidency of the European Union (EU). We also
welcome the Permanent Representative of Finland, as
she commences her country’s EU presidency.

My delegation would like to express its views on
paragraph 62 of the resolution that we have just
adopted. The delegation of Bahrain fully agrees with
the statement made by the State of Qatar in that
respect. We had hoped that that paragraph would
reflect the proposal made earlier by the Group of 77
and China, since that initiative is a matter of great
importance for developing States. In joining the
consensus, we expressed our readiness to accept the
current formulation on the basis that it would be
appropriately rectified during the forthcoming
negotiations on the preparatory process for the first
review conference.

Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I am speaking on behalf
of the European Union. The European Union
appreciates the balanced outcome of our negotiations.
It recognizes that extensive and protracted
consultations were required in order to finalize such a
complex resolution, and is convinced that the followup to the development-related aspects of the 2005
World Summit Outcome will greatly benefit from the
document. At the same time, we would like to reaffirm
that all the development-related provisions contained
in the World Summit Outcome, including those that
have not found their way into the resolution, have
equal dignity and should be implemented in a timely
manner.
Follow-up to the development-related provisions
of the World Summit Outcome can be ensured only
through a long-term process, and the resolution is only
the first step in that direction. It should serve as an
agreed platform for our mutual commitments. We are
hopeful that the adoption by consensus of this
important resolution will reinvigorate the global
partnership for development and thereby pave the way
for the successful conduct of the very important
development-related efforts to come: the substantive
session of the Economic and Social Council, the
discussions on the Economic and Social Council draft
resolution on reform, the high-level dialogue on
migration and development, the mid-term review of the
Brussels Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries and the work of the Second Committee.
I thank members for their warm welcome.
The President: I am sure that I speak for all
members of the General Assembly in welcoming the
Permanent Representative of Finland as she begins her
term of office representing the presidency of the
European Union at the United Nations.

06-41738

Mr. Laurin (Canada): I am speaking in
explanation of position on paragraph 34 of the
resolution just adopted.
(spoke in French)
Canada did not want to stand in the way of
consensus on that paragraph, but we would like to
express our concerns regarding the challenges with
which we are confronted with a view to achieving a
reduction in the level of greenhouse gases in the
context of the Kyoto Protocol. Canada remains firmly
committed to dealing with climate change within the
context of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change and other international processes.
Furthermore, we are currently developing a new action
plan to deal with air pollution that will allow for an
appreciable reduction in greenhouse gases.
(spoke in English)
In conclusion, allow me to thank the
Co-Chairmen, the facilitators and our partners for
making it possible for us to reach consensus on the
resolution today.
Mr. Al-Hebsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to explain its
position on paragraph 62 of the resolution just adopted.
My delegation supports the statement made by the
Chairman of the Group of 77 and China in that regard.
We had hoped that paragraph 62 would reflect the offer
made by His Highness the Emir of Qatar to host, in
Doha in 2007, the first review conference of the

5

A/60/PV.92

International
Development.

Conference

on

Financing

for

maintenance of a right to abortion or access to it as a
service.

That initiative is of great importance in terms of
providing impetus for international cooperation for
development. In this context, therefore, my delegation
looks forward to that offer being taken up during the
forthcoming negotiations on the preparatory process of
the review conference.

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.

Mr. Chaudhry (Pakistan): We align ourselves
with the statement made by the Chairman of the Group
of 77.
We are pleased that a development resolution has
been adopted today by consensus. Development is a
matter of high priority for developing countries. The
resolution reiterates many commitments already made
in the past, but makes only modest references to
monitoring mechanisms to ensure that those
commitments are implemented. Nevertheless, we hope
that we will build a strong, robust monitoring
mechanism at the United Nations to ensure effective
implementation.
We would like to take this opportunity to support
the statement made by the delegation of Qatar
regarding its offer to host, in Doha, the first review
conference of the Monterrey Consensus.
The President: I call on the observer of the
Observer State of the Holy See.
Monsignor Cushley (Holy See): My delegation
welcomes the resolution on the follow-up to the
development outcome of the 2005 world summit and
the renewed commitment of Member States to work in
favour of development, which in itself is an essential
and central goal among the various ends of the
Organization.
In accord with its explanations of position in the
past, the Holy See welcomes all measures that will
provide for the achievement of equal rights everywhere
and promote social progress and better standards of life
in larger freedom. Therefore, while my delegation
supports the resolution in question, it hereby restates
its understanding that the term “reproductive health”
and the reaffirmation in the resolution of the full and
effective implementation of the goals and objectives of
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and
the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the
General Assembly do not endorse the creation or

6

The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda items 46 and 120.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 121, 135 to 140, 142 to 145, 146 (a), 147 to 152
and 124.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Fifth
Committee that are before it today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote or position. The
positions
of
delegations
regarding
the
recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in the plenary meeting is
different from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance. That means that where
recorded or separate votes were taken, we will do the
same. I also hope that we may proceed to adopt

06-41738

A/60/PV.92

without a vote those recommendations that were
adopted without a vote in the Fifth Committee.

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 135.

Agenda item 121 (continued)
Agenda item 136
Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/561/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/234 B).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 121.
Agenda item 135 (continued)
Financing of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/606/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft decision recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report.
We will now take action on the draft decision,
entitled “Revised estimates arising in respect of
Security Council resolution 1660 (2006) on the
appointment of reserve judges at the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft decision
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

Administrative and budgetary aspects of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/916)
The President: The Assembly has before it three
draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 10 of its report. The texts of the three
draft resolutions, for the time being, are contained in
documents
A/C.5/60/L.59,
A/C.5/60/L.60
and
A/C.5/60/L.62, respectively.
We will now take a decision on draft resolutions I
to III.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Cross-cutting
issues”. The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
60/266).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at
Brindisi, Italy”. The Fifth Committee adopted draft
resolution II without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
60/267).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Support account for peacekeeping operations”. The
Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution III without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
60/268).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 136.

The draft decision was adopted.

06-41738

7

A/60/PV.92

Agenda item 137

Agenda item 139

Financing of the United Nations Operation
in Burundi

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/917)

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/918)

The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6, of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/60/L.53.

The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/60/L.49.

The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?

The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/269).

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/270).

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 137.

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 139.
Agenda item 140 (continued)

Agenda item 138
Financing of the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire

Financing of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/574/Add.1)

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/540/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/60/L.55.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/17 B).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 138.

8

The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/60/L.56.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/121 B).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 140.

06-41738

A/60/PV.92

Agenda item 142

Agenda item 144

Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor

Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/919)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/60/L.57.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/271).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 142.
Agenda item 143
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/920)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/60/L.61.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/272).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 143.

06-41738

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/921)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/60/L.50.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/273).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 144.
Agenda item 145
Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/541/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/60/L.58.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/18 B).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 145.

9

A/60/PV.92

Agenda item 146

Agenda item 148

Financing of the activities arising from Security
Council resolution 687 (1991)

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia

(a) United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation
Mission
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/922)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/60/L.45.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution, which is entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission”. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/274).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 146.
Agenda item 147
Financing of the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/923)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/60/L.51.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/275).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 147.

10

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/924)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/60/L.52.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/276).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 148.
Agenda item 149
Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
forces in the Middle East
(a) United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/925)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/60/L.54.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution, which is entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force”. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/277).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 149.

06-41738

A/60/PV.92

(b) United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/928)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 12 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/60/L.42.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution, which is entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon”.
A single separate vote has been requested on the
fourth preambular paragraph and operative paragraphs
4, 5 and 17 of the draft resolution. Is there any
objection to that request? As there is none, I shall put
to the vote the fourth preambular paragraph and
operative paragraphs 4, 5 and 17 of the draft
resolution, on which a single separate vote has been
requested. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Fiji, Gambia, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar,
Malaysia,
Maldives,
Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

06-41738

Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Palau, Papua New
Guinea, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland,
Ireland,
Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay
The fourth preambular paragraph and operative
paragraphs 4, 5 and 17 were retained by 99 votes
to 6, with 49 abstentions.
[Subsequently the delegation of the Congo
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
vote in favour.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution as a whole. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and
Herzegovina,
Brazil,
Brunei
Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,

11

A/60/PV.92

Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Palau, United States of America
Abstaining:
Australia
The draft resolution as a whole was adopted by
150 votes to 3, with 1 abstention (resolution
60/278).
[Subsequently the delegation of the Congo
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
vote in favour.]
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of subitem (b) of agenda item 149.

The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/279).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 150.
Agenda item 151 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/562/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report.
The text of the draft resolution, for the time
being, is contained in document A/C.5/60/L.46.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/122 B).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 151.
Agenda item 152

Agenda item 150
Financing of the United Nations Mission
in Sierra Leone

Financing of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/927)

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/926)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report.
The text of the draft resolution, for the time
being, is contained in document A/C.5/60/L.47.

12

The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report.
The text of the draft resolution, for the time
being, is contained in document A/C.5/60/L.48.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution.

06-41738

A/60/PV.92

The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/280).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
152.
Agenda item 124 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007
Reports of the Fifth Committee
(A/60/608/Add.3 to Add.6)
The President: The Assembly will now consider
four reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
item 124.
I shall now give the floor to those representatives
wishing to speak in explanation of position before
action is taken on the draft resolutions and decisions.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): Two days ago, in the Fifth
Committee, in dissociating itself from the Committee’s
recommendation to lift the spending cap by consensus,
my delegation expressed its strong hope that good
progress would be made and tangible results achieved
on the remaining key issues of management reform,
mandate review and other issues associated with
United Nations reform. That, I said, would give us
confidence and satisfaction and, hopefully, enable us to
change our position and join a full consensus decision
when it comes to the General Assembly plenary.
Over the past two days, intensive efforts have
been made on all sides to find generally agreed
solutions to these issues, and I commend all
negotiating partners for their efforts to that end. In
particular, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for the
special efforts you yourself have made in this regard.
In addition, we all are very grateful to Ambassador
Allan Rock of Canada, one of the co-Chairmen on
mandate review, for his special dedication to making
progress, up until his very last day as Ambassador in
New York.
On the issue of management reform, we regret
that, despite extended and good-faith efforts on all
sides, consensus has not been possible. My delegation
put forward a modest, concrete suggestion on the

06-41738

question of limited discretion for the Secretary-General
in budgetary implementation, an issue that is long
overdue for consideration. This was incorporated into
the proposal informally circulated by the United States,
Australia and Japan. We appreciate the fact that a
version of the proposal has been well received by a
large number of Member States, including States
members of the Group of 77 and China. I hope that this
will be a useful basis for possible consensus in our
further talks.
On the issue of mandate review, to which my
delegation also attaches great importance, along with
reform in management, accountability and oversight,
we once again express regret that consensus continues
to elude us, despite the fact that we had made some
very encouraging progress thanks especially to the
extraordinary efforts made by the co-Chairmen, for
which we are again grateful.
We had come fairly close to an agreement on a
road map for mandate review on a win-win basis, but,
unfortunately, it became clear that more time was
needed to clinch it. I join others in expressing my
delegation’s dismay at not having been able to achieve
agreement on the issue at this point.
However, this is not and must not be the end of
the road. We really need to continue with our serious
work and reach decisions soon on key issues if we are
to be successful in implementing what our leaders
decided in the Outcome Document on mandate review,
which is to review all mandates older than five years,
complete the process and take the necessary decisions
arising from that review during 2006.
Bearing all the foregoing in mind, it is with great
regret that my delegation finds it impossible to change
the position it took in the Fifth Committee, and,
consequently, Japan will dissociate itself from
consensus in the plenary on the decision to lift the
spending cap.
In that regard, I wish to mention the fact that
Japan is proud of its record of fulfilling its financial
obligations to the United Nations in full and without
conditions, and my delegation will strive to maintain
that record. Causing a financial crisis for the
Organization has never been the aim of the spending
cap. As I stated on 23 December last, in this very Hall,
the spending cap was intended — as I put it — as
concrete evidence of Member States’ firm

13

A/60/PV.92

determination to realize, in good
implementation of United Nations reform.

faith,

the

We believe that a more efficient and effective
United Nations is in the interest of all Member States.
The status quo is not an option for us. The decisions in
the September outcome document need to be
implemented in good faith and in full. My delegation
stands ready to work with other delegations to achieve
progress on management reform during the next
resumed session of the Fifth Committee. We are also
determined, in the days and weeks ahead, to continue
to work strenuously and constructively with other likeminded Member States to achieve results on mandate
review.
Mr. Hill (Australia): Australia must also
dissociate itself from lifting the spending cap by
consensus. Last December, we decided by consensus to
limit the Secretary-General’s spending authority. That
demonstrated our collective commitment to United
Nations reform and our shared conviction that reform
should be achieved as early as possible in this session
of the General Assembly. To lift the cap without
meeting that responsibility to reform would be to
defeat the purpose for which the cap was originally
accepted.
When the matter was taken up in the Fifth
Committee on Wednesday, I said that we had not
achieved important reforms on mandates or
management reform, and therefore the proposed action
was premature. I said I nevertheless hoped that such
reforms would be achieved by today. They have not
been. We have no resolution before us on management
and oversight reform or mandate review. For us, that is
a serious failure, and it is a failure by us, the Member
States.
To agree to review the mandates or the work
programme of any organization on a regular basis is
simply sensible practice. It allows an organization to
ensure that its funding and its staff are focused
according to contemporary and not historical priorities.
It is the least that our constituencies should expect of
us.
Similarly, the need to implement best
management practices should also be beyond debate.
Necessary reforms — such as accepting international
public sector accounting practices, publishing an
annual report for the Organization, operationalizing the
ethics office, establishing a chief information

14

technology officer, providing a modern information
and technology structure, and adopting a modern
enterprise resource planning system — should not take
months of endless debate. Neither should sensible
oversight reform, such as ensuring budget
independence for the Office of Internal Oversight
Services or appointing members to the already
established Independent Audit Advisory Committee.
Necessary reforms in procurement should have
been authorized and better public access to United
Nations documents provided. Our failures to achieve
these necessary reforms should not allow us to lift the
cap, to lift the only discipline that we had imposed on
ourselves — which is the cap.
Having said that, and having accepted the reality
that the cap will be lifted, my delegation will
nevertheless continue to work hard towards the goal of
a United Nations Organization that is best able to meet
the many and important demands that are placed on it.
Finally, there are many — including yourself,
Mr. President — who deserve to be thanked for a great
deal of effort to have done better than what we had
before us tonight, but I would specifically mention
Mr. Allan Rock, Ambassador for Canada, because he
retires within a couple of hours. I thank him for his
tireless efforts and wish him well for the future.
Mr. Wallace (United States of America): Thank
you, Mr. President, for the tremendous effort that you
and your colleagues made on behalf of all of us over
the last several weeks.
As the Assembly knows, my delegation
dissociated itself from consensus on this matter in the
Fifth Committee. We do so again here tonight, and our
remarks can be found in the records of the Fifth
Committee (see A/C.5/60/SR.65).
Finally, we too would like to thank Allan Rock,
the Permanent Representative of Canada, for his
tireless service to this body, particularly over the last
several weeks. We wish him well as he leaves us after
tonight, and we will all miss him.
Mr. Laurin (Canada): Let me begin by
acknowledging the very helpful and constructive role
you have played, Mr. President. We encourage you to
persevere.
The breadth and depth of Canada’s engagement in
this Organization is well known. Our commitment to

06-41738

A/60/PV.92

ensuring its effectiveness is unshakeable. We are, as
the Assembly knows, among the few countries that
have, without exception, paid their dues in full and on
time — a concrete expression of our commitment to
the reliable financing of this Organization.
Canada joined in the lifting of the cap on
Wednesday night on the basis of what we thought was
a shared understanding of the work to be completed by
this evening’s plenary. That included substantial
progress on both management reform and mandate
review. My colleagues know how hard our delegation
has worked to bring one of those tracks to a successful
conclusion. Sadly, what we have seen since that time
cannot, in Canada’s view, be construed as a serious
effort to find common ground or to advance the cause
of reform.
What we know is this: the United Nations cannot
continue to be effective unless it modernizes its
programme of work through mandate review and its
methods of work through management reform. Above
all, the management structures within which the United
Nations undertakes its operations must be suited to the
times. One simply cannot confront new problems with
antiquated structures.
We are therefore deeply distressed at the failure
of this body to seize the moment and act on what our
leaders have instructed us to do, namely, modernize the
Organization. We believe this failure undermines the
Organization’s credibility, and we fear it will
ultimately undermine support for the Organization
among the Governments of the world. That is a
decision with which we cannot associate ourselves.
Nevertheless, we intend to dedicate ourselves fully to
achieving consensus on both management reform and
mandate review in the weeks and months ahead.
The President: We shall first take up the report
of the Fifth Committee issued as document
A/60/608/Add.3.
The Assembly has before it a draft decision
entitled “Expenditure authorization for the biennium
2006-2007”, recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 8 of its report.
We will now take an action on the draft decision.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.

06-41738

The President: We shall now take up the report
of the Fifth Committee issued as document
A/60/608/Add.4.
The Assembly has before it a draft resolution
entitled “Estimates in respect of special political
missions, good offices and other political initiatives
authorized by the General Assembly and/or Security
Council”, recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/60/L.63.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/281).
The President: We shall now take up the report
of the Fifth Committee issued as document
A/60/608/Add.5.
The Assembly has before it a draft decision
entitled “Additional office accommodation in Geneva
for the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights”, recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The
text of the draft decision, for the time being, is
contained in document A/C.5/60/L.65.
We will now take action on the draft decision.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: We shall now take up the report
of the Fifth Committee issued as document
A/60/608/Add.6.
The Assembly has before it a draft resolution
entitled “Capital master plan”, recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of this report. The text
of the draft resolution for the time being is contained in
document A/C.5/60/L.66.
We will now take an action on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/282).

15

A/60/PV.92

The President: There is a request for explanation
of position. I give the floor to the representative of
Finland, speaking on behalf of the European Union.
Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I am speaking on behalf
of the European Union. While the European Union is
encouraged by the constructive spirit that came to the
fore during our negotiations, we are disappointed that
we are not seeing more of it this evening. But we have
demonstrated that if we work together we can achieve
tangible progress. The lifting of the cap was important,
because it is in our shared interest that the United
Nations continue its crucial mission to deliver services
around the world.
Mr. President, in your letter of 28 June, which
reflects the political understanding of representatives
of all groups on the way ahead in the reform process,
you addressed the remarkable progress achieved so far,
which in our view deserves to be highlighted. A new
Peacebuilding Commission has been established, and it
met for the first time on 23 June. The new Human
Rights Council has replaced the Commission on
Human Rights; its first session ended today. We set up
the Central Emergency Response Fund. We adopted the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel. We
established the Ethics Office. We strengthened
oversight capacities, and we introduced a system of
whistle-blower protection and financial disclosure. We
achieved all of that in a little over six months. Today,
we adopted resolution 60/265, on development followup, which reflects a spirit of global partnership. And
the intensive negotiations on the financing of
peacekeeping operations have been successfully
concluded.
Agreement was not reached on mandate review or
management reform today, and we must now redouble
our efforts in order to reach consensus next week. But
there a consensus may be emerging on reform methods,
specifically on the replacement of the Integrated
Management Information System, the creation of the
position of Chief Information Technology Officer in
order to better manage the information technology
resources of the Organization, the adoption of the
International Public Sector Accounting Standards,
better reporting and an increase in the Working Capital
Fund. We need to build on the progress next week as
we continue our work along the lines that you,
Mr. President, have proposed.

16

Reform is an ongoing process, and a lot remains
to be done. The European Union will continue to work
hard and constructively with all partners with a view to
achieving a successful conclusion. We appeal to all
delegations to enhance the global partnership that has
been evolving in recent days in order to help us to take
the decisions on substance and process which are
necessary if we are to make our Organization more
efficient and effective. It is crucial that by 7 July we
achieve meaningful and concrete results together.
The European Union is deeply grateful for your
efforts, Mr. President, to bridge the gaps, to create an
atmosphere of trust and to show us the way ahead.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 124.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it.
Statement by the President
The President: During the past few weeks in the
General Assembly there has been intense work on
Secretariat and management reform, as well as on
mandate review, with a view to implementing the
decisions taken by our leaders at the 2005 world
summit. By those efforts we have begun the process of
creating the necessary conditions for a more efficient,
effective and accountable United Nations.
As I indicated in my letter of 28 June, we can
look back on a number of significant accomplishments
during the sixtieth session of the General Assembly. I
also outlined measures that now need to be pursued on
issues relating to Secretariat and management reform.
The Assembly’s work during the past few weeks
was carried out in an increasingly improved
atmosphere. Member States have started to discuss
these complex issues with a view to better
understanding each others’ positions and to finding
common ground for mutually acceptable solutions.
Over the past few days our colleagues in the Fifth
Committee have been focused on the various issues
raised in the Secretary-General’s report “Investing in
the United Nations” (A/60/692). I want to thank all
delegates for working literally day and night to find
compromises regarding the proposals on the table. I
would also like to thank the Chairman of the Fifth
Committee and the Secretariat for their contributions.

06-41738

A/60/PV.92

In particular, I would like to thank the coordinator, Mr.
Morteza Mirmohammad of the Islamic Republic of
Iran, for the skilful way in which he has led the
negotiations on a possible draft resolution.
In those negotiations — in which work must
continue — some areas of possible agreement have
emerged. There is agreement on the establishment of
the post of Chief Information Technology Officer in
the Office of the Secretary-General. There is general
acceptance of the need to replace the Integrated
Management Information System with a modernized
system to ensure that the Organization provides a high
degree of transparency and accountability.
There is support for the adoption of the
International Public Sector Accounting Standards.
There is, furthermore, a general understanding of the
need for an increase in the Working Capital Fund.
There is also support for the Secretary-General in his
intention to submit a single, comprehensive annual
report to the General Assembly containing financial
and programme information, aimed at enhancing the
transparency of the Organization and the accountability
of the Secretariat to Member States. Consultations are
also being pursued with regard to the idea of providing
the Secretary-General with limited discretion in
budgetary implementation.
The Fifth Committee has been working hard on
the complex management reform issues in the
“Investing in the United Nations” report. At the same
time, the Committee has also had to deal with
peacekeeping budgets. Nearly 20 resolutions
amounting to almost $5 billion have been negotiated
and adopted. The workload has been extremely heavy.
Given that situation, it is understandable that
more time will be needed to finalize the negotiations.
Expectations of results have been expressed in this
Hall today. The Fifth Committee has thus decided to
extend its resumed session from 5 to 7 July so that it
may devote its attention solely to concluding its work
on the “Investing in the United Nations” report with a
view to working out a comprehensive, substantial draft
resolution on Secretariat and management reform for
adoption by the General Assembly.
Another important aspect of our reform efforts is
mandate review. As members may recall, at the 2005
world summit, our leaders asked us to review all
mandates older than five years in order to strengthen
and update the programme of work of the United

06-41738

Nations. To facilitate that review, the SecretaryGeneral provided us with his report “Mandating and
delivering” (A/60/733). I would like to thank the CoChairs for management reform, Ambassador Rock of
Canada and Ambassador Akram of Pakistan, for their
constructive and dynamic leadership of the complex
mandate review process. I would also like to mention
and thank Aizaz Ahmed Chaudhry of Pakistan and
Heidi Hulan of Canada for their important and diligent
efforts in the working group. I would also like to take
this opportunity to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Robert Orr and his very competent staff for their
excellent work.
As members know, in parallel with the work in
the General Assembly, mandate review processes are
ongoing in the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council. The Co-Chairs have provided me with
an interim report on their work. According to the
report, comprehensive discussions have been held on
the report entitled “Mandating and delivering”.
Member States have welcomed the electronic database
of mandates as a helpful tool for their deliberations.
The database should be a living source of
information — that is, it should be continuously
updated.
A working group has been established to consider
mandates five years or older that have not been
renewed. The 400 mandates that the group has
considered have been separated into categories on the
basis of their implementation status. The group will
continue by identifying areas for early action within
those categories.
During the past few days, intensive consultations
have taken place among Member States regarding the
proposals for the way forward outlined in the interim
report by the Co-Chairs. It is my understanding that
there is support for the idea that, as soon as the review
of mandates five years or older that have not been
renewed has been concluded, consideration should be
given to entering a second phase of discussion on the
remaining mandates. It is, however, also my
understanding that further consultations will be needed
on the guiding principles for such a second phase.
It is thus my intention to convene informal
consultations of the plenary on mandate review as soon
as possible in the month of July to consider the way
forward. I also suggest that the informal plenary
consider giving a renewed mandate to the working

17

A/60/PV.92

group so that it can continue its work on the nonrenewed mandates with a view to broadening its scope
to consideration of the remaining mandates once an
agreement on how to proceed is agreed upon.
Regrettably, Ambassador Rock will leave his post
in New York tomorrow to return to Canada. Let me
take this opportunity to wish him all the best in his
continued professional pursuits and in his personal life.
Alan Rock is a deeply respected friend and colleague
who will be sorely missed; he will always be welcomed
back to the United Nations in New York. I have asked
Ambassador David Cooney of Ireland to take his place
as Co-Chair for management reform. I am very pleased
to inform the Assembly that Ambassador Cooney has
agreed to take on that task and is ready to start his
work in July. We know that he will do so with his wellknown competence and wisdom.
Before concluding, I would also like to note that
the General Assembly has now authorized by
consensus the expenditure of the remaining funds
appropriated through resolution 60/247 A, also noting
the disassociation from the consensus by some Member

18

States. With this decision, the United Nations is now in
a position to fully implement its programme of work
during the remainder of the biennium 2006-2007 and to
deliver its services to peoples and crisis areas all over
the world. In order to do that effectively, the work to
reform, streamline and modernize the United Nations
must be pursued with vigour and a sense of shared
responsibility.
Extension of the work of the Fifth Committee
The President: As there are still pending issues
to be considered by the Fifth Committee, may I take it
that the General Assembly agrees to extend the work of
the Committee from Wednesday, 5 July, to Friday,
7 July 2006, on the understanding that conference
services will be provided from resources allocated for
the General Assembly?
It was so decided.
The President: I wish all members a pleasant
evening and a good Fourth of July weekend.
The meeting rose at 10.50 p.m.

06-41738
