United Nations

A/RES/66/207

General Assembly

Distr.: General
14 March 2012

Sixty-sixth session
Agenda item 20

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2011
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/66/441)]

66/207. Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and
strengthening of the United Nations Human Settlements
Programme (UN-Habitat)
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 65/165 of 20 December 2010 and all other previous
resolutions on the implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference
on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and strengthening of the United Nations Human
Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat),
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 2011/21 of 27 July
2011 and all other previous resolutions of the Council on human settlements,
Recalling further the goal contained in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration 1 and the 2005 World Summit Outcome 2 of achieving a significant
improvement in the lives of at least 100 million slum-dwellers by 2020 and the goal
contained in the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”) 3 to halve, by 2015, the
proportion of people who lack access to safe drinking water and sanitation,
Recalling the Habitat Agenda, 4 the Declaration on Cities and Other Human
Settlements in the New Millennium, 5 the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation3 and
the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for
Development, 6
_______________
1

See resolution 55/2.
See resolution 60/1.
3
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
4
Report of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), Istanbul, 3–14 June 1996
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.97.IV.6), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
5
Resolution S-25/2, annex.
6
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
2

11-47124

*1147124*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/66/207

Expressing concern about the continuing increase in the number of
slum-dwellers in the world, despite the attainment of the Millennium Development
Goal target of achieving a significant improvement in the lives of at least
100 million slum-dwellers by 2020,
Taking note of the outcome document of the High-level Plenary Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals, 7 in particular
paragraph 77 (k), in which Heads of State and Government committed themselves to
working towards cities without slums, beyond current targets, by reducing slum
populations and improving the lives of slum-dwellers, with adequate support of the
international community, by prioritizing national urban planning strategies with the
participation of all stakeholders, by promoting equal access for people living in
slums to public services, including health, education, energy, water and sanitation
and adequate shelter, and by promoting sustainable urban and rural development,
and encouraging UN-Habitat to continue providing the necessary technical
assistance,
Taking note also of resolution 23/9 of 15 April 2011 of the Governing Council
of UN-Habitat, entitled “Global and national strategies and frameworks for
improving the lives of slum-dwellers beyond the Millennium Development Goals
target”, 8
Recognizing the negative impacts of environmental degradation, including
climate change, desertification and loss of biodiversity, on human settlements,
Welcoming with appreciation the important contribution of UN-Habitat, within
its mandate, to more cost-effective transitions between emergency relief, recovery
and reconstruction, and also its participation in the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee,
Welcoming the progress being made by UN-Habitat in the implementation of
its medium-term strategic and institutional plan for the period 2008–2013 and its
efforts, as a non-resident agency, in helping programme countries to mainstream the
Habitat Agenda into their respective development frameworks,
Welcoming also the offer of the Government of Italy and the city of Naples to
host the sixth session of the World Urban Forum from 1 to 7 September 2012,
Recognizing the continuing need for adequate and predictable financial
contributions to the United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation so
as to ensure timely, effective and concrete global implementation of the Habitat
Agenda, the Declaration on Cities and Other Human Settlements in the New
Millennium and the relevant internationally agreed development goals,
Taking note of resolution 23/10 of 15 April 2011 of the Governing Council of
UN-Habitat, entitled “Future activities by the United Nations Human Settlements
Programme in urban economy and financial mechanisms for urban upgrading,
housing and basic services for the urban poor”,8
Recalling its resolution 64/207 of 21 December 2009, in which it took note of
the recommendation made by the Governing Council of UN-Habitat in its resolution
22/1 of 3 April 2009 and, having considered the question of convening, in 2016, a
_______________
7

See resolution 65/1.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/66/8), annex,
sect. B.

8

2

A/RES/66/207

third United Nations conference on housing and sustainable urban development
(Habitat III), requested the Secretary-General to prepare a report on that question, in
collaboration with the Governing Council, for its consideration at its sixty-sixth
session,
Recalling also that, in its resolution 65/165, it encouraged the
Secretary-General, in consultation with the Governing Council of UN-Habitat and in
discussion with all the partners of the Habitat Agenda, to consider the possibility of
integrating the two themes of “housing finance systems” and “sustainable
urbanization” into the preparatory process for Habitat III,
Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the coordinated
1.
implementation of the Habitat Agenda, 9 on the implementation of the outcome of
the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and strengthening
of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) 10 and on the
third United Nations conference on housing and sustainable urban development
(Habitat III); 11
2.
Decides to convene in 2016, in line with the bi-decennial cycle (1976,
1996 and 2016), a third United Nations conference on housing and sustainable urban
development (Habitat III) to reinvigorate the global commitment to sustainable
urbanization that should focus on the implementation of a “New Urban Agenda”,
which should build on the Habitat Agenda,4 the Declaration on Cities and Other
Human Settlements in the New Millennium5 and the relevant internationally agreed
development goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration,1 and the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development 12 and
the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation,3 and the outcomes of other major United
Nations conferences and summits;
3.
Acknowledges, in this regard, the importance of the forthcoming United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, to be held in Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012;
Emphasizes that the Conference and the preparatory process should take
4.
full advantage of planned meetings by aligning with the twenty-fourth and
twenty-fifth sessions of the Governing Council of UN-Habitat and with the sixth
and seventh sessions of the World Urban Forum, and encourages the regular
regional ministerial conferences on housing and urban development and other
relevant expert group meetings to support the activities of the preparatory process,
taking into account that the Conference and the preparatory process should be
carried out in the most inclusive, efficient, effective and improved manner;
Decides to consider before the end of 2012 the scope, modalities, format
5.
and organization of the third United Nations conference on housing and sustainable
urban development (Habitat III), in a most efficient and effective manner;
Invites the Secretary-General to appoint the Executive Director of
6.
UN-Habitat to serve as Secretary-General of the third United Nations conference on

_______________
9

See A/66/326.
A/66/281.
11
A/66/282.
12
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
10

3

A/RES/66/207

housing and sustainable urban development and to act as focal point on behalf of the
United Nations system;
7.
Invites Governments and regional and local authorities, in accordance
with national legislation, to enumerate the populations living in slums in their
countries, regions and urban areas and, on that basis, to set, with the support of the
international community, voluntary and realistic national, regional and local targets,
to be attained by 2020, with regard to improving significantly the lives of
slum-dwellers, in line with resolution 23/9 of the Governing Council of UNHabitat;8
8.
Invites UN-Habitat to provide, within its current budget and in line with
its medium-term strategic and institutional plan for the period 2008–2013, or its
subsequent strategic plan, technical and advisory assistance to Governments and
regional and local authorities wishing to assess their slum population levels and
trends, set voluntary national, regional and local 2020 targets, prepare national,
regional and local slum prevention and upgrading strategies and plans, formulate
and implement slum upgrading and housing programmes and monitor the progress
of implementation, and to report periodically to the Governing Council and the
General Assembly;
Welcomes the progress made by UN-Habitat in the implementation of its
9.
medium-term strategic and institutional plan for the period 2008–2013, and takes
note of the conclusions of the midterm review of the implementation of the plan
submitted to the Governing Council of UN-Habitat at its twenty-third session; 13
10. Encourages UN-Habitat to continue to work on the strategic plan for
2014–2019 in consultation with the Committee of Permanent Representatives, in an
open and transparent manner, setting realistic and achievable goals for the period it
covers;
11. Takes note of the report of the Executive Director on the review of the
governance structure of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme, 14 and
encourages UN-Habitat to move this process forward, in cooperation with the
Committee of Permanent Representatives, in order to continue on its path towards
the improvement of its transparency, accountability, efficiency and effectiveness;
12. Notes the request made by the Governing Council of UN-Habitat in its
resolution 23/108 that the Executive Director, in building on the lessons learned
from the experimental reimbursable seeding operations and slum upgrading facility
programmes, shift the focus of the work of UN-Habitat in the area of human
settlements financing towards strengthening its normative approaches to urban
economy and the promotion of finance for urban upgrading, housing and basic
services for the urban poor, while taking into account geographical and regional
balance, as well as the request to explore as expeditiously as possible and to select,
in consultation with the Committee of Permanent Representatives, a partnership
model with development finance institutions for future lending, guarantee and
financial advisory services in the urban upgrading and housing finance sectors;
13. Reiterates its encouragement to UN-Habitat to continue, within its
mandate and in line with its medium-term strategic and institutional plan for the
period 2008–2013, its existing cooperation on issues related to cities and climate
_______________
13
14

4

HSP/GC/23/5/Add.3.
HSP/GC/23/2/Add.1.

A/RES/66/207

change and to continue to play a complementary role in matters related to climate
change within the United Nations system, in particular in addressing the
vulnerability of cities to climate change, including through further normative work
and expansion of its technical assistance to towns and cities on local action for the
mitigation of urban-based greenhouse gas emissions and adaptation to climate
change, with a focus on vulnerable urban populations, slum-dwellers, the urban poor
and at-risk populations;
14. Stresses the importance of timely action by UN-Habitat in response to
natural and human-made disasters, in particular through its work in addressing
post-disaster and post-conflict housing and infrastructure needs through its
normative and operational work as part of the continuum from emergency relief to
recovery and to urban development through effective urban planning;
15. Reiterates its support for the dissemination and implementation of the
guidelines on decentralization and strengthening of local authorities and the
guidelines on access to basic services for all, approved by the Governing Council of
UN-Habitat in its resolutions 21/3 of 20 April 2007 15 and 22/8 of 3 April 2009, 16
respectively, and reaffirmed by the Governing Council in its resolution 23/12 of
15 April 2011;8
16. Invites the international donor community and financial institutions to
contribute generously to UN-Habitat through increased voluntary financial
contributions to the United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation,
including the Water and Sanitation Trust Fund and the technical cooperation trust
funds, and invites Governments in a position to do so and other stakeholders to
provide predictable multi-year funding and increased non-earmarked contributions;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-seventh session a report on the implementation of the present resolution;
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-seventh session
the item entitled “Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference
on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and strengthening of the United Nations Human
Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat)”.
91st plenary meeting
22 December 2011

_______________
15
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/62/8), annex I,
sect. B.
16
Ibid., Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/64/8), annex I, sect. B.

5
