United Nations

A/RES/57/116

General Assembly

Distr.: General
26 February 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 75

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/57/519)]

57/116. International cooperation in the peaceful uses
of outer space
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/122 of 13 December 1996, 54/68 of 6 December
1999 and 56/51 of 10 December 2001,
Deeply convinced of the common interest of mankind in promoting and
expanding the exploration and use of outer space, as the province of all mankind, for
peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend to all States the benefits
derived therefrom, and also of the importance of international cooperation in this
field, for which the United Nations should continue to provide a focal point,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in developing the rule
of law, including the relevant norms of space law and their important role in
international cooperation for the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful
purposes, and of the widest possible adherence to international treaties that promote
the peaceful uses of outer space in order to meet emerging new challenges,
Seriously concerned about the possibility of an arms race in outer space, and
bearing in mind the importance of article IV of the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the
Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, 1
Recognizing that all States, in particular those with major space capabilities,
bearing in mind the importance of article IV of the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the
Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, should contribute actively to the goal of
preventing an arms race in outer space as an essential condition for the promotion
and strengthening of international cooperation in the exploration and use of outer
space for peaceful purposes,
Considering that space debris is an issue of concern to all nations,

_______________
1

02 54548

Resolution 2222 (XXI), annex.

A/RES/57/116

Noting the progress achieved in the further development of peaceful space
exploration and applications as well as in various national and cooperative space
projects, which contributes to international cooperation, and the importance of
further developing the legal framework to strengthen international cooperation in
this field,
Convinced of the importance of the recommendations in the resolution entitled
“The Space Millennium: Vienna Declaration on Space and Human Development”,
adopted by the Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE III), held at Vienna from 19 to 30 July 1999, 2
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
the recommendations of UNISPACE III, 3
Convinced that the use of space science and technology and their applications,
in such areas as telemedicine, tele-education and Earth observation, contribute to
achieving the objectives of the global conferences of the United Nations that address
various aspects of economic, social and cultural development, inter alia, poverty
eradication,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space on the work of its forty-fifth session, 4
1.
Endorses the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space on the work of its forty-fifth session; 4
2.
Urges States that have not yet become parties to the international treaties
governing the uses of outer space 5 to give consideration to ratifying or acceding to
those treaties as well as incorporating them in their national legislation;
3.
Notes that, at its forty-first session, the Legal Subcommittee of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space continued its work, as mandated by
the General Assembly in its resolution 56/51;6
4.
Notes with satisfaction the successful completion of the three-year work
plan 7 by the Working Group of the Legal Subcommittee concerning the review of
the concept of the “launching State”, and takes note of its recommendations; 8
5.
Endorses the recommendation of the Committee that the Legal
Subcommittee, at its forty-second session, taking into account the concerns of all
countries, in particular those of developing countries:
_______________
2

See Report of the Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space, Vienna, 19–30 July 1999 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.00.I.3), chap. I, resolution 1.
3
A/57/213.
4
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/57/20).
5
Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (resolution 2222 (XXI), annex); Agreement on the Rescue
of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into Outer Space (resolution
2345 (XXII), annex); Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects
(resolution 2777 (XXVI), annex); Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space
(resolution 3235 (XXIX), annex); and Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon and
Other Celestial Bodies (resolution 34/68, annex).
6
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/57/20),
chap. II.D.
7
Ibid., Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 20 and corrigendum (A/54/20 and Corr.1), annex I,
para. 3 (b) (iii).
8
Ibid., Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/57/20), para. 169.

2

A/RES/57/116

(a)

Consider the following as regular agenda items:

(i)

General exchange of views;

(ii)

Status and application of the five United Nations treaties on outer space;

(iii) Information on the activities of international organizations relating to
space law;
(iv) Matters relating to:
a.

The definition and delimitation of outer space;

b.
The character and utilization of the geostationary orbit, including
consideration of ways and means to ensure the rational and equitable use of the
geostationary orbit without prejudice to the role of the International
Telecommunication Union;
(b)

Consider the following single issues/items for discussion:

(i) Review and possible revision of the Principles Relevant to the Use of
Nuclear Power Sources in Outer Space; 9
(ii) Examination of the preliminary draft protocol on matters specific to
space assets to the Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment,
opened for signature at Cape Town, South Africa, on 16 November 2001:
a.
Considerations relating to the possibility of the United Nations
serving as supervisory authority under the preliminary draft protocol;
b.
Considerations relating to the relationship between the terms of the
preliminary draft protocol and the rights and obligations of States under the
legal regime applicable to outer space;
6.
Notes that the Legal Subcommittee, at its forty-second session, will
submit its proposals to the Committee for new items to be considered by the
Subcommittee at its forty-third session, in 2004;
7.
Notes also that, in the context of paragraph 5 (a) (ii) above, the Legal
Subcommittee will reconvene its Working Group, which will meet for three years,
from 2002 to 2004, with the terms of reference as agreed upon by the Legal
Subcommittee; 10
8.
Notes further that, in the context of paragraph 5 (a) (iii) above, the group
of experts designated by interested Member States to identify which aspects of the
report on the ethics of space policy of the World Commission on the Ethics of
Scientific Knowledge and Technology of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization might need to be studied by the Committee and to draft a
report, in consultation with other international organizations and in close liaison
with the World Commission, will submit its report to the Legal Subcommittee at its
forty-second session;
9.
Notes that, in the context of paragraph 5 (a) (iv) above, the Legal
Subcommittee will reconvene its working group on the item only to consider matters
relating to the definition and delimitation of outer space;

_______________
9

See resolution 47/68.
See A/AC.105/763 and Corr.1, para. 118, and A/AC.105/787, para. 138.

10

3

A/RES/57/116

10. Notes with appreciation that, in the context of paragraph 5 (b) (ii) above,
the Governments of France and Italy hosted the intersessional meetings within the
framework of the ad hoc consultative mechanism established in accordance with
paragraph 10 of General Assembly resolution 56/51;
11. Agrees that the Legal Subcommittee should establish a working group to
consider the questions reflected in paragraphs 5 (b) (ii) a and b above separately;
12. Notes that, in accordance with the measures relating to the working
methods of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies, 11 which were endorsed by the
General Assembly in paragraph 11 of its resolution 52/56 of 10 December 1997, the
Committee, at its forty-fifth session, considered the composition of the bureaux of
the Committee and its subsidiary bodies for the third term, starting in 2003, and held
informal consultations on the matter;
13. Notes also that, in accordance with the agreement of the Committee at its
forty-fifth session, 12 the Government of Austria convened and facilitated and will
continue to convene and facilitate intersessional informal consultations, including
the chairpersons of the regional groups, on the composition of the bureaux of the
Committee and its subsidiary bodies for the third term with a view to reaching
consensus before the forty-sixth session of the Committee;
14. Agrees that, on the basis of agreements to be reached among the members
of the Committee on the composition of the bureaux of the Committee and its
subsidiary bodies for the third term, the election of the officers of the Committee for
the third term should be conducted at the beginning of the forty-sixth session of the
Committee;
15. Notes that the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its thirty-ninth
session, continued its work as mandated by the General Assembly in its resolution
56/51; 13
16. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee that the Scientific and
Technical Subcommittee, at its fortieth session, taking into account the concerns of
all countries, in particular those of developing countries:
(a)

Consider the following items:

(i) General exchange of views and introduction to reports submitted on
national activities;
(ii)

United Nations Programme on Space Applications;

(iii) Implementation of the recommendations of the Third United Nations
Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
(UNISPACE III);
(iv) Matters relating to remote-sensing of the Earth by satellite, including
applications for developing countries and monitoring of the Earth’s
environment;

_______________
11
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/52/20),
annex I.
12
Ibid., Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/57/20), para. 209.
13
Ibid., chap. II.C.

4

A/RES/57/116

(b) Consider the following items in accordance with the work plans adopted
by the Committee: 14
(i)

Use of nuclear power sources in outer space;

(ii) Means and mechanisms for strengthening inter-agency cooperation and
increasing the use of space applications and services within and among entities
of the United Nations system;
(iii) Implementation of an integrated, space-based global natural disaster
management system;
(iv) Space debris;
(c)

Consider the following single issues/items for discussion:

(i) Examination of the physical nature and technical attributes of the
geostationary orbit and its utilization and applications, including, inter alia, in
the field of space communications, as well as other questions relating to
developments in space communications, taking particular account of the needs
and interests of developing countries;
(ii) Mobilization of financial resources to develop capacity in space science
and technology applications;
(iii) The use of space technology for the medical sciences and public health;
17. Notes that the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee at its fortieth
session will submit its proposal to the Committee for a draft provisional agenda for
the forty-first session of the Subcommittee, in 2004;
18. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee that the Committee on
Space Research and the International Astronautical Federation, in liaison with
member States, be invited to arrange a symposium on applications of satellite
navigation and their benefits to developing countries, with as wide a participation as
possible, to be held during the first week of the fortieth session of the Scientific and
Technical Subcommittee;
19. Agrees that, in the context of paragraphs 16 (a) (ii) and (iii) and 17
above, the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee at its fortieth session should
reconvene the Working Group of the Whole;
20. Also agrees that, in the context of paragraph 16 (b) (i) above, the
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee at its fortieth session should reconvene its
Working Group on the Use of Nuclear Power Sources in Outer Space;
21. Invites the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities to contribute
to the work of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee in the context of
paragraph 16 (b) (ii) above, and agrees that the Inter-Agency Meeting should
continue to report to the Subcommittee and the Committee on the work conducted at
its annual session;
22. Endorses the United Nations Programme on Space Applications for 2003,
as proposed to the Committee by the Expert on Space Applications;15

_______________
14
See A/AC.105/697 and Corr.1, annex III, appendix, for the work plan for item (i); A/AC.105/736,
annex II, paras. 40 and 41, for items (ii) and (iii), respectively; and A/AC.105/761, para. 130, for item (iv).
15
See A/AC.105/773, sects. II–IV.

5

A/RES/57/116

23. Notes with satisfaction that, in accordance with paragraph 30 of General
Assembly resolution 50/27 of 6 December 1995, the African regional centres for
space science and technology education, in the French language and in the English
language, located in Morocco and Nigeria, respectively, and the Centre for Space
Science and Technology Education in Asia and the Pacific continued their education
programmes in 2002 and that progress has been achieved in furthering the goals of
the Network of Space Science and Technology Education and Research Institutions
of Central, Eastern and South-Eastern Europe and in establishing the regional
centres for space science and technology education in Latin America and the
Caribbean, as a result of the substantive progress achieved during the meetings held
in Mexico and Brazil in 2002, as well as in Western Asia;
24. Recognizes the agreement reached at the Space Conferences of the
Americas for the Latin American countries as a mechanism to promote cooperation
and coordination in space activities in the region, notes with satisfaction the success
of the Fourth Space Conference of the Americas, held at Cartagena de Indias,
Colombia, from 14 to 17 May 2002, which adopted the Declaration of Cartagena de
Indias and the Plan of Action, 16 and encourages other regions to convene
periodically regional conferences with a view to achieving convergence of positions
on issues of common concern in the field of the peaceful uses of outer space among
States Members of the United Nations;
25. Urges all Governments, entities of the United Nations system and
intergovernmental and non-governmental entities conducting space-related activities
to take the necessary action for the effective implementation of the
recommendations of UNISPACE III, in particular its resolution entitled “The Space
Millennium: Vienna Declaration on Space and Human Development”, 2 and requests
the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session
on the implementation of the recommendations of UNISPACE III;
26. Notes with satisfaction the work conducted by the eleven action teams
that the Committee had established at its forty-fourth session under the voluntary
leadership of Member States to implement the recommendations of UNISPACE III,
and agrees that Member States should provide full support to the action teams in
conducting their work; 17
27. Agrees that, in accordance with paragraph 30 of General Assembly
resolution 55/122 of 8 December 2000, the Committee should include in the
agendas of its forty-sixth and forty-seventh sessions an item on the implementation
of the recommendations of UNISPACE III;
28. Notes with satisfaction that the Committee has started to prepare a report
under the agenda item on the implementation of the recommendations of
UNISPACE III for submission to the General Assembly, so that the Assembly may
review and appraise, at its fifty-ninth session, in 2004, in accordance with
paragraph 16 of its resolution 54/68, the implementation of the outcome of
UNISPACE III and consider further actions and initiatives, and agrees that, in this
context, the Working Group established by the Committee to prepare the abovementioned report should be reconvened at the forty-sixth session of the Committee;

_______________
16

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/57/20), annex II.
Ibid., Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 20 and corrigendum (A/56/20 and Corr.1), paras. 50 and 55;
and ibid., Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/57/20), paras. 42 and 43.
17

6

A/RES/57/116

29. Agrees that the review by the General Assembly of the progress made in
the implementation of the recommendations of UNISPACE III should be conducted
in plenary meetings at the fifty-ninth session of the Assembly, under a separate
agenda item entitled “Review of the implementation of the recommendations of the
Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space”, in addition to the item entitled “International cooperation in the peaceful
uses of outer space”;
30. Urges all Member States to contribute to the Trust Fund for the United
Nations Programme on Space Applications to support activities to implement the
recommendations of UNISPACE III, in particular the priority project proposals as
recommended by the Committee at its forty-third session;18
31. Recommends that more attention be paid and political support be
provided to all matters relating to the protection and the preservation of the outer
space environment, especially those potentially affecting the Earth’s environment;
32. Considers that it is essential that Member States pay more attention to
the problem of collisions of space objects, including those with nuclear power
sources, with space debris, and other aspects of space debris, calls for the
continuation of national research on this question, for the development of improved
technology for the monitoring of space debris and for the compilation and
dissemination of data on space debris, also considers that, to the extent possible,
information thereon should be provided to the Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee, and agrees that international cooperation is needed to expand
appropriate and affordable strategies to minimize the impact of space debris on
future space missions;
33. Urges all States, in particular those with major space capabilities, to
contribute actively to the goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as an
essential condition for the promotion of international cooperation in the exploration
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes;
34. Emphasizes the need to increase the benefits of space technology and its
applications and to contribute to an orderly growth of space activities favourable to
sustained economic growth and sustainable development in all countries, including
mitigation of the consequences of disasters, in particular in the developing
countries;
35. Agrees that the benefits of space technology and its applications should
be prominently brought to the attention of conferences organized within the United
Nations system to address global issues relating to social, economic and cultural
development and that the use of space technology should be promoted towards
achieving the objectives of those conferences and implementing the United Nations
Millennium Declaration; 19
36. Notes that the Government of Chile has offered to host an international
conference on biotechnology in 2003 to promote the use of space technology in
enhancing food security, as part of the contributions to the implementation of the
United Nations Millennium Declaration;

_______________
18
19

Ibid., Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/55/20), para. 87.
See resolution 55/2.

7

A/RES/57/116

37. Notes with satisfaction the efforts made by the Committee and its
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee as well as the Office for Outer Space Affairs
of the Secretariat and the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities to bring
the benefits of space science and technology and their applications to the attention
of the World Summit on Sustainable Development;
38. Urges entities of the United Nations system, particularly those
participating in the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities, to examine, in
cooperation with the Committee and its Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, how
space science and technology and their applications could contribute to the
implementation of the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development 20 and
the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
(“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”); 21
39. Takes note of Algeria’s interest in and contributions to the work of the
Committee and of its request to become a member of the Committee, as well as of
the support for that request expressed by the Group of 77 and other regional groups
and Member States, and decides, on an exceptional basis, to accept its membership
in accordance with paragraph 41 of General Assembly resolution 56/51;
40. Welcomes the interest of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in membership in
the Committee and the endorsement of its candidature by the Group of African
States, and requests the Committee to continue the consideration of the matter
constructively during its next session, taking into account the principle of
consensus;
41. Endorses the decision of the Committee to grant permanent observer
status to the Committee on Earth Observation Satellites and to the Spaceweek
International Association;
42. Requests the Committee to continue to consider, as a matter of priority,
ways and means of maintaining outer space for peaceful purposes and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session;
43. Also requests the Committee to continue to consider, at its forty-sixth
session, the item entitled “Spin-off benefits of space technology: review of current
status”;
44. Further requests the Committee to continue to consider, at its forty-sixth
session, the item entitled “Space and society”;
45. Commends the International Satellite System for Search and Rescue on
its achievements during its twenty years of service to the global community in using
space technology to assist aviators and mariners in distress around the globe;
46. Agrees that the Committee should continue to consider a report on the
activities of the System as a part of its consideration of the United Nations
Programme on Space Applications under the item entitled “Report of the Scientific
and Technical Subcommittee”, and invites Member States to report on their
activities regarding the System;

_______________
20
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August-4
September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution
1, annex.
21
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.

8

A/RES/57/116

47. Invites the Committee to expand the scope of international cooperation
relating to the social, economic, ethical and human dimension in space science and
technology applications;
48. Requests the specialized agencies and other international organizations to
continue and, where appropriate, enhance their cooperation with the Committee and
to provide it with progress reports on their work relating to the peaceful uses of
outer space;
49. Requests the Committee to consider and identify new mechanisms of
international cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space, in accordance with the
preamble to the present resolution, and to submit a report to the General Assembly
at its fifty-eighth session, including its views on which subjects should be studied in
the future.
73rd plenary meeting
11 December 2002

9
