S/PV.9136

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9136th meeting

Monday, 26 September 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Nanga
Ms. Osei
Mrs. Kamboj
Mr. Gallagher
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Ms. Jacobs
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-60179 (E)
*2260179*

S/PV.9136

The question concerning Haiti

By the afternoon of 12 September, roadblocks
had been set up throughout the country, generating a
countrywide lockdown. That situation persisted in the
capital for a full five days, until 16 September, when the
police began concerted action to remove the roadblocks.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Canada,
the Dominican Republic and Haiti to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Helen La
Lime, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti; Ms. Valerie Guarnieri, Deputy
Executive Director of the World Food Programme;
and Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. La Lime.
Ms. La Lime: Over the past several weeks, three
crises have begun to intersect in altogether new and
frightening ways in Haiti. A gang crisis continues to
violently disrupt daily life, driving more than 20,000
people from their homes. An economic crisis has the
country in a stranglehold, with Haitians facing soaring
food prices and fuel often available only on the black
market. As those trials play out and the Haitian people
engage in a legitimate protest, political stakeholders are
still struggling to find common ground and define a
path to elections.
In his 11 September address to the nation, the Prime
Minister again launched a call for ongoing dialogue as
a means to create the necessary security, constitutional
and political conditions for elections by the end of
2023. He highlighted the $600 million a year lost
every year by the State through uncollected customs
proceeds — a problem with which the Government
has been struggling for some time. He announced the
Government’s decision to reduce regressive subsidies
on fuel, which cost the State some $400 million a year,
as a means of increasing revenue for social programmes.
2/20

26/09/2022

The Prime Minister again addressed the nation
on 18 September, extending his sympathies to the
victims of the violence. He urged people to come
together in support of the reforms that the Government
was implementing to make the State stronger, and he
encouraged all to resist vested interests.
Later that same day, one of the largest alliances of
criminal gangs in the capital blocked the nation’s main
fuel terminal in Varreux, in Port-au-Prince. The state
of siege has remained in place for more than a week
despite concerted police operations over the weekend,
cutting the capital off from its primary source of fuel,
creating shortages across the country and closing
down hospitals.
Throughout the crisis, I have maintained my goodoffices efforts with all sectors of Haitian society and
encouraged all sides to engage in a broad, open and
constructive dialogue. While inconclusive efforts
have led to a perceived stalemate so far, national
stakeholders have begun to re-engage with a renewed
sense of urgency. In the past weeks, Government
representatives, political groups and civil society
organizations launched new consultations on ways to
forge a broader consensus on a path to elections, but we
are not there yet.
It is encouraging to see private-sector leaders
also starting to come together, pledging to meet their
respective fiscal and legal responsibilities. Sustained
increases in revenues will be the clearest sign that that
commitment is being met by all sides.
A number of observers and interlocutors have
publicly pointed towards the role of entrenched economic
and political interests in driving, sustaining and
manipulating the unrest, deepening the political crisis.
However, despite efforts to undermine reform, the
new customs administration is beginning to operate.
In addition to the seizures made in recent months,
customs import collections increased fivefold between
July and August. Programming on border management
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
aims to build on those early successes, in particular to
tackle drug trafficking.
22-60179

26/09/2022

The question concerning Haiti

The current unrest has put a major focus on the
Haitian National Police, which has truly been put to
the test. The hard work demonstrated by its removal of
roadblocks and the restoration of some semblance of the
freedom of movement for the population has elicited a
degree of trust in its capacities. While some barricades
were quickly re-erected, the institution’s response has
demonstrated how far it has come. However, whole
neighbourhoods remain unpoliced, and the chronic
situation at the Varreux fuel terminal threatens to
highlight the very real limits of the national force.
I am grateful to those donors that engaged early
with the Joint Programme for the Haitian National
Police, known as the Basket Fund. I urge international
partners to continue meeting regularly, as we did last
week, in order to generate more support for the Basket
Fund. Investment in institutions, infrastructure and
human capacity is key.
As ever, it is those who are already most vulnerable
who suffer the most. The United Nations system in
Haiti estimates that at least 1.5 million people have
been directly impacted by recent gang violence,
with gender-based violence, in particular rape, being
used systematically.
The current generalized insecurity has also
severely curtailed humanitarian access. Before the
current bout of civil unrest, some 4.9 million Haitians
were in a state of humanitarian need. In the past two
weeks alone, attacks on World Food Programme (WFP)
personnel resulted in the loss of some 2,000 tons of
food aid, valued at close to $5 million, which would
have collectively supported up to 200,000 of the most
vulnerable Haitians over the next month. My colleagues
from the WFP will no doubt share more information on
those events.
It is self-evident that, under such conditions,
basic rights — from the freedom of movement to
education — are being catastrophically undermined
and access to basic social and health services is
repeatedly being interrupted. Prisons have not received
food, medicine or water for days. An economic crisis,
a gang crisis and a political crisis have converged into
a humanitarian catastrophe. We must not lose hope, but
rather combine our efforts to find a pathway to a better
tomorrow. A Haitian-led political solution is the first
necessary step for addressing the current crisis. The
Security Council must take urgent action to support
Haitians in their effort to build a better future.

S/PV.9136

The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. La
Lime for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Guarnieri.
Ms. Guarnieri: I visited Haiti several months ago,
and at the time I was struck by the increasing needs and
the difficulties that the World Food Programme (WFP)
team and our partners were having in moving goods
in and out of the capital city. We were struggling to
meet the needs of the population, one in every two of
whom are food-insecure. But there were important rays
of hope. School meals were reaching more than 350,000
children, one third of whom were fed with food locally
grown by smallholder farmers. And we were scaling up
further as part of Government efforts to ensure that all
Haitian children benefit from nutritious meals in school.
Tens of thousands of people were engaged in work to
rehabilitate and construct rural assets that supported
food production and to clear and drain canals in urban
areas that caused flooding during the cyclone season.
With support from the World Bank, WFP was
helping the Government to develop a national social
protection policy and taking measures to support its
implementation and make it responsive to shocks and
inclusive of the most vulnerable people. There were
plans for Government to take over the provision of
cash transfers completely by 2024, and emergency
food assistance was reaching more than 450,000
people around the country, with stocks pre-positioned
to support a scale-up in the event of hurricanes and
other disasters.
Instead of the progress we were hoping for and
dreaming of, today the situation in Haiti has sadly
reached new levels of desperation. In less than one
year, the price of the basic food basket has increased by
52 per cent. The price of petrol has doubled. Inflation
stands at 31 per cent, the highest it has been in recent
years, and is expected to rise further. The diesel needed
to run the power supply, food and basic supplies can
no longer enter the country through the port, and water
supplies are running desperately low. The schoolfeeding programme is on hold because it is not safe for
children to go to school. The economic and political
hub that is Port-au-Prince has effectively been cut off
from the rest of the country. And all of that has been
caused by the gangs, who have a stranglehold on the
main arteries in and out of the capital city. That is the
reality that Haitians have been enduring on a daily
basis for months.

22-601793/20

S/PV.9136

The question concerning Haiti

Last week, the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations and WFP issued our Hunger
Hotspots report, in which Haiti is featured. We expect
food security to further deteriorate this year and surpass
the record high of 4.5 million people estimated to face
crisis levels of food insecurity or worse, including
1.3 million people in need of emergency assistance.
Insecurity makes it very difficult and dangerous
to implement humanitarian programmes, let alone
development, in the country. The gangs that are
strangling the capital are blocking access to fuel
supplies and key logistics hubs, including ports and
airports, as well as road access to other departments.
Protesters have ransacked and looted humanitarian
warehouses throughout the country, depleting stocks
that were pre-positioned for disasters and intended for
vulnerable people. And as Ms. La Lime said, over the
course of one week the WFP and Haiti lost one third
of our food stocks, as two of our four warehouses
were deliberately targeted, looted and pillaged. Those
warehouses contained well over 2,000 metric tons of
food, which could have supported more than 218,000 of
the most vulnerable women, men, girls and boys.
Other
United
Nations
agencies
and
non-governmental organizations also saw their offices
and warehouses looted, and we estimate that at least
$6 million worth of relief supplies were lost in the
attacks, which could have benefited more than 410,000
people in need. The lootings are having a negative
impact on disaster preparedness, right at the peak of
the hurricane season.
Despite those difficult conditions, WFP and other
actors remain in Haiti and intend to stay and deliver.
Over the weekend, we started supporting Haitians
again, albeit at a limited scale. To put it simply, we are
not in a position to support all of those who need our
help, owing to the general lawlessness and operational
environment. We therefore look forward to increased
support from the States Members of the United Nations
to further facilitate humanitarian access and ensure the
protection of humanitarian actors, personnel and assets.
We are doing our part. We are working hard to get
access and already achieved a breakthrough earlier this
summer in Cité Soleil, where humanitarian access was
facilitated. We have many concerns for the people we
serve, and we are worried that a bad situation will only
get worse as food prices go up further and food stocks
run out. We are also projecting an active hurricane
4/20

26/09/2022

season, which would be nothing short of a catastrophe
for this battered population.
I also need to mention that the delivery of logistics
services, including through the United Nations
Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS), managed
by WFP, and a ship service that we put in place
to circumvent gang-controlled areas, is becoming
more crucial. Those services are underfunded and
need urgent support, owing to the role of UNHAS
in evacuating hundreds of United Nations and staff
of non-governmental organizations out of tricky
situations in the field and in delivering supplies. As
we plan for the months ahead, we already know that
operating in Haiti will come at a sharp increase in
cost. We in the WFP, along with other United Nations
agencies and non-governmental-organization partners,
have no choice but to beef up our security posture in the
country and put in place additional measures to protect
food stocks and staff. We will have to rebuild at least
one warehouse and enhance our logistics capabilities.
I also welcome the opportunity to speak today in
order to highlight that the Haiti humanitarian operation
is chronically underfunded, and the latest crisis makes
the urgency of the Council’s support all the more vital to
reverse that negative trend. The humanitarian response
plan is funded at just 22 per cent. More funding is
needed for humanitarian affairs and more investment is
needed to support Haitians with livelihoods and basic
services. The extent of the violence, the depth of the
needs and the risks to the population and to those of us
who are trying to help them in Haiti are severe. Haiti
needs help now and we are counting on the Council’s
attention and support.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Guarnieri for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Waly.
Ms. Waly (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Madam President, on behalf of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for
the opportunity to inform the Security Council of its
activities in Haiti.
Violence and organized crime, as well as the
presence of armed groups and clashes between them,
are compromising stability, security and the rule of
law in Haiti, hampering the efforts aimed at achieving
peace and the prospects for lasting development.
The country’s 1,500 kilometres of coastline and its
22-60179

26/09/2022

The question concerning Haiti

360-kilometre land border with the Dominican Republic
make Haiti particularly vulnerable to illicit trafficking
in commodities, especially drugs, arms, firearms and
ammunition. Regional cooperation, particularly with
the Dominican Republic, is therefore crucial to curbing
the recent uptick in violence and its cross-border effects.
UNODC is working especially with the Caribbean
Community and its specialized Implementing Agency
for Crime and Security in order to advance the road
map for implementing priority actions on the illicit
proliferation of firearms and ammunition across the
Caribbean, including in Haiti.
We must give priority to supporting services that
aim to uphold and implement the law and criminal
justice in Haiti so as to assist the Haitian population
and prevent any regional destabilization. In March,
a UNODC multidisciplinary team carried out an
assessment mission to Haiti in close cooperation with
the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH).
The team identified the need for capacity-building
and technology as a top priority in order to safeguard
Haiti’s borders, international ports and airports, as well
as to combat illicit trafficking and organized crime,
reduce the proliferation of illicit firearms and halt
endemic corruption.
The Haitian Government is starkly aware of
those realities and has directly tasked UNODC with
supporting it in its border-management capacitybuilding endeavours through an earmarked financial
contribution. As part of that recently launched
programme, UNODC has just begun working to map
transnational criminal activities in Haiti and their
regional impact. At the operational level, we are
supporting the Haitian authorities’ capacity-building
in the inspection of containers at strategic points
such as Port-au-Prince, Port Lafito, the international
port of Cap-Haïtien and the land-border crossings of
Ouanaminthe, Belladère, Malpasse and Anse-à-Pitres,
in cooperation with the Dominican authorities. The
assistance also covers the monitoring of air freight
cargo and the transport of passengers and post at
Toussaint Louverture international airport in Port-auPrince and Cap-Haïtien international airport. Those
efforts should help to ensure that customs revenue is
effectively invested in activities promoting border
security and modernization.
Achieving those aims requires access to ports,
as well as the engagement and commitment of port
authorities and private companies. UNODC will remain

S/PV.9136

in the country as long as security conditions allow, and
stands ready to take robust measures. In parallel with
those efforts, we hope to cooperate with BINUH and
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
within the framework of a special joint programme to
support the Haitian National Police in these priority
efforts, including forensic capacity-building.
Investments and efforts in the security sector should
be accompanied by similar efforts throughout the entire
criminal justice system. Haiti needs a competent police
force, solid investigations, effective prosecutors and
an independent judicial system if justice is to function
properly. Criminal organizations must be brought
to justice before the courts and impunity must be
brought to an end on behalf of the Haitian people. In
that connection, UNODC is cooperating with UNDP
and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, with the support of the Peacebuilding Fund, to
bolster the fight against corruption.
(spoke in English)
Meanwhile, there is groundwork to be done. For
example, we need a better understanding of trafficking
flows in Haiti, with a focus on firearms and drugs,
which will help provide insights for designing tailored
criminal justice and border management responses. We
are planning various activities in those areas, including
mitigating corruption risks in border management and
ensuring the availability of technical expertise to track
illicit financial flows with the support of BINUH,
United Nations sister agencies and other relevant
organizations such as the International Organization
for Migration, INTERPOL and the Organization of
American States.
I would like to take this opportunity to express
my deepest appreciation for the leadership of Special
Representative La Lime and the work of her BINUH
team amid this crisis, including in hosting our staff
in Haiti and supporting our efforts in the country.
Working with BINUH and all our partners, UNODC
stands ready to continue and expand its interventions in
Haiti to contribute to a more stable foundation for peace
and security in the country.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Waly
for her briefing.
I shall give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

22-601795/20

S/PV.9136

The question concerning Haiti

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for convening this meeting. I also welcome the Foreign
Ministers of Haiti and the Dominican Republic to the
meeting and thank the three briefers for their statements.
Last week, as the world turned its attention to New
York and focused on the General Assembly’s high-level
week, the situation in Haiti went from bad to worse. The
Haitian Government abruptly abolished fuel subsidies,
and gangs seized the chance to stir up trouble, turning
civilian protests into large-scale riots. We have seen
journalists shot dead, women raped, civilians burnt to
death, public facilities and businesses forced to close
and World Food Programme warehouses looted and
reduced to ashes. Haiti as a whole has been plunged
into anarchy, totally out of control. As SecretaryGeneral Guterres said on 20 September in the general
debate (see A/77/PV.4), gangs in Haiti are destroying
the very building blocks of society. If that scourge is not
eradicated, Haiti will never see peace. The SecretaryGeneral is about to submit a report to the Council on
supporting Haiti in its fight against gangs, which we
hope will contain feasible and effective options.
Resolution 2645 (2022) expresses the Council’s
readiness to take appropriate measures that could
include assets freezes or travel-ban measures against
those engaged in or supporting gang violence. Given
the current situation in the country, it is essential that
the Council translate that readiness into action. We
hope that the United States and Mexico, as penholders,
will submit a draft resolution as soon as possible and
convene consultations so that the Council can make a
decision on the issue as scheduled. The United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) should submit a
list of criminal gangs and their leaders to the Security
Council for its consideration when making decisions.
Resolution 2645 (2022) also calls on Member
States to prohibit the transfer of arms to non-State
Haitian actors linked to gangsters. In view of the
current situation, it is necessary for the Council to turn
this voluntary measure into a mandatory one, explicitly
prohibiting the supply of arms to non-State actors
associated with gangs in Haiti. This would help cut
off the supply of weapons and ammunitions to gangs
without prejudice to the security cooperation between
Member States and the Haitian Police Force. We hope
that the co-penholders will include this idea in the
draft resolution.
6/20

26/09/2022

Resolution 2645 (2022) supports the Haitian
authorities in combating illicit financial flows and the
trafficking in weapons, and in enhancing management
and control of borders and ports. With the situation
in Haiti as it is, the Council must support Haiti in
giving priority to port management and customs
reform. We welcome further increased investment in
this regard from the international community — and
from the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
in particular — and support and cooperation from the
relevant countries. We hope that the new draft resolution
will also address this point.
The work of the United Nations in Haiti for over
three decades has proved that international assistance
can only play a catalytic, promoting and facilitating
role, and that the issue of Haiti can only be resolved by
the Haitian people themselves. The political stalemate
in Haiti has been ongoing for years, and there is a strong
desire for the restoration of constitutional order.
We hope that all parties in Haiti will have a
stronger sense of urgency, actively carry out political
consultations and establish national institutions as soon
as possible which enjoy the real support of the Haitian
people and represent their interests. The United Nations
and relevant regional organizations must continue to
play an active role in that regard.
At the same time, I must also point out that neither
the United Nations nor any organization or country
can go beyond its duties, let alone take sides. We have
taken note of Prime Minister Henry’s commitment
that the interim Government will create the necessary
conditions for elections by the end of the year. We look
forward to the Government of Haiti’s submission of a
concrete and credible report to the Council in October.
The United Nations has been in Haiti to offer help.
However, for some time, the clamorous negative public
opinion in Haiti with regard to the United Nations is
a cause for concern. We hope that the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) will do more to
reach out and engage with the civilian population in
Haiti, strive through concrete actions to eliminate the
misunderstandings that exist among the Haitian people,
and win their trust and support.
BINUH and other United Nations offices in Haiti
cannot work in silos. They should instead strengthen
resource-sharing and operational synergy to put the
“one United Nations” approach into practice.
22-60179

26/09/2022

The question concerning Haiti

Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
La Lime, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
Executive Director Waly, and World Food Programme
(WFP) Deputy Executive Director Guarnieri for
their briefings.
The United States shares the Secretary-General’s
deep concern about the instability in Haiti and is
working to help address civil unrest to ensure the
security of all Haitians. I would also like to thank the
Foreign Ministers of Haiti and the Dominican Republic,
as well as the Permanent Representative of Canada, for
their participation in today’s briefing. The perspectives
and partnership of their countries are invaluable as
the Security Council addresses how the international
community can support Haiti-led solutions to these
ongoing challenges.
As we heard President Biden say in his address to
the General Assembly last week,
“We continue to stand with our neighbour in Haiti,
and we call on the world to do the same. We have
more to do” (A/77/PV.6).
The United States certainly recognizes that the ability
to gather and protest is fundamental in any democracy.
That said, we strongly condemn the acts of violence,
looting and destruction that recently occurred in Haiti.
We were dismayed by the looting that took place at a
WFP warehouse in Gonaïves on 15 September, resulting
in the loss of over a $1 million in food supplies and the
looting of WFP and the International Organization for
Migration supplies from a United Nations Office for
Project Services warehouse in Les Cayes last week. We
call on all Haitians to express their views in a peaceful
manner, one that protects humanitarian actors, respects
law enforcement and allows unfettered access to food,
water and medical care for Haitians.
We all know that security in Haiti has worsened
over the past year, as criminal gangs continued to
ravage parts of the country, leading to many killings
and kidnappings. We are concerned with the significant
deterioration in the independence and operational
ability of the judiciary and the apparent evidence of
widespread impunity reserved for elite members of the
Haitian population.
We are also seeing troubling reports of sexual
assault by gangs against women and girls, as well
as increased recruitment and use of minors in gang

S/PV.9136

activities, including arming minors to take direct part
in violent conflict. These struggles continue to remind
us of the importance of providing support to the Haitian
National Police (HNP).
We are firmly committed to efforts to strengthen
the HNP’s capacity to counter gangs, including
community-based efforts to deter gang recruitment,
the deployment of additional anti-gang subject-matter
experts and support to build the HNP’s anti-gang
strategic planning and organizational and operational
capacities. And we will procure more equipment for the
HNP, such as protective gear and new vehicles.
Over the past 18 months, the United States has
provided more than $80 million in assistance to the HNP.
Just last week we provided emergency supplies to help
the HNP maintain its operations in the face of violent
unrest. The HNP continues to need further support.
On the margins of the General Assembly high-level
week, together with Canada and the United Nations
Development Programme, we co-hosted a side event on
security in Haiti at which we announced the provision
of $3 million to the United Nations security basket fund.
The basket fund presents an outstanding opportunity
for all nations to contribute to the restoration of security
in Haiti.
Given the seriousness of the situation, we will
continue to expedite our security assistance to
Haiti. We are about to start vetting the first hundred
candidates for our special weapons and tactics training
programme. We expect the training to be well under
way by later this fall. We see this as a key component of
our joint efforts — of the efforts of all of us — to support
Haiti-led solutions. The international community
must continue its support to turn the tide of Haiti’s
extremely serious security environment before it is too
late, because the people of Haiti need security before
they can make political progress. They need security
before they can make economic progress, and they need
security so they can receive humanitarian aid.
As we know, gang elements and those that fund them
are creating a deeply destabilizing environment in the
country. The international community must help Haiti
to respond, and the Security Council must act. To that
end, building on resolution 2645 (2022), we are working
with our close partner and co-penholder, Mexico, on a
draft resolution proposing specific measures to enable
the Security Council to address the many challenges

22-601797/20

S/PV.9136

The question concerning Haiti

facing the people of Haiti. We are aiming to circulate a
draft in the coming days.
We have a duty right now to redouble our efforts
to help Haiti. With our efforts combined, we can send
a clear and powerful message to those who seek to
undermine the security of everyday Haitians: “you
will not succeed”. Let us ensure that Haiti can provide
its citizens with the security and political stability
they deserve.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Haiti, Ms. Helen La Lime, the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly,
and the representative of the World Food Programme
(WFP), Ms. Valerie Guarnieri, for their briefings.
We welcome the presence at this meeting of
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Haiti and the
Dominican Republic and the Ambassador of Canada.
We would first like to recognize the efforts of the
World Food Programme to meet the growing demands
of the Haitian population and the efforts of UNODC to
try to control the illicit trafficking in weapons. We also
reiterate our support for the work of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) under extremely
adverse conditions.
Mexico condemns the recent looting of the World
Food Programme warehouses.
The level of violence in recent days is truly
alarming. We cannot stand by and wait for something
worse to happen. Both the Security Council and the
international community must urgently adopt additional
and more effective measures than those taken to date.
Predictably, given the deterioration, the human
rights situation has also deteriorated. The impact of
armed violence on Haiti’s children is deplorable. It
severely limits their right to education and health. We
categorically condemn those who recruit children to
participate in criminal activities.
It is clear that the Haitian National Police needs
effective support from the international community.
It needs equipment, technology, training and an
effective programme to address organized crime and
the gangs that control the local economy and daily life
in the capital and surrounding areas. In that regard,
we await the report of the Secretary-General to learn
8/20

26/09/2022

what the possible options are for providing support to
the Haitian National Police so that it can begin to take
action more effectively.
We also await the information to be provided by
the Government of Haiti, in accordance with resolution
2645 (2022), on the steps it has taken with regard to the
political and electoral process.
We will do our utmost to propose an appropriate
solution in line with the circumstances. To that end,
we are working closely with the delegation of the
United States. We hope that, when we submit a draft
resolution, we will be able to count on the support of all
Security Council members, because a united Council is
necessary to effectively support Haiti.
The multidimensional crisis in Haiti requires a
solution that prioritizes the prevailing violence and
insecurity. That is the most important thing. But it
must also strengthen the political process, inclusive
dialogue and a governance that enables a free, legal and
credible electoral process. That must all be coordinated
simultaneously. To date, none of that is really happening.
The illicit trafficking in weapons, which are used
by the gangs and criminal groups to terrorize civilians,
must be stopped, and all those involved in their sale,
distribution and acquisition must be punished. If the
gang violence is not stopped, it will not be possible to
stabilize the country.
The priority is not to sanction the Government,
let alone the long-suffering population. The priority
is to identify and hold accountable those who directly
supply or acquire weapons illegally in order to curb the
growing wave of violence as a first step.
Mexico will continue to support Haiti, as it has
been doing and as our Minister for Foreign Affairs
reiterated a few days ago to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Haiti.
The Council must take action and propose effective
and coordinated actions that can lead to timely and
objective follow-up by the Council itself if we do not
want to see the collapse of a Member State of this
Organization and a kindred country with whom we
stand in full solidarity.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I thank Special
Representative Helen La Lime for her presentation, as
well as the briefers from the World Food Programme
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
22-60179

26/09/2022

The question concerning Haiti

India also welcomes the presence of the
representatives of Haiti, the Dominican Republic and
Canada at today’s meeting.
The Security Council will recall that, in our
meeting in June (see S/PV.9066), we expressed our
concern about the political and security situation in
Haiti. The Haitian political stakeholders had not been
able to reach any agreement on the transition, the
restoration of functioning institutions or the holding of
elections. The humanitarian situation had been further
complicated by the prevailing economic stagnation.
Three months on from the June meeting, civil unrest
in the country has continued. Gang-related violence
and kidnappings have further contributed to insecurity.
United Nations programmes are on hold owing to
roadblocks, demonstrations and limited access to fuel.
The Government of India is closely monitoring the
situation concerning the well-being of our citizens who
are currently caught up in the conflict zone from our
Embassy in the neighbouring Dominican Republic.
We continue to believe that, in order to be
sustainable, security solutions for Haiti must be
Haitian-owned and Haitian-led. Capacity-building for
the Haitian National Police must remain a priority. In
July, when the Council unanimously adopted resolution
2645 (2022), which renewed the mandate of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) for one
more year, India worked with other nations, including
Council members from the region, to reflect an increase
in the number of police and correction units to 42
civilian and seconded personnel as part of the mandate
renewal for BINUH.
We believe that no solutions to the political,
socioeconomic and security crisis will emerge without
the direct involvement of Haiti and its neighbours.
We therefore continue to welcome the engagement
of regional partners — the Caribbean Community,
Canada and Haiti’s neighbour, the Dominican
Republic — on issues of immediate concern, including
capacity-building initiatives for the Haitian National
Police and controlling the flow of small and light arms
into Haiti.
I reiterate that my country firmly believes in the
path of peace. In the past, as the Council is well aware,
we have contributed to capacity-building and training
initiatives for Haiti. We stand ready to do so again and
to do anything else we can to help our Haitian brothers
and sisters in their hour of need.

S/PV.9136

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank the briefers for
their valuable insights into the dire situation in Haiti
and for proposing urgently needed ways to deal with
and possibly reverse the current catastrophic course. I
welcome the participation of the Foreign Ministers of
Haiti and the Dominican Republic and the representative
of Canada in this meeting.
The situation in Haiti could not be grimmer, and
is seemingly at the limits of hopelessness. As we heard
from Special Representative La Lime, the country faces
enormous challenges — a deep, triple crisis. It will only
get worse with time. Most fundamental of all is the lack
of order and the rule of law. Armed violence, killings,
injuries, kidnapping and sexual violence continue
to ravage the country and prevent it from addressing
fundamental challenges. Civilians are hurt, their rights
are denied and the country is at a standstill. Haiti is in
desperate need of help, which is an appeal that many
clearly expressed here before the representatives of
many countries did so once again during the high-level
week of the General Assembly at its seventy-seventh
session. The challenges are many, and they include
catastrophic economic and humanitarian situations,
arms trafficking, violence and a poor health-care
system that is severely underfunded.
Yet the main priority is reining in the gangs that
are hampering the delivery of scarce basic goods by
controlling the transport routes. Gangs are suffocating
the country. The fact that they have the upper hand
is undermining everything and holding the people
hostage. Albania joins others in highlighting the crucial
need to restore order and security in order to stop a mad
cycle in which the entire country is spiralling out of
control into total lawlessness. The endemic corruption,
widespread smuggling and uninterrupted trafficking
need to be addressed urgently, not only with words but
with muscle — the kind of muscle that Haiti does not
seem to possess, despite the measures taken or under
way to strengthen the Haitian National Police.
Haiti is on the brink of ruin, and that prospect
is further exacerbated by what looks like a detached
political class. In the face of a continued catastrophic
situation in the country, which calls for an urgent and
unified national response from all stakeholders, one
has the impression that the people of Haiti and their
political establishment are two separate entities. Such
behaviour undermines people’s trust in State institutions
and leads to tension and violence. Furthermore, rising
living costs and insecurity are forcing people to take to

22-601799/20

S/PV.9136

The question concerning Haiti

the streets. We believe in peaceful protests, which are
part of the dialogue in every democracy. But the use
of violence is never the answer to the ills that provoke
such demonstrations. We call on the State authorities
to heed the demands of protesters and seek to address
the root causes of the problems that they are calling
attention to. They involve deep social, economic and
security concerns, as well as the issue of legitimacy,
which should be restored as soon as possible through
elections. Free, fair and inclusive elections, with the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women,
are a crucial step towards enabling Haitians to express
their will and fulfil their ambitions.
Albania stands with Haiti and its people and
supports their aspirations for a peaceful and prosperous
country based on the rule of law, with full and equal
rights for everyone. We support the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti
and strengthening the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti. But that will not be enough.
Haitians must know that the United Nations is there to
help them. Ms. La Lime called for urgent action, and
we know what the instruments and the power of the
Security Council are. We should use them, and we
welcome the ongoing efforts to adopt a draft resolution
that we will support in due course.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): We thank our briefers for
their statements and acknowledge the presence of the
Foreign Ministers of Haiti and the Dominican Republic
with us today.
We are meeting today to discuss a further
deterioration in the already devastating situation in
Haiti. As we have heard, protests and subsequent
civil unrest have plunged Haiti deeper into crisis,
exacerbating the profound suffering of millions.
The collapse of governance and of law and order has
resulted in surging food prices, a lack of access to fuel
and economic collapse. That vulnerability is being
exploited by the unchecked proliferation of gangs
intent on wreaking havoc across Haitian society, which
they are doing through displacement, control and
brutal violence.
We welcome the efforts of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime that we heard about
today to curtail the proliferation of weapons in Haiti,
which fuel and sustain violence and repression. Yet
it is clear that more is needed. We have heard from
Special Representative La Lime about the use of
10/20

26/09/2022

sexual and gender-based violence, including rape and
sexual slavery, as a tactic by gangs to assert control
over already traumatized communities. She told us
that it is systematic. We condemn that unreservedly.
We also condemn in the strongest terms the killing of
two journalists on 11 September. Tayson Latigue and
Frantzsen Charles were reporting on the suffering of
Haitians at the hands of those armed groups. Journalists
in Haiti must be free to do their work in safety, as they
should be everywhere. Those responsible for those
heinous crimes must be held to account. At the same
time, steps must be taken urgently to provide protection
and support to victims and survivors. We have noted
the initiative of the penholders and look forward to
engaging on the draft resolution.
The deepening crisis threatens to push an already
dire humanitarian situation over the edge. It seems that
gangs are not content with targeting ordinary Haitians.
They also want to target those who seek to help them.
We wholeheartedly condemn the threats, intimidation
and direct attacks that have been made against
humanitarian actors in Haiti. The attacks violate our
shared principles and our shared humanity. United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations,
particularly at the local level, must never be targets.
The multifaceted crisis engulfing Haiti will only
worsen without humanitarian aid and essential aid
providers. The looting and burning of the World Food
Programme warehouse in Gonaïves was reprehensible.
As Ms. Guarnieri told us, it essentially meant taking
food from the mouths of those most in need.
In that context, the United Nations Humanitarian
Air Service (UNHAS) in Haiti is more vital than ever.
We call for increased support for UNHAS, as it works
not only to access communities in need, but also to
relocate humanitarian workers under threat of violence
from gangs. Violence against humanitarian actors
and medical workers must cease immediately, and
unhindered humanitarian access must be facilitated
without delay or interference. Access to food for the
millions in Haiti enduring severe food insecurity
cannot be assured without an end to the violence.
The time for a genuine national dialogue is past
due. The time for a restoration of governance is past
overdue. It is only through participative dialogue that
Haiti can begin to regain stability, rebuild institutions
and forge reconciliation — a political response to
Haiti’s challenges led by and owned by all Haitians.
A sustainable political path to the restoration of
22-60179

26/09/2022

The question concerning Haiti

governance in Haiti will also require the support of
the international community. Ireland looks forward
to returning to this table in the coming weeks, in
accordance with resolution 2645 (2022), to hear updates
from the Government of Haiti on efforts towards a
framework for a political process and from the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti on its support for
those efforts.
Let us be clear — to succeed, all sections of society,
including women and young people, must be fully
involved in any political process. Above all, breaking
the cycle in Haiti will require political will. Ireland
calls on all actors to commit to dialogue in support
of the needs and expectations of the Haitian people.
They have waited long enough for the pace of action
on a political agreement to match the urgency of their
suffering and for those in political leadership to hear
and heed their calls. The time is now.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members of
the Security Council — Gabon, Ghana and Kenya (A3).
We thank the delegation of China for calling today’s
meeting. We also thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Helen La Lime, Ms. Ghada Fathi
Waly and Ms. Valerie Guarnieri for their briefings.
We welcome the participation of Their Excellencies
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Worship of Haiti, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic
and our colleague the Permanent Representative
of Canada.
The A3 remains deeply concerned about the rapidly
deteriorating situation in Haiti. If current trends hold,
the people of Haiti will suffer State failure, worsening
humanitarian suffering and insecurity. The dimensions
of the crisis are well documented, and there is no
further need to dwell on them without putting forward
practical proposals.
During the Security Council’s previous meeting
on the situation (see S/PV.9066) in June, members
expressed strong convictions that drastic and urgent
action was needed to arrest any further deterioration.
However, the solutions proposed paled in comparison
to the scale of the crisis. While a strengthened United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti is welcome, as is a
relatively modest effort to train and better equip the
police, it is clear that more is needed. However, even as
the A3 urges more ambitious action, we recognize that,

S/PV.9136

historically, Haiti’s experience of interventions by the
international community and external actors has been
profoundly damaging.
As such, any actions supported by the Council
must take the failures of the past into account and
be accompanied by extensive confidence-building,
transparency and respect. They must be rooted in
Haitian-led, Haitian-designed, Haitian-responsive
and Haitian-caring frameworks and mindsets. The
trust of the Haitian people in any efforts promoted by
the Council, specifically, and the United Nations, in
general, is an irreducible minimum.
We believe that generating that trust needs new
efforts and more partners to contribute to ongoing
efforts and institutional initiatives. In particular, we
commend the positive actions taken by the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM). We urge all international
partners to work closely with CARICOM to generate
financial and technical resources that are deployed in
line with Haitian needs and priorities.
As African representatives, we commit to becoming
more involved at the political and technical levels.
We invite CARICOM to collaborate with the African
Union to bring its expertise to bear on the situation in
Haiti. As a storied land populated by Africa’s diaspora,
Haiti is part of the Sixth Region of the African Union,
as articulated in our Constitutive Act. There is no more
urgent consideration of the continent’s solidarity with
the Sixth Region than by its efforts to support Haiti
in every way. We have the ability and the experience.
Africa has mediated complex and difficult conflict
situations. We have recovered from failed States. We
have faced negative armed groups of different kinds in
urban and rural environments. The continent has the
experience and the know-how; it also has the political
and cultural sensitivity to be a trusted partner of Haiti.
With those concerns and observations in mind, we,
as the A3, offer the following proposals.
The immediate focus should be to offer the Haitian
National Police sufficient training and equipment
to effectively challenge armed gangs. It would be
particularly helpful if the training were undertaken
by countries that have the experience and whose
policing professionals can relate well to their Haitian
counterparts. We look forward to the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations, in his report to be submitted
by the middle of next month, on the options available
to assist the police in tackling armed gang violence.

22-6017911/20

S/PV.9136

The question concerning Haiti

26/09/2022

We hope that they will respond to the willingness of
CARICOM and African Union members to be part of
the solution. There may be a need for more specialized
skills than are currently available. We recommend a
Haitian-designed and Haitian-coordinated cooperation
framework that enables, if necessary, the deployment
of United Nations-supported and United Nationsmandated police, with specific skills in suppressing
violent gangs.

In conclusion, the A3 reaffirms its respect for the
sovereignty and political independence of Haiti and its
undying solidarity with all Haitians.

A stronger police force will succeed only if its work
is carried out in concert with a strengthened judiciary.
Every effort should be taken to provide resources for
the delivery of comprehensive criminal-justice sector
reforms. The aim should be to establish functioning
court registries, expedite court cases and eliminate
prolonged pre-trial detention.

First, like others, the United Kingdom remains
deeply concerned by the continued deterioration
of the security and human rights situation in Haiti.
Violence and insecurity further entrench the
multifaceted challenges faced by Haiti and exacerbate
the vulnerabilities of the Haitian population. As
we heard today from our briefers, the humanitarian
situation in Haiti also continues to deteriorate. Rooted
in long-standing economic security and sociopolitical
crisis, the current escalation of those challenges has
exacerbated the food insecurity of the Haitian people.
The looting of the World Food Programme Office
and warehouse is deeply concerning, as it prevents
assistance from reaching thousands of Haiti’s most
vulnerable. The United Kingdom encourages all actors
to work constructively to find urgent solutions and
support recovery and progress for the Haitian people.

A competent State is a minimum requirement for
a peaceful and prosperous Haiti. It is imperative that
investment be undertaken in the training of the public
service and that its incentives be aligned with effective
delivery. That requires patience, scale and financing.
Grants by bilateral and multilateral partners should
prioritize public sector reforms and strengthening.
As long as Haitians are food-insecure, they
will have a serious deficit of hope in the future.
We commend bilateral and multilateral actions to
provide immediate relief and aid, which should
be complemented by ambitious efforts to increase
agricultural productivity with a view to providing
cheaper food and improved livelihoods.
The milestone lessons learned during the design
and deployment of the African Union/African Vaccine
Acquisition Trust can be applied. The African Trust
created the largest buyer market for vaccines and used
economies of scale for members of the African Union,
and also for the Caribbean. The same approach can be
used in the acquisition of grain and fertilizers in a way
that will benefit Haiti.
Africa is inspired by the Haitian Revolution and its
triumphant realization of freedom and independence.
The people of Haiti continue to suffer the consequences
of their rejection of oppression and exploitation. It is
now time for Africa to go beyond an appreciation of
that glorious history to achieve practical solidarity in
responding to the challenges that Haiti faces. We will
do so with humility, as we also face major emergencies,
but confident in the knowledge that our unity can
deliver solutions.
12/20

Ms. Jacobs (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General La Lime and
our briefers.
I would like to add three brief points to the
discussion today.

Secondly, as others have also said, there must be
greater efforts by Haitian stakeholders to resolve the
political gridlock. That is critical in enabling Haiti to
find its own pathway out of the compounded challenges
it is facing. We renew our call for all actors to resume
political dialogue and to work together to ensure the
necessary security environment within which free and
fair elections can be held as soon as possible.
Thirdly, I would like to underscore the United
Kingdom’s support for the work of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH). BINUH is
fundamental in supporting Haiti to resolve those
multifaceted challenges. By strengthening the Haitian
National Police and facilitating dialogue among Haitian
political stakeholders, BINUH’s efforts help lay the
groundwork for stability in Haiti. We look forward to
seeing the outcome of the strategic review of options
to support security in Haiti and hope that those are part
of a renewed holistic and joined-up approach by the
United Nations and other partners.
Finally, we welcome the intention of the United
States and Mexico to propose a draft resolution
22-60179

26/09/2022

The question concerning Haiti

and look forward to discussing it with partners. We
support action that moves Haiti closer to security and
stability, with a return to democratic processes, as soon
as possible.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank Ms. Helen La Lime,
Ms. Ghada Waly and Ms. Valerie Guarnieri for their
thorough briefings and for providing a detailed picture
of the developments in Haiti, which the United Arab
Emirates continues to follow closely. I also welcome
the participation of the Foreign Ministers of Haiti
and the Dominican Republic, as well as the Canadian
Ambassador, in today’s meeting.
In the light of recent developments in Haiti, we
express our deep concern over the serious escalation
of unrest erupting across the country, including attacks
against civilian infrastructure, such as educational
and health facilities. We condemn all acts of violence,
which cause the social fabric of Haitian communities to
unravel and undermine efforts to achieve sustainable
peace in Haiti. The current situation requires the
cessation of all hostilities and underscores the need for
calm and inclusive dialogue as essential steps so that
Haiti can begin to pave the way towards a sustainable
political solution.
The looting of humanitarian warehouses, including
those to the World Food Programme, is unacceptable.
Almost half of the country’s population are subjected
to severe food insecure. Such actions also seriously
impede the delivery of urgent humanitarian aid,
including food and water, a lifeline for the most
vulnerable communities. That requires the need to
ensure the safe, timely and unimpeded delivery of aid
to lessen the worsening living conditions in Haiti.
The deteriorating situation in Haiti further
underscores the urgent need to build the capacity of
the country’s security sector, especially its judicial
system and the Haitian National Police. Capacitybuilding in that area will strengthen the response to
complex security challenges, foremost of which is
the escalation of gang violence and the illegal flow of
weapons. We hope to discuss the draft resolution that
the co-penholders will introduce on the matter. We
also believe that the complementary role of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime will be essential
in that regard, and we look forward to seeing tangible
results from its programmes.

S/PV.9136

Addressing the security, economic, humanitarian
and political challenges in Haiti requires a
comprehensive and inclusive approach. As the Security
Council continues to follow the situation, we look
forward to the two upcoming reports of the SecretaryGeneral, as well as the updates to be provided by the
Haitian Government on developments related to the
political settlement. All those reports will be important
in guiding the Council’s discussions on Haiti next
month. We will study them carefully.
In conclusion, we value the efforts of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti and all the United
Nations staff who are working tirelessly in difficult
conditions to support the people of Haiti, to whom we
stress that we will continue our solidarity with them.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Representative
La Lime and the representatives of the World Food
Programme and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime for their briefings. I also welcome the
participation of the Foreign Ministers of Haiti and
the Dominican Republic, as well as the Permanent
Representative of Canada, in this meeting.
We are extremely concerned by what we have heard
here today. Haiti’s economic and social development
continues to be hindered by political instability,
increasing violence and social unrest. There is a lack of
access to basic services, and the humanitarian needs of
Haitians are ever-increasing. There are terrible reports
of sexual and gender-based violence. Haitians are
suffering due to a lack of food and water.
Protecting the population from violence and
abuses of human rights is a matter of urgency. We call
on all stakeholders to de-escalate the situation and
abstain from the use of violence. Safe and unhindered
humanitarian access to people in need must be ensured.
A lack of protection and limited access to humanitarian
assistance will only further fuel violence. Combating
sexual and gender-based violence and responding to
the needs of survivors, including by providing access to
sexual and reproductive health services, is also crucial.
Last week, during the general debate of the
General Assembly, we were confronted by current
international challenges such as climate change, threats
to fundamental human rights and basic protection.
Yet those are issues that the people of Haiti face every
single day.

22-6017913/20

S/PV.9136

The question concerning Haiti

There is a need to address the acute security situation
and step up efforts to find a political solution to the
crisis. The country’s political leadership and opposition
must recognize the gravity of the situation and make
compromises in the best interests of the people of Haiti.
We therefore look forward to the upcoming report by
the Haitian Government on its political reconciliation
and election efforts, which is due by 17 October. An
inclusive Haitian-led solution to the crisis is needed to
reverse the current negative developments.
However, the international community, including
Norway, should be ready to assist as necessary. We
also look forward to the Secretary-General’s upcoming
recommendations — in consultation with Haitians — on
combating high levels of gang violence. Those reports,
together with the regular report of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti, will be important milestones
when we discuss concrete ways forward for Haiti in
October. We must work together to stop the cycle of
brutal gang violence and hold perpetrators accountable.
Like others, we look forward to engaging constructively
in the discussions on the draft resolution to be proposed
by the United States and Mexico.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to start by
thanking China for requesting this very timely meeting.
I would also like to commend Special Representative
La Lime, Deputy Executive Director Guarnieri of the
World Food Programme and Executive Director Waly
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
for their comprehensive briefings. I also recognize
Mr. Jean Victor Généus, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Worship of Haiti; Mr. Roberto Álvarez Gil, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic; and
Mr. Robert Rae, Permanent Representative of Canada.
It is regrettable that the Security Council has
once again been convened to discuss grave eruptions
of violence in Port-au-Prince. Those episodes of
violence are unfortunately becoming more frequent
and more dangerous. It seems that the boundaries
between criminal and political violence are becoming
increasingly blurred in Haiti. The current shortage of
fuel supply in Port-au-Prince due to criminal activity
seems to confirm the veracity of such a claim. We
are concerned by possible far-reaching humanitarian
consequences if the supply is not normalized shortly.
We are following the situation closely as we
discuss possible next steps in terms of the international
response to the Haitian crisis. At this point in time, it
14/20

26/09/2022

seems critical that we discuss ways to help identify and
hold accountable whoever promotes and benefits from
the current bleak state of affairs in Haiti.
Amid such a challenging situation, however, we
are encouraged to hear that rival political groups have
been in talks recently in order to break the political
stalemate that has paralysed the country. We urge all
Haitian political actors to deepen the current dialogue
and urgently agree on a political way forward that will
curb violence, allow for the resumption of the normal
functioning of Haitian institutions and, eventually, pave
the way for the organization of safe and fair elections.
Brazil has consistently advocated the strengthening
of United Nations support for Haiti, including through
increased capacity for the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti (BINUH). We believe that the renewal
and reinforcement of BINUH´s mandate last July, during
Brazil´s presidency of the Council, was an important
step in that direction. However, more is needed to help
Haiti. BINUH’s renewed mandate has yet to foster
positive developments. As Brazil has consistently
pointed out, the situation in Haiti needs to remain at
the top of the international community’s agenda, as it
also concerns a situation of violence against innocent
civilians. And the Council needs to continuously follow
new developments on the ground in order to consider
the need for new measures.
In that context, I believe that it is high time we
started in-depth discussions on the provisions foreseen
in resolution 2645 (2022), particularly on prohibiting the
transfer of small arms, light weapons and ammunition
to non-State actors in Haiti and on the possibility of
imposing appropriate measures, which could include
an assets freeze and travel ban against those engaging
in or supporting gang violence. As we underlined
in July (see S/PV.9095), it is imperative that such
measures, if adopted, not have adverse humanitarian
consequences for the civilian population, especially
given the traumatic history of comprehensive sanctions
imposed on Haiti in past decades. Parameters such as
listing criteria, conditions for lifting the sanctions,
humanitarian exemptions and carve-outs are essential
for applying such measures in a responsible and
effective manner. In addition, with regard to possible
options for enhanced security support in Haiti, Brazil
takes note of bilateral initiatives and looks forward
to the report of the Secretary-General concerning the
issue, due on 15 October.
22-60179

26/09/2022

The question concerning Haiti

Haiti remains deeply plunged in a multidimensional
crisis, with political, economic and social consequences.
Undoubtedly, security is a key aspect of the crisis, but
not the only one. Haiti needs change that goes much
further than better control of criminal activities. One
cannot forget that resolving a multidimensional crisis
demands a multidimensional response. Therefore,
besides security measures, socioeconomic progress in
Haiti is key to addressing the crisis in an effective and
sustainable way.
Brazil stands ready to cooperate with other
partners in providing additional support to the Haitian
Government and people. Brazil has been consistently
engaged in technical and humanitarian cooperation
with Haiti, in areas such as health, education and
agriculture. As part of those efforts, this week Brazil
is depositing $650,000 in the fund created for the
reconstruction of Haiti’s southern peninsula, which was
severely hit by an earthquake in 2021, in addition to
the specific cooperation projects to which I referred at
previous Council meetings. We hope that other donor
countries can also join that initiative.
For our part, I would like to underline that Haiti
has long been a priority for Brazil and will remain so.
Brazil has a long-standing history of contributing to
peace and stability in Haiti and continues to be fully
committed to supporting the country and its people,
particularly in these challenging times.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the briefers for the information
that they provided. We welcome the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Haiti and the Dominican Republic
at this meeting.
The news that the situation in Port-au-Prince
has stabilized is encouraging. Nevertheless, by all
accounts, the country is one step away from disaster.
Real gang warfare is under way, the impact of which
affects civilians in the form of abductions, looting,
violence and the already-common fear that they feel
for their lives. Given the current state of affairs, the
protests, which were set off by the Government’s
decision to cancel fuel subsidies, of course led to riots
and demands for the country’s leadership to resign.
We have heard claims that criminal networks and
their sponsors are behind the protests. But attempts to
simplify the situation and underestimate the scope of
the population’s discontent are clearly inappropriate in
this case. We are witnessing widespread disappointment

S/PV.9136

and a loss of trust in the authorities. We have repeatedly
spoken about the need for broad political dialogue
and the launching of electoral and reform processes.
Unfortunately, we are not seeing consistent, purposeful
steps towards ensuring that Haiti returns to the
constitutional path of development.
We are particularly disappointed by the fact that
the external actors that have meaningful leverage over
Port-au-Prince are not taking practical steps to help
resolve the crisis in the country and are, in effect,
divorcing themselves from events on the ground. We
are all familiar with Haiti’s complicated history, and we
understand who it is all about. Calls to stand together
with Haiti, including from the rostrum of the General
Assembly, are not enough. In particular, we must
ensure that the brutal assassination of President Moïse
14 months ago is at last investigated and that those
responsible are duly punished. We cannot ignore the
fact that elections have not been held in the country for
six years and that the terms of Government offices and
most of those in Parliament ended long ago, including
in the context of the 2001 Inter-American Democratic
Charter. At the same time, in other regions, far less
serious problems are met with extreme criticism and
even threats from certain members of the Security
Council. We believe that they should be honest and
either call a spade a spade or admit that they are guided
by double standards with regard to the various countries
on the Council’s agenda.
The international community needs to do a
thorough job of righting wrongs in determining the true
needs of Haitians and finding effective ways to support
their efforts. It must do so without interfering in their
internal affairs, which, as history has shown, does not
produce the desired results. As for the proposals to
impose targeted sanctions against gang leaders, we are
ready to consider them. The leaders of criminal groups
indisputably must be cut off from access to funding and
be deprived of the ability to travel. However, we must
also consider to what extent they use foreign accounts
and travel and whether the introduction of targeted
sanctions against them will affect the situation on the
ground in the country, where criminal elements feel
like the real masters. We must pay close attention to the
routes used for the delivery of illegal weapons, and to
financial flows. If we fail to stop weapons smuggling, it
will continue to spur violence in Haiti — a country that
has long deserved peace and development.

22-6017915/20

S/PV.9136

The question concerning Haiti

The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
First of all, I would like to thank the Special
Representative, Ms. La Lime, for her briefing. I also
wish to thank the Deputy Executive Director of the
World Food Programme and the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) for their briefings.
I would also like to welcome the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Haiti and the Dominican Republic,
as well as the Permanent Representative of Canada, to
today’s meeting.
The situation in Haiti is an urgent one. France
is very concerned about the surge in violence in
recent weeks. We condemn the attacks on people, the
roadblocks and the looting that have occurred across
the country. We heard the concerns, which we share,
of the States of the region at last week’s meeting of the
Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group
on Haiti, chaired by Prime Minister Justin Trudeau.
The Haitian authorities must respond, and the
international community must mobilize further. We
are closely following the implementation of resolution
2645 (2022), adopted on 15 July, which clearly recalls
our collective commitment to assisting Haiti in finding
a solution to the crisis by defining our expectations and
further mobilizing the United Nations on the ground.
I would like to convey three simple messages.
First, France urges all Haitian political stakeholders
to reach an agreement that would result in the holding
of democratic elections when security conditions
permit. We call upon the political class to demonstrate
responsibility in order to resume dialogue and break
the current stalemate. We eagerly await the report that
the Haitian authorities are expected to submit to the
Security Council detailing all progress made.
Secondly, gang violence must be brought to an end.
Criminal groups are committing more abuses, with total
impunity. They undermine the authority of the State
and pillage its resources. Everyone knows that, without
security, there can be no rule of law or development.
We have taken steps to strengthen the Haitian National
Police, including through the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti, and will continue to take similar action.
France is ready to exert greater pressure on all those
who fuel the spiral of violence in Haiti. Providing
16/20

26/09/2022

support for an effective judicial system and combating
impunity must be our priorities. The idea of an
international independent investigative mechanism in
particular warrants greater consideration. France will
continue to support the basis of a resolution, as just
presented by the representatives of the United States
and Mexico.
Thirdly, the violence in recent weeks is linked to
the alarming deterioration of the socioeconomic and
humanitarian situation. How can we expect the situation
in a country to stabilize when half of the population
suffers from hunger? As we have said repeatedly, there
is an urgent need to bolster humanitarian support, and
in particular food assistance. We must ensure supplies
for the most vulnerable and guarantee access to poor
neighbourhoods in Port-au-Prince and the provinces.
We condemn the unacceptable looting of humanitarian
supplies that are reserved for those people, which
occurred in recent days. At the same time, the Haitian
State must strengthen governance and accountability in
its institutions and step up the fight against corruption.
That is why nascent cooperation with UNODC
is welcome.
In conclusion, France would like to reaffirm its
solidarity with the Haitian people. Alongside the
European Union and the International Organization
of la Francophonie, we will continue to mobilize
the international community to provide the
necessary assistance.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Worship of Haiti.
Mr. Généus (Haiti) (spoke in French): First of all,
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to the
President for convening today’s briefing on the situation
in Haiti and for agreeing to the Haitian Government’s
participation. It demonstrates the Security Council’s
special interest in, and manifest commitment to,
Haiti and its people and a clear willingness to help
the Government to seek a sustainable solution to the
multiple and complex issues the country faces.
I therefore wish to commend the work of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Helen La
Lime, and their efforts, in such difficult circumstances,
to fulfil the mandate conferred upon it by the Security
22-60179

26/09/2022

The question concerning Haiti

Council through its various resolutions. I would also
like to thank the various briefers for their judicious
comments, which we have noted.
Needless to say, today’s important meeting is
timely. Indeed, it enables the Government, through me,
to inform the Council of the most recent developments
in the sociopolitical and security situation in the
country and the Government’s efforts to improve it.
At the same time, it allows the Government to inform
the international community of its expectations, with a
view to leaving behind a multidimensional crisis that
has lasted for far too long.
On 12 September, violent protests broke out in
the country, following the Government’s decision to
stop subsidizing oil products, which, in turn, led to an
increase in fuel prices. That decision was difficult, but
crucial, as the State was losing a total of $400 million
per year. In addition, it sought to clean up public
finances by adopting an austerity budget through
macroeconomic reforms.
The Government has undertaken major reform of the
General Customs Administration to combat smuggling,
increase customs revenue and halt the flow of weapons
and ammunition into the country. Those measures have
enabled the customs department to collect, in August
alone, almost 8 billion Haitian gourdes — an increase
of more than 40 per cent.
Using the increase in prices as a warhorse, along
with its inherent short-term social consequences,
compounded by general discontent with customs
reforms and the forthcoming adoption of new measures,
the usual troublemakers in the political and private
business sectors have implemented their plan to sow
chaos in the country. They have used heavily armed
gangs to paralyse all parts of the country by blocking
the main roads between the capital and the towns in the
provinces and by looting and burning public buildings,
such as court buildings, prisons, private sector
businesses, the premises of certain commercial banks
and the warehouses of international organizations,
such as the World Food Programme, the United Nations
Office for Project Services, UNICEF and Caritas.
More than 20 schools have been ransacked and
pillaged in Artibonite. Given the brutal deterioration
of the situation, the Government has focused on
re-establishing security in the country to ensure the
resumption of economic activity. Except for a few
isolated cases, I can say that, overall, the situation is

S/PV.9136

under control and calm has returned to several parts
of the country. It is an opportunity to commend the
professionalism of the Haitian National Police. They
were able to regain control of the situation and limit
the damage caused by gangs that are better armed and
better equipped.
I would like to convey to the Council the Haitian
Government’s deep concern and disquiet about the
serious situation in the country. I would also like to
underscore the disastrous consequences that harmful
actions carried out by gangs — supported by some
economic and political sectors — have on our society,
as well as their devastating impact on our national
economy and on our people’s everyday life. The
consequences are extremely serious.
The violent and destructive protests and the
difficulties encountered in the delivery and supply of
fuel to the country, because of the road blocks set up
by armed gangs at the Varreux oil terminal, further
complicate the country’s already precarious economic
situation. As fuel is a cross-cutting product that concerns
all economic activity, that situation is likely to paralyse
the State and almost entirely paralyse the country.
Therefore, some private companies are threatening
to pack up and relocate elsewhere. The Caracol
Industrial Park, one of the country’s most important,
just announced, on Sunday, the end of its operations
owing to a lack of fuel. That could lead to the loss of
12,000 jobs in the context of negative economic growth.
Moreover, some hospitals have also closed on account
of a lack of fuel, while the resumption of classes, which
had already been postponed to 3 October, is uncertain.
Faced with the worsening insecurity, we need very
strong support from the international community to
support the Haitian Nation Police (HNP) in combating
armed gangs. The appeal launched by the SecretaryGeneral is a step in the right direction and must be
further developed. This is also an opportunity to invite
other partners to do more. In that regard, we thank those
who initiated the meeting organized on 23 September
on the basket fund and the States that have made pledges
to support the work of the HNP.
To address those acts of terrorism, the Government
is relying heavily on the collaboration of the
international community. We must block the road to
those troublemakers who take advantage of Haiti’s
chronic instability to enrich themselves through
smuggling and trafficking in weapons and ammunition.

22-6017917/20

S/PV.9136

The question concerning Haiti

In that context, the direct instigators and the brains
behind the criminal and terrorist acts, in particular
those perpetrated in the past few days, will be fully
suppressed by the HNP and brought to justice in Haiti.
We also welcome the decision by some countries to
consider imposing sanctions on those who participate
in one way or another in criminal activities and
insecurity in the country. That is a significant step in
the right direction to bring an end to the phenomenon of
insecurity in the country.
The priority now is the return to constitutional
order by restoring security and political dialogue, which
are prerequisites for the holding of general elections,
and the re-establishment of democratic and republican
institutions, which will make it possible to address
social and economic issues. In that regard, I am pleased
to announce that negotiations are currently under way,
and we hope that a political agreement can be reached
soon, which will allow us to ease the situation. The
Prime Minister has never spared any effort and has
always remained open to pursue dialogue, which is the
only way to resolve the political crisis.
The President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Dominican Republic.
Mr. Álvarez Gil (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): On behalf of the Government of the
Dominican Republic, I thank the delegation of China
for requesting this meeting. I also thank all the briefers
for their statements at this meeting. We also thank
the Security Council for its resolution 2645 (2022),
adopted in July, which extended the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) for
one year.
However, as I already said before the General
Assembly (see A/77/PV.7), the results expected of
BINUH are contingent upon the Haitians reaching
a national agreement as a starting point to combat
and neutralize the gangs, and secondly, to ensure the
holding of elections as soon as circumstances permit.
Unfortunately, that process has so far not succeeded
and, for that reason, the Dominican Government
considers that stabilization efforts in Haiti must be
focused, as President Luis Abinader Corona has said
on numerous occasions, on immediate pacification
and political dialogue as the only adequate means to
confront violence and chaos, as stipulated in paragraph
18/20

26/09/2022

10 of the resolution, enhancing security support for the
Haitian National Police’s efforts to combat high levels
of gang violence.
But the almost non-existent progress in that
direction demands from the international community,
as expressed by Secretary-General António Guterres
and a position that our country strongly supports, that
“while strengthening assistance for training its
police, there is a need for a robust force that
is capable of restoring peace and putting an
end to the violence unleashed by armed gangs,
which have been infiltrated by the political and
economic power”.
The Dominican Republic, in reiterating its usual
spirit of cooperation and friendship with the Haitian
Government and people, also reiterates its conviction
that the only lasting and sustainable response to the
Haitian crisis must come from the Haitians themselves.
Therefore, I repeat before the Security Council:
international cooperation with the efforts of Haiti and
Haiti’s authorities is vital if we are to bring stability
and peace to the people of Haiti, its neighbours and the
region. That is our only goal.
The human suffering in Haiti today is indescribable.
We have heard at this meeting about some of the
terrible violations affecting the most vulnerable in
Haiti above all. For approximately 10 days, the main oil
terminal, Varreux, which Minister Généus referred to,
with millions of gallons of diesel, gasoline, kerosene
and liquefied petroleum gas, has been blocked by large
trenches, barricades, trucks and trailers, and the police
have not been able to effectively remove them during
this entire time. Around 400,000 people live around
that fuel terminal. We must avoid a tragedy at all costs.
In conclusion, I wish to recall what President Luis
Abinader Corona said last year before the General
Assembly at its seventy-sixth session: “Haiti can wait no
longer. We must act responsibly, and we must act now.”
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rae (Canada): I had an opportunity to
travel to Haiti and the Dominican Republic in late
August, as Chair of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on
Haiti of the Economic and Social Council and in my
national capacity.
22-60179

26/09/2022

The question concerning Haiti

I think everything that needs to be said has been
said about the depths of the challenges that we face
in the country. Armed gangs have encircled Port-auPrince, endangering the safety and security of its
residents. The country’s main courthouse was for a
time overrun by gangs — almost a metaphor for the
collapse of law and order. Children are unable to get
to school. Many Haitians face chronic food shortages,
as we heard, and food insecurity is on the rise. In
Cité Soleil and other areas, pregnant women cannot
access essential health services due to gang violence.
Businesses are closing. Haitians are leaving the country
or are internally displaced. Yet we must recognize the
remarkable resilience of the people of Haiti.
Given that reality, the international community
must increase its resolve and stand shoulder to shoulder
with the Haitians to help overcome those complex
challenges, especially as tensions continue to mount.
(spoke in French)
Canada’s commitment to Haiti continues. Last
week, in collaboration with our Caribbean partners and
the Government of Haiti, Prime Minister Trudeau hosted
a meeting of the Economic and Social Council’s Ad
Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti. As friends, neighbours
and partners of Haiti, we discussed the importance
of stepping up our support to the country, not only in
the short term but also in the long term. That includes
assistance to help Haiti to identify the root causes of
the complex and interconnected challenges that it faces.
We should support Haiti in creating the conditions
for an inclusive national dialogue — today I was glad
to hear the update from Foreign Minister Généus — to
enable all people to chart a course towards credible
elections and the return to a stable and democratic
Government. We must ensure that we provide Haiti
with all the support that it needs to leave no one behind.
That clearly means giving women and young people
the opportunity to play their important role in shaping
their future.
(spoke in English)
In Canada, we answered the call to help the Haitian
National Police to tackle armed gangs that are — and
this is no exaggeration — literally terrorizing the
Haitian population. Together with the United Nations
and the Haitian National Police, we established and
funded a basket fund, managed by the United Nations
Development Programme, which will help to ensure

S/PV.9136

that international assistance for security is more
effective and coordinated. We welcomes the pledge
recently announced, on Friday, by the United States in
support of that fund, and I must say to all participants
that we encourage other Member States to contribute
because it is vitally important.
We also welcome, and it was affirmed by many
statements made today, the possibility of further
measures to be taken by the Security Council to help
Haiti to curtail the power of armed gangs. At the same
time, we urge the Council to ensure — many others
commented on this, and I agree with them — that the
measures are effectively targeted and that they do not
hinder the ability of the United Nations to support the
Haitian people. I was very encouraged by the comments
in that regard of a large number of representatives,
including from the Russian Federation, Brazil and
China. I think that it is extremely helpful for us to
agree that sanctions may be required, but they need to
be the right sanctions against the right people. They
must not in any way, shape or form slow down the need
to aid Haiti in its time of need and must ensure that
humanitarian and development assistance is in no way
negatively affected.
That said — it is easy to say, but not so easy to do,
but we need to do that — we must also stop the guns,
and we must find an effective way to do that.
(spoke in French)
Canada is ready to support the Government of
Haiti in strengthening its capacity to fight corruption,
economic crime and money laundering. To that end,
we will continue to build the capacity of Haiti’s legal
institutions to prosecute the perpetrators of such crimes.
(spoke in English)
I have five questions, which, I hope, not just
the Security Council but also many Member States
can consider.
First, how do we quickly bring an end to the
violence, while avoiding the mistakes that were made
in the past by past interventions? I think that we must
understand that that is a critical focus.
Secondly, how do we immediately and effectively
increase accountability for criminality, which involves
not only policing, but also the entire justice system?

22-6017919/20

S/PV.9136

The question concerning Haiti

Thirdly, how can we assist the political dialogue
without interfering in it? How do we make sure that it
happens without telling people what to do?
Fourthly, how do we respond to the immediate
food and energy crisis and, at the same time, assist the
Government of Haiti in building a long-term plan for
prosperity and investment?
Finally, how do we engage a more concerted
and comprehensive response from the region, as my
colleague from Kenya pointed out, from the Caribbean
Community, from the Dominican Republic itself and
from the wider international community, including
Africa, while ensuring that we have full Haitian
ownership and responsibility for political change? In

20/20

26/09/2022

the past, we were not able to find the formulas, but that
does not mean that we should stop looking for them.
(spoke in French)
The people of Haiti deserve our support, our
encouragement and our respect. In that spirit, Canada
will continue to work with all Council members and
with our Haitian and Dominican Republic partners.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

22-60179
