S/2020/121

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 February 2020
Original: English

Situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 22 of Security Council
resolution 2461 (2019) and paragraph 33 of Council resolution 2472 (2019) and
provides updates on the implementation of those resolutions, including on the
mandates of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the
United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS). The report covers major
developments in Somalia during the period 5 November 2019 to 4 February 2020.

II. Political, security, and economic overview
A.

Political developments
2.
Preparations for national elections in 2020 gradually proceeded, as the House
of the People of the Federal Parliament of Somalia debated and agreed on the electoral
bill and submitted it to the Upper House for further revision. On 27 November 2019,
the ad hoc parliamentary committee mandated to review the bill had tabled its report
to the House of the People following consultations, including with federal member
states. On 28 December, the House of the People passed the bill, with 172 votes in
favour, 5 against and 2 abstentions. On 2 January 2020, following the receipt of the
electoral bill from the House of the People, the Speaker of the Upper House appointed
a seven-member ad hoc committee to review it. Plenary debates on the report of the
ad hoc committee are continuing.
3.
The Federal Parliament passed some of the priority legislation identified in the
Mutual Accountability Framework, including the Public Financial Management Act
and the Company Act. The Upper House also passed the petroleum bill and the
national statistics bill.
4.
On 1 January, the President, Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed “Farmajo”, signed
the 2020 government budget, totalling $459.5 million, which had been approved
earlier during a joint parliamentary session.
5.
Opposition politicians continued to call for open political space. O n
7 November, six opposition politicians united under the banner of the Forum for
National Parties. The Forum called for national unity, inclusive politics, timely
national elections and the completion of the constitutional review. Mr. Farmajo met

20-01738 (E)

180220

*2001738*

S/2020/121

the opposition party leaders, including two former Presidents, in subsequent meetings
held on 20 and 21 November, but, to date, the exchanges have not continued.
6.
The political impasse that had prevented the Federal Government and federal
member state leaders from meeting for more than a year remained unresolved. The
absence of a forum through which the leaders could meet and reach political
agreements on national priorities, including preparations for federal elections,
security and the review of the Constitution, impeded further progress on key national
priorities.
7.
On 8 January, the President of Puntland, Said Abdullahi Mohamed Deni,
expressed his concern about the lack of consultation by the Federal Government with
the federal member states on important legislation, as well as the constitutional review
process. However, technical-level cooperation between the Federal Government and
the federal member states continued on some issues, in particular the debt relief
process, most notably through a meeting of state and federal finance ministers in
Kismaayo on 21 December.
8.
The political situation in Jubbaland remained unsettled, without an agreement
between the Federal Government and Ahmed Mohamed Islam “Madobe” on the
outcome of the state presidential election of 22 August. The impasse continued to be
one of the major obstacles to improved relations between the Federal Government
and federal member states. On 18 and 19 January, Mr. Deni and Mr. Madobe, together
with ministers from Puntland and Jubbaland, met in Boosaaso and agreed, among
other things, to strengthen the unity of Somalia and the implementation of a federal
system in accordance with the Provisional Federal Constitution. They called upon the
Federal Government and federal member states to convene a national consultative
conference to discuss outstanding national issues.
9.
The reconciliation and electoral processes in Galmudug made further progress,
albeit at a slow pace. On 12 December, the Minister of the Interior, Federal Affairs
and Reconciliation and the state’s Chief Minister agreed that Ahl al-Sunna
wal-Jama‘a (ASWJ) would hold 20 of the 89 state assembly seats. The Federal
Government-led Galmudug state formation technical committee announced the
89 assembly members, including the 20 ASWJ representatives, by 13 January. The
election of the Speakers, held on 17 January, resulted in the election of a woman to
the position of Second Deputy Speaker. ASWJ and four presidential aspirants
announced, on 21 and 22 January, respectively, that they would boycott the elections,
accusing the Federal Government of controlling the process. Both ASWJ and the
President of Galmudug, Ahmed Duale Gelle “Haaf”, initiated parallel processes in
Dhuusamarreeb and Gaalkacyo, respectively. On 2 February, the Dhuus amarreebbased state assembly elected Ahmed Abdi Kaariye as President and Ali Dahir Eid as
Vice-President.
10. In South-West State, on 18 December, traditional leaders of the Leysan sub -clan
and supporters of Mukhtar Robow announced the conclusion of their reconciliation
process with the state administration. The announcement followed payment by the
state administration of compensation to the victims of the pre-election violence
of 13 to 15 December 2018. Separately, preparations to form a new state assembly
advanced. On 25 November, the President of South-West State, Abdiaziz Hassan
Mohamed “Laftagaren”, announced that the membership of the state assembly would
be reduced from 149 seats to the constitutional 95.
11. In Puntland, on 14 November, the state Parliament elected Abdirashid Yusuf
Jibril as the new Speaker, following his predecessor’s removal, on 7 November. On
16 November, the state Parliament approved the composition of the Transitional
Puntland Electoral Commission, mandated to conduct local district elections.

2/18

20-01738

S/2020/121

12. On 24 November, the House of Elders of the “Somaliland” Parliament further
extended the term of office of the House of Representatives, which dates from 2005,
for an additional two years. The opposition parties criticized the extension and called
for the holding of parliamentary elections in 2020. On 16 December, a mediation
committee recommended that the recently appointed National Electoral Council be
disbanded and replaced by the previous commission, and those recommendations
were accepted by both the President of “Somaliland”, Muse Bihi Abdi, and opposition
parties following the engagement of international partners, led by the European
Union. The recommendations have yet to implemented, however, with debates
continuing on how the Council can be replaced.
13. Commendable efforts were made to foster dialogue between the Federal
Government and “Somaliland” and reduce tensions in the disputed areas of Sool and
Sanaag. Relations between Puntland and “Somaliland’’ remained stable, notwithstanding
their competing claims to the two regions.
14. On 14 November, Mr. Farmajo and the President of Kenya, Uhuru Kenyatta,
agreed to strengthen ties between their countries. The two committed the mselves to
restoring bilateral relations and provided assurances that the Kenya-Somalia maritime
border dispute would not affect bilateral relations. On 27 January, the President of
Eritrea, Isaias Afwerki; the Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Abiy Ahmed; and
Mr. Farmajo reaffirmed their commitment to the tripartite agreement that they had
signed in September 2018, and adopted a joint plan of action for 2020 and beyond
that was focused on consolidating peace, stability and security, as well as on
promoting economic and social development. The three leaders also agreed to
strengthen joint efforts to foster effective regional cooperation and to tackle common
security threats, among other issues.

B.

Security developments
15. The security situation in Somalia remained volatile during the reporting period,
with security incidents increasing from 239 in November to 266 in December,
followed by a slight decline to 235 in January. The increase in December was recorded
mainly in Al-Shabaab hit-and-run attacks targeting security forces, vehicle-borne
improvised explosive devices (two in December compared with none in November),
improvised explosive device attacks and hand grenade attacks, as well as incidents
categorized under crime. A decline was recorded in terrorism-related incidents in
January, compared with December, while incidents categorized under armed conflict
remained the same.
16. The significant incidents in January included improvised explosive device
attacks targeting six closed-circuit television cameras in Howlwaadag, Xamar Jajab
and Xamar Weyne districts in Mogadishu on 30 January. No casualties were reported
following the explosions, and no group or individual claimed responsibility for the
attack. However, it is likely that Al-Shabaab had had information about the closedcircuit television project and considered it to be a vital target because the cameras
significantly increased the capacity of the security authorities of the host government
for face recognition, vehicle licence plate identification, early detection and tracking.
17. Al-Shabaab carried out a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device attack on
a police force in Afgooye district, Shabelle Hoose, on 18 January. An unverified
number of casualties was reported. Al-Shabaab had also carried out a vehicle-borne
improvised explosive device attack in Mogadishu on 8 January, targeting a security
checkpoint near the presidential palace, which resulted in the death of at least four
persons.

20-01738

3/18

S/2020/121

18. Government initiatives to safeguard Mogadishu included the establishment of
20 additional checkpoints and 190 targeted security operations. However, Al-Shabaab
appears to have modified its tactics, as seen in the attack on the SYL Hotel on
10 and 11 December, which was carried out by the group’s fighters disguised in police
uniforms. Reportedly, five Al-Shabaab elements, three security personnel and three
civilians were killed, although an intervention by Somali security forces enabled the
rescue of more than 100 persons, including one United Nations national staff member.
19. On 28 December, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device was detonated
at the Ex-control Afgooye Junction checkpoint, in Mogadishu. More than 90 persons,
including 2 Turkish engineers, 30 Mogadishu University students and 58 civi lian
bystanders, were reportedly killed, and 140 were injured. Most of the casualties were
university students. On 30 December, Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility for the
attack. On 29 December, the United States Africa Command announced that it had
conducted air strikes in Somalia in coordination with the Federal Government and
that, in an initial assessment, it was concluded that four Al-Shabaab elements had
been killed. On 2 January, hundreds of civilians gathered to protest at the police
academy and the Ex-control checkpoint, in a rare demonstration, to condemn the
Al-Shabaab attack.
20. Most of the incidents reported were Al-Shabaab attacks and ambushes targeting
Government security and African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) forces,
mainly in southern Somalia, in Shabelle Hoose in particular. A total of five air strikes
in November and seven in December were recorded, mainly in Shabelle Hoose and
Juba Dhexe, targeting Al-Shabaab posts. The number of air strikes has increased, from
45 in 2018 to 63 in 2019, with 6 to date in 2020. Most targeted locations in Shabelle
Hoose and Lower Jubba.
21. The number of attacks by Al-Shabaab and pro-Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) elements that targeted civilians decreased, from a total of 71 in October
to 55 in November to 61 in December, and a decrease in Al-Shabaab mortar attacks,
from eight in October to four in November and none in December. The number of
assassinations claimed by Al-Shabaab remained relatively steady, with 12 in
November, 13 in December and 10 in January. Two assassinations were claimed by
pro-ISIL elements: in January, in Qandala, Bari, on 23 January and in Afgooye,
Shabelle Hoose, on 30 January. The number of improvised explosive device attacks
returned to near the average of 40 incidents in December, after a temporary dip to
31 incidents in November.
22. On 20 November, a peace and humanitarian activist and former first secretary
at the Embassy of Somalia in Kenya, Almaas Elman, was killed in the AMISOMprotected Aden Abdulle International Airport zone in Mogadishu. At the time of the
incident, there were armed clashes at the Ex-control Junction between the Custodial
Corps and the Somali National Police.
23. On 19 December, pro-ISIL elements ambushed a group of Darwish soldiers in
Boosaaso, in Puntland’s Bari region, killing one and injuring an indeterminate
number. No other security incidents attributed to the group were recorded during the
reporting period.
24. In the Sool and Sanaag regions, on 22 December, a government -backed
committee facilitated a peace deal to conclude protracted conflict between two
warring sub-clans in Ceel Afweyn, Sanaag region. On 2 January, the deserter militia
laid down its weapons following the pardon by Mr. Bihi of the militia, its integration
in the army of “Somaliland” and the exile of the militia’s ringleader.

4/18

20-01738

S/2020/121

C.

Economic developments
25. Somalia continues to make progress towards the requirements for debt relief
under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative of the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund (IMF). In November, IMF reported to its Executive
Board on the first review of its fourth staff-monitored programme, which covers the
period from May 2019 to July 2020, concerning domestic revenue mobilization,
public financial management, financial sector stability and compliance with the
framework for combating money-laundering and the financing of terrorism. During
the review, it was found that all of the structural benchmarks had been met. IMF and
Somalia also reached a staff-level agreement on a new three-year macroeconomic
reform programme that could be supported by the Extended Credit Facility and the
Extended Fund Facility.
26. The three-year economic reform programme is intended to guide reforms in
Somalia and support the implementation of the ninth National Development Plan and
strategy for inclusive growth and poverty reduction. It will also build on strengthening
public financial management, increase domestic revenue mobilization and support the
Central Bank.
27. Efforts by the Federal Government to mobilize domestic resources resulted in
increased revenue performance. The total reported domestic revenue collected in July
amounted to $126 million, exceeding the IMF indicative target of $111 million. The
2020 budget is in line with the targets of the fourth staff-monitored programme of
IMF, and a domestic revenue envelope of $221 million, including increased tax
revenues amounting to $154 million, is projected.
28. The National Economic Council, formed in August 2018, held its third National
Economic Policy Forum in Mogadishu on 7 and 8 December. With more than 200
participants, the discussions focused on fiscal federalism, the national anti -corruption
strategy and the vision of Somalia for private sector development , highlighting the
need for the Federal Government and federal member states to cooperate on fiscal
federalism and intergovernmental relations.

III. Support for peacebuilding and state-building efforts
A.

Establishment of a functional federal state

1.

Preparations for universal suffrage elections
29. The electoral bill is undergoing final review by the Upper House before being
resubmitted to the House of the People after the deadline of 31 December 2019
identified in the Mutual Accountability Framework. A major departure from the
electoral system that was agreed to in Baidoa in 2018 by Somali political stakeholders
is being proposed in the current version of the bill, with Parliament instead adopting
a first-past-the-post electoral system with 275 single constituencies. The National
Independent Electoral Commission, with the support of international partners,
identified articles in the bill that required clarification, including how constituencies
were to be defined, how the 30 per cent quota for women would be ensured and how
to allocate seats in the Upper House, among many other issues. Election preparations
cannot move forward in the absence of such clarifications and key revisions to the
electoral bill. The amendment to the Political Parties Law have not yet been
introduced for a first reading in the House of the People.
30. Following its formation, in September, the National Electoral Security Task
Force held its first meeting on 9 December. At its second meeting, on 21 January,

20-01738

5/18

S/2020/121

draft terms of reference and a draft concept for security for voter registration were
produced. The Task Force’s next step is to enable Federal Government and federal
member state security forces supported by AMISOM to conduct security assessments
of all potential voter registration sites identified by the National Independent
Electoral Commission, to develop a national plan for security for voter registration
and propose an elections security budget.
31. At the Somalia Partnership Forum, held in October 201 9, the Federal
Government committed itself to contributing financially to the electoral operation
costs and indicated its plans to submit its request to Parliament to fund temporary
elections staff in April.
32. The international community and the United Nations issued a joint statement on
19 December setting out guiding principles to enable the implementation of the
electoral law, such as the need to ensure the widest possible participation of the
Somali public, including internally displaced persons, and measures to ensure the
implementation of the 30 per cent quota for women. In response to concerns raised
by the United Nations and members of the international community before the
Speaker of the House of the People concerning the draft electoral bill, th e Speaker
outlined that the House planned to establish technical committees to address specific
issues and prepare resolutions. The resolutions would require approval during the next
plenary session of Parliament, which is scheduled for April 2020 . International
partners have continued to engage with key electoral stakeholders, including the
Speakers of both houses of Parliament, the National Independent Electoral
Commission and members of the executive branch, to deliver joint messages on the
urgency of the timely passage of a bill that will enable preparations to begin.
2.

Deepening federalism
33. From 10 to 18 December, in the light of the protracted political stalemate and
the need to build consensus and unity of purpose among all political stakeholders, my
Special Representative, together with the African Union, the European Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, held a series of consultations with
political leaders and civil society groups in South-West State, Hirshabelle, Jubbaland,
Puntland and Galmudug, as well as with the leadership of the federal executive and
legislative branches. Such multi-stakeholder exchanges provided an opportunity to
hear views and discuss ways to realize national priorities that will require a
functioning relationship and broad consensus between the two levels of government.
They include one-person, one-vote elections, finalization of the Federal constitution,
continued progress towards debt relief and the fight against Al -Shabaab. At the
conclusion of their consultations, the partners briefed Mr. Farmajo.
34. From 8 to 10 January, my Special Representative met with “Somaliland”
authorities, political parties and civil society representatives in Hargeysa and
welcomed initiatives aimed at building mutual confidence and fostering dialogue
between “Somaliland” and the Federal Government.

3.

Constitutional review
35. Adoption of the amended Federal Constitution was identified as a critical
priority by the Federal Government and the international community at the Somalia
Partnership Forum on 1 and 2 October. A tripartite working session brought together
representatives of the Independent Constitutional Review and Implementation
Commission and the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs, as well as the parliamentary
Oversight Committee and federal member state assembly counterparts (excluding
Jubbaland) in Istanbul on 5 November. The stakeholders reflected on the draft review
prepared by the Commission and the parliamentary Oversight Committee, prior to

6/18

20-01738

S/2020/121

further consultations with other stakeholders. The lack of a broad political consensus
remained the main challenge to making progress on the outstanding constitutional
issues that require political agreement, including the allocation of powers, the
structure of the government and resource sharing.
36. In a joint session held by the two Houses of the Federal Parliament on
27 November, special procedures for the adoption of the amended Federal Constitution
were discussed. However, agreement on the special procedures has not yet been
reached.
37. At their meeting, held in Boosaaso on 18 and 19 January, the Puntland and
Jubbaland administrations agreed on the urgent need for national consultations
between the Federal Government and the federal member states on the constitutional
review process to ensure that there was inclusiveness and consensus on contentious
articles.
4.

Prevention and resolution of conflicts
38. Although an official launch of the national reconciliation process by the Federal
Government has been delayed, the Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and
Reconciliation, in accordance with the national reconciliation framework, took
measures to mitigate conflict.
39. On 5 December, heavy fighting erupted between two sub -clans residing in
Af Barwaaqo and Towfiiq, Mudug region, which resulted in dozens of casualties on
both sides. To quell the fighting and defuse tensions, the Somali National Army was
deployed to the area. The localities are on the fault line between Puntland and
Galmudug, and there is a high risk of escalation of violence, affecting surrounding
areas, including Gaalkacyo, if the situation is not managed well. From 22 to
28 December, the Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation facilitated
a dialogue between the two clans, resulting in the formation of a joint peace committee,
including women and young people, and a joint security committee.

B.

Cross-cutting issues

1.

Gender equality and women’s empowerment
40. On 5 November, the South-West State Minister of Constitutional Affairs urged
all stakeholders involved in the selection of state assembly members to preserve a
20 per cent quota for women, as stipulated in the state Constitution. In Jubbaland, on
19 November, Mr. Madobe encouraged local female university graduates to apply for
jobs at government institutions.
41. At a planning session held on 20 November, the Women’s Parliamentary Caucus
of the Federal Parliament also emphasized the need for capacity -building to achieve
effective female political engagement.
42. From 25 November to 9 December, the United Nations in Somalia took part in
the campaign 16 Days of Activism to End Violence against Women and Girls on the
theme “Orange the World: Generation Equality Stands against Rape!”. The campaign
included a variety of activities, including training sessions on gender-responsive
reporting, panel discussions and interactive radio discussions in Baidoa, Garoowe and
Kismaayo. The campaign concluded with a high-level event hosted by my Special
Representative, with the participation of the government, women and young people.
43. At the third annual Somali Women Parliamentarians Conference, held in
Mogadishu on 15 and 16 December, the Federal Government was called upon to
enshrine the 30 per cent representation quota for wom en in the Federal Constitution.

20-01738

7/18

S/2020/121

Participants called for greater inclusion of women parliamentarians in leadership
roles in parliamentary committees, as well as opportunities for women in the three
branches of government and independent commissions. They al so highlighted the
need to develop gender-responsive national budgets and plans. In addition, full
support was expressed for the sexual offences bill.
2.

Youth empowerment
44. More than 5,000 people attended the second Mogadishu Technology Summit,
held from 19 to 21 November. Under the theme “Scaling Youth-Led Tech-Enabled
Solutions for Somalia”, the event brought together Somali innovators, social activists
and entrepreneurs involved in the technology industry, as well as representatives of
government, United Nations agencies, international partners, investors and financial
institutions, some of whom pledged significant financial support for technological
advancement and innovation in the country.
45. The Ministry of Youth and Sports held the fourth ann ual Somali National Youth
Conference in Mogadishu from 1 to 4 December. A total of 300 young people from
all of the federal member states attended the event, which comprised panel
discussions and intergenerational dialogue with government representatives. The
conference included a Model United Nations, thereby giving young Somalis the
opportunity to acquire negotiation and diplomacy skills.
46. The National Independent Electoral Commission and international partners held
a three-day electoral training session for 40 young people, including representatives
of all federal member states, from 1 to 3 December. Participants in the training session
discussed opportunities for engagement with young people throughout the national
electoral cycle and created a platform to help the Commission and representatives of
the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs to learn about barriers to the political
participation of young people in Somalia.

C.

Development coordination
47. Following Cabinet approval, in September, Mr. Farmajo launched the ninth
National Development Plan on 23 December 2019. The plan lays out development
priorities for Somalia for the period 2020 to 2024 and serves as the key overarching
planning framework for that country.
48. The Somalia Development and Reconstruction Facility has continued to serve
as both a coordination framework and a financing architecture for implementing the
National Development Plan. Consultations on the development of a refined aid
architecture aligned to the government’s road maps and the new Plan are being
concluded between the government and international partners.

IV. Human rights and protection
A.

Human rights
49. UNSOM recorded 392 civilian casualties during the reporting period.
Al-Shabaab remained the main perpetrator, responsible for 83 per cent of civilian
casualties. State security forces accounted for 8 per cent, clan militia for 2 per cent,
AMISOM for 2 per cent and unidentified actors for 5 per cent. A total of 14 death
sentences were pronounced, and 7 executions were carried out.
50. Violations of freedom of expression continue to be documented. A total of
11 journalists were arrested in “Somaliland” and 1 in Puntland; 7 were harassed and

8/18

20-01738

S/2020/121

threatened by security forces in Banaadir and 8 were briefly ar rested in Hirshabelle.
Two media organizations and two media outlets were suspended in Hirshabelle and
“Somaliland” (three suspensions were later lifted), while a local newspaper that had
been suspended in “Somaliland” on 10 February 2019 resumed publicati on in
December, after the “Somaliland” Supreme Court issued a judgment lifting the
suspension on 25 December. With regard to freedom of assembly, two directives were
issued by a government official in Hargeysa, “Somaliland”, and Galmudug police ,
ordering hotels not to host meetings and conferences without advance approval.
51. On 26 November, Somalia signed the African Union Convention for the
Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa, also known as
the Kampala Convention, into law. On 11 December, the Federal Government
announced the submission of its first State party report under the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment since its
ratification, in 1990. The report, supported by the Joint Programme on Human Rights,
provides an outline of the efforts of the Federal Government to prevent and
criminalize acts of torture and to provide redress for survivors.
52. A national action plan of the Federal Government of Somalia for assistance to
survivors of mines and explosive remnants of war for 2020–2025 was launched jointly
by the Somalia Explosive Management Authority, the Ministry of Women and Human
Rights Development and the United Nations Mine Action Service at the Fourth
Review Conference of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction, held in
Oslo on 25 to 29 November 2019.

B.

Compliance with the human rights due diligence policy
53. UNSOM provided support for the implementation of the human rights due
diligence policy through the delivery of human rights and international humanitarian
law training for 140 AMISOM aircrew to be deployed by the Uganda People’s
Defence Forces and 29 Somali Police officers under the explosive ordnance disposal
programme of the United Nations Mine Action Service.
54. UNSOM participated in the human rights due diligence policy and practice
workshop on the integration of human rights into United Nations milit ary
components, held in New York on 25 and 26 November. Meanwhile, in accordance
with the usual coordination mechanisms, two alleged violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law by AMISOM troop-contributing countries were
communicated to AMISOM.
55. At its December meeting, the United Nations human rights due diligence policy
task force approved the updated risk assessment for the Somali Police Force, which
considered an additional support package as well as a risk assessment on the Nationa l
Intelligence Service Agency and agreed on an engagement strategy with the Custodial
Corps, in line with the risk assessment mitigation measures.

C.

Children in armed conflict
56. Between 1 November and 31 December, the country task force on monitori ng
and reporting on grave violations against children in armed conflict verified 407 grave
violations affecting 358 children (282 boys and 76 girls) and five attacks on schools.
Over the same period, a total of 143 children were victims of recruitment and use,
137 children were abducted, 92 were victims of killing and maiming and 30 were
victims of sexual violence. The violations were attributed to Al-Shabaab (275, or

20-01738

9/18

S/2020/121

68 per cent), unknown armed elements (43, or 11 per cent), clan militia (19, or 5 per
cent) and federal and state (64, or 16 per cent). A total of 10 incidents of deprivation
of liberty affecting 20 boys were attributed to the Somali National Army (8), the
Somali Police Force (7), the National Intelligence and Security Agency (3) and
Jubbaland forces (2). A total of 1,315 children (1,042 boys and 273 girls) were
separated from armed forces and armed groups and handed over to United Nations
Children’s Fund partners for rehabilitation and eventual reintegration.

D.

Prevention of sexual and gender-based violence
57. On 3 November, the Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development and
UNSOM conducted training for judges and prosecutors on prosecuting crimes of
sexual violence and conflict-related sexual violence. Topics included understanding
conflict-related sexual violence, obtaining access to justice for victims, engaging the
criminal justice system to be more responsive to victims and securing information
during court processes.
58. The sexual offences bill had been pending approval in Parliament for 18 months.
On 2 December, the Speaker of the House of the People communicated that the bill
would be returned to the executive branch. On 9 December, 15 Members of
Parliament brought a motion against the Speaker calling for the immediate tabl ing of
the bill.
59. In Jubbaland and Puntland, bills on outlawing female genital mutilation and
sexual offences were reviewed on 14 and 21 November, respectively.

V. Humanitarian situation
60. Moderate to heavy deyr rains in 2019 (September to December) started early in
many parts of Somalia and the Ethiopian highlands. A rise in water levels in the Juba
and Shabelle Rivers resulted in flooding in Hirshabelle, Jubbaland and South -West
states. Flooding affected 570,000 persons, more than 370,000 of whom were
displaced from their homes, and farms, houses, roads and other infrastructure wer e
destroyed. Beledweyne district in Hiraan region was the worst affected, with 240,000
displaced and the entire town of Beledweyne virtually submerged by flood waters.
61. On 23 November, the United Nations and the Federal Government launched a
flood response plan, requesting $72.5 million to assist flood-affected persons in
29 districts throughout the country over a three-month period. The plan is being
implemented by 100 partners (92 non-governmental organizations and 8 United
Nation entities) in all clusters. Some $25 million has been made available, but another
$47.5 million is still required. With the available resources, humanitarian agencies
have assisted some 350,538 flood-affected persons.
62. The rapid shifts from severe droughts to flooding are a reminder that Somalia is
increasingly vulnerable to climate change, which has an impact on populations
already vulnerable owing to chronic poverty and conflict. Before the flood -related
displacements, more than 2.6 million persons had been displaced inte rnally and were
living at 2,000 sites across Somalia.
63. Since 1990, Somalia has experienced 30 climate-related hazards – 12 droughts
and 18 floods – thus tripling the number of climate-related hazards that the country
experienced between 1970 and 1990.
64. Tropical storm Pawan made landfall on 6 December, bringing moderate to heavy
rains, strong winds and flash floods to parts of Puntland. Authorities estimated that
10/18

20-01738

S/2020/121

32,400 persons lost their livelihood, 4,800 persons were displaced from their homes
and six were killed.
65. In early December, Somalia was beset by the worst desert locust outbreak in
more than 25 years. “Somaliland”, Puntland and Galmudug are the worst-affected
areas, with an estimated 70,000 ha of land infested by hoppers and breeding adult
locusts, which have already damaged crops and pastures. During the second half of
December, large numbers of immature swarms reached some southern and central
areas of Somalia, including Hirshabelle, South-West and Jubbaland states. The
infestation is affecting pastures and threatening staple food crops of agropastoral and
pastoral families in rural areas. Recognizing the severity of the locust crisis, the
Federal Government declared a national state of emergency on 2 February.
66. Humanitarian agencies continue to advocate for durable solutions to stimulate
long-term development and address the underlying causes of the crises in Somalia.
To achieve that, the United Nations and its partners are working to ensure that
emergency and development assistance complement each other in line with the
National Development Plan to achieve long-term recovery and resilience.
67. The Somalia humanitarian response plan of 2020 was launched on 22 January
in Mogadishu. Humanitarian partners and agencies are seeking a total of $1.03 billion
to provide life-saving assistance and enhance livelihood support to 3 million persons
of the 5.2 million persons in Somalia who need humanitarian assistance.

VI. Comprehensive approach to security
A.

Operations
68. The Federal Government-led joint operations in Shabelle Hoose remained on
hold during the reporting period owing primarily to shortfalls in force generation for
the next phase of phase I of Operation Badbaado, which requires a minimum of two
Somali National Army battalions. The Federal Government has declared these forces
to be ready for deployment, however, they currently remain unarmed and ill equipped
(vehicles, communications and ammunition) to engage in operations. Before deploying,
the battalions will be assessed by a team of international community partners,
including UNSOM. The Somali National Army has conducted some independent
operations in Shabelle Dhexe, and planning is under way with international partners
to convene a force generation conference and agree on operational priorities for 2020.
69. On 6 January, refresher training began for 300 federal Darwish police officers
to be deployed to newly liberated areas. The United Nations, the African Union and
the Federal Government of Somalia completed a Joint Threat Assessment of security
conditions on the ground in line with Security Council resolution 2472 (2019).
70. The African Union convened an expanded meeting of the AMISOM Military
Operations Coordination Committee in Kampala on 28 January with the participation
of AMISOM and senior military and police commanders from troop - and policecontributing countries. The Federal Government, UNSOS and international partners
also attended. The meeting reviewed progress made on the implementation tasks
contained in resolution 2472 (2019) and African Union Peace and Security Council
communiqué 848, including the plan to draw down 1,000 uniformed person nel by
28 February. AMISOM reconfiguration plans were also examined, and technical
discussions with the Federal Government followed in Mogadishu on 3 February.

20-01738

11/18

S/2020/121

B.

Institutional capacity-building
71. With funding from the Joint Police Programme, 400 South-West State police
recruits who had graduated on 29 December were deployed to various locations in
Shabelle Hoose to support the hold and build phases of the transition plan. In addition,
200 police recruits, including 22 women, commenced their three -month training in
Jawhar, which will bring the number of Hirshabelle State Police to 600. Meanwhile,
the Federal Ministry of Internal Security is coordinating the expansion of the federal
police-focused Darwish Police Concept to include the state-level Darwish. The
United Nations Mine Action Service conducted refresher training for the Somali
Police Force explosive ordnance disposal team in Mogadishu from 1 to 11 December.
72. An amnesty policy is before the Council of Ministers for approval. On
10 December 2019, the Federal Government agreed on a road map to enable the
transfer of the caseload of high-risk Al-Shabaab and Al-Shabaab-associated detainees
from military to civilian courts. The joint security sector governance programme
organized training in November and December for officials from the South-West State
Ministry of Security and the Puntland Ministry of Security and Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration to strengthen the oversight and accountability
mechanisms for the security sector at the state level. Similar training was organized
in Mogadishu in January for the Ministry of Defence.
73. From November to January, the Somali Maritime Administration received
training focused on key maritime conventions, ship registration, maritime search -andrescue and crew certification and will enable the Somali Maritime Administration to
achieve Initial Operational Capability by mid-2020.
74. On 12 December, UNSOM and AMISOM adopted a concept note on joint
security sector reform engagement in support of the national security architecture
agreement and the transition plan. The strategy paves the way for joint awareness raising activities related to security sector reform on the part of the United Nations,
AMISOM and the Office of National Security in 2020 and underscores the importance
of an inclusive security sector approach that also responds to the security needs of
women, young people and marginalized communities at the state level.
75. On 20 January, the Upper House of the Federal Parliament approved the bill
amending Law No. 6 of 1969 concerning pension and gratuities for members of the
armed forces and security services, which will enable the rightsizing of the security
services in alignment with the National Security Architecture. The amendments
proposed by the Upper House are now with the House of the People for further
consideration.
76. The Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development and the Somali
Explosive Management Authority, with support from the United Nations Mine Action
Service, organized workshops on disabilities and victim assistance consultation,
which were attended by line ministries, disability-related organizations and
international aid organizations. Workshops were held in Mogadishu, South-West
State, Puntland, Galmudug and Hirshabelle.

C.

Supporting activities
77. The Federal Government continued to discuss the mobilization of resources with
key donors to address gaps in the stabilization efforts and ensure su pport to current
and future operations envisaged under the transition plan and the priorities in the
National Stabilization Strategy. The State Ministries of Interior continue to lead a
range of stabilization initiatives to rebuild community infrastructure , develop

12/18

20-01738

S/2020/121

inclusive local governance systems and promote reconciliation, with support from
international partners.
78. In implementation of the National Programme for the Treatment and Handling
of disengaged combatants, the National Defector Rehabilitation Programme Centres
provided support to 81 male combatants in Mogadishu, 94 in Baidoa and 47 in
Kismaayo, with 80 graduating from the three centres between November 2019 and
January 2020. The construction of two new female rehabilitation centres with
capacity for 100 persons is nearing completion. In December 2019, a pilot project
supported by the Peacebuilding Fund rehabilitated 150 women formerly associated
with Al-Shabaab and engaged with as many as 1,000 community members.
79. On 17 November, an interministerial task force on Shabelle Hoose and senior
representatives of the national army visited Awdheegle, Shabelle Hoose, to assess
progress in consolidating security arrangements and stabilization efforts and listen to
the concerns of community representatives. Notwithstanding the deyr rains,
stabilization initiatives in Awdheegle and Sabiid continued under the direction of the
Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation and South -West State
authorities. The killing of the Awdheegle District Commissioner by an improvised
explosive device, on 4 December, underscored the risks faced by officials and
stabilization partners, as well as the urgency of developing the capabilities of Somali
forces.
80. On 19 November, the Ministry of Information and the Prevention and
Countering of Violent Extremism Coordination Unit in the Office of the Prime
Minister established a communication task force on preventing and countering violent
extremism to enhance strategic communications on the issue. Such in terventions are
being developed in the newly recovered areas in Shabelle Hoose.

VII. United Nations Support Office in Somalia support to
the African Union Mission in Somalia and the Somali
National Army
A.

Support to African Union Mission in Somalia operations
81. A wellness programme to enhance security and facilities on 21 forward
operating bases continued during the reporting period. Field defence stores were
moved to eight forward operating bases, and constructi on work is pending because
poor roads have not allowed mission-enabling units to move to those locations.
82. Between 11 and 27 November, UNSOS leadership visited Burundi, Ethiopia,
Ghana, Kenya, Sierra Leone and Uganda to enhance cooperation and listen to the
concerns of the leadership of contributing countries. The Head of UNSOS met with
senior foreign affairs and government defence officials in four of the five troop contributing countries, as well as the Inspector General of Police in Uganda. A
planned visit to Djibouti was cancelled owing to severe weather. The Director of
UNSOS concurrently visited two of the four police-contributing countries, Ghana and
Sierra Leone, where he met with senior internal security and police officials. The
troop- and police-contributing countries expressed satisfaction with the logistics
support provided by UNSOS and requested training in management of contingent owned equipment, self-sustainment and preparations for electoral security.
83. The United Nations, the African Union and Uganda finalized negotiations on
the deployment of four military helicopters to AMISOM with a letter of assist signed
on 10 November. The deployment of the helicopters and an aviation unit, comprising

20-01738

13/18

S/2020/121

up to 140 personnel, is still pending a predeployment visit by the African Union. The
deployment will bring the total number of military helicopters at AMISOM to seven.
84. The United Nations trust fund for AMISOM support had a balance of
$3.3 million as at 30 January.
85. The United Nations Mine Action Service, with support from UNSOS, continued
to support AMISOM security operations and stabilization efforts by providing advice,
analysis, training and mentoring concerning the use of specialized equipment,
explosive-detection dogs, community liaison officers and explosive ordnance
clearance teams. From 5 November to 12 December, the Service provided training to
1,082 AMISOM military and police personnel to enhance their capability to find and
destroy improvised explosive devices and safely operate i n the threat environment.
The Service contributed to the safety and security of strategic infrastructure through
the deployment of 21 teams working with 42 detection dogs to conduct searches of
20,568 pieces of luggage, 86,729 vehicles, 125 buildings, 102,226 m 2 of built-up
areas and 6,068,26 m 2 of undeveloped areas throughout the sectors. The Service also
supported Mission-enabling units with convoy movements to deliver supplies and
equipment from Mogadishu to the sectors.

B.

Support to Somali national armed forces operations
86. UNSOS has continued to support 10,900 members of the national army in
35locations throughout the AMISOM area of operations. This includes support for
joint operations in Shabelle Hoose, as part of Operation Badbaado, where UN SOS is
providing life support supplies and services to national army units holding recovered
towns. UNSOS also provided field defence stores to establish four forward operating
bases to Operation Badbaado and a further two are planned when the operation
progresses. UNSOS has also provided communications equipment, including training
for Somali troops on its use and maintenance, to augment command and control for
front-line units, including repeater stations to serve tactical and operational -level
commanders. In December 2019, UNSOS and the national army agreed to establish a
forward logistics hub within an AMISOM forward operating base in Shabelle Hoose
in early 2020, to enhance responsiveness and build organic logistics management
capacity.
87. On 14 January, UNSOS and the Ministry of Defence sent a joint letter to several
Member States to appeal for further contributions to the trust fund in support of the
Somali security forces, managed by UNSOS.
88. On 17 January, my Special Representative hosted a diplom atic briefing for the
international community to mobilize resources for the fund. The briefing included
presentations by the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia, Francisco Caetano José Madeira; the National Security
Adviser of the Federal Government, Abdisaid Muse Ali; and the Head of UNSOS.
The briefing appealed for additional contributions from Member States to replenish
the trust fund and ensure the provision of sustained support to Somali security for ces.
As of 30 January, the United Nations trust fund in support of the Somali security
forces had a balance of $10,025,679. Based on an average monthly expenditure of
$1.2 million, current funds are expected to last until November 2020.

VIII. United Nations presence in Somalia
89. United Nations entities continue to be present in the following locations in
Somalia: Baidoa, Beledweyne, Boosaaso, Dhooble, Dhuusamarreeb, Doolow,
14/18

20-01738

S/2020/121

Gaalkacyo, Garoowe, Hargeysa, Jawhar, Kismaayo and Mogadishu. As of 1 February
2020, there were 683 international staff members and 1,308 national staff members
deployed throughout Somalia.
90. The United Nations in Somalia hosted visits by my Special Representative to
the African Union, Hanna Tetteh, in December and my Special Envoy for the Horn of
Africa, Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, in January to strengthen ties among United Nations
entities throughout the subregion. The two visits provided the basis for further
discussions on United Nations-African Union cooperation, as well as subregional
political, security and development issues, respectively.
91. The United Nations continued to engage with the Somali authorities to address
challenges created by the imposition of fees in contravention of the status -of-mission
agreement signed with the Federal Government in 2014. On 8 December 2019, the
Head of UNSOS and the Federal Minister of State for Foreign Affairs co -chaired the
Joint Host Country Relations Committee meeting, which resolved some of the
challenges. However, the denial of gratis visas and work permits to United Nations
international contractors and United Nations personnel not in possession of laissez passer continued to negatively affect the ability of the Organization to implement its
mandates and provide programmes. At the Joint Host Country Relations Committee
meeting, the Co-Chairs also agreed to undertake a joint investigation into allegations
of United Nations items being sold in local markets in Mogadishu.

IX. Observations
92. As Somalia embarks on an important year, I emphasize the imperative of
political dialogue among leaders as a matter of the highest priority. The lack of
constructive dialogue between Mogadishu and all federal member states or more than
18 months impedes much-needed political progress, consensus-building and
reconciliation, which should form the basis of the federal Somali State. I renew my
urgent call to the country’s leaders to take immediate steps to restore ties and consider
instituting a mechanism for dialogue and consensus-building in the interest of the
nation. Without their unity of purpose, the political, security, humanitarian and
development challenges that the country is facing cannot be adequately addressed.
93. In this regard, the timely organization of peaceful national elections remains the
first priority for 2020, as identified in the Mutual Accountability Framework. It is
urgent that an implementable electoral law be passed in order for such preparations
to begin. To be implemented, the electoral law will need the su pport of all federal
member states, the political opposition and civil society. I call upon all stakeholders
to safeguard the political representation of women and minorities in the electoral
process. In parallel, further delays to the introduction of the amendment to the
Political Parties Law in Parliament will have an impact on the electoral timeline.
94. In Galmudug, following the conclusion of the electoral process, I encourage all
relevant stakeholders to continue their efforts towards reconciliation a nd work
together to establish a unified and stable administration. The political situation in
Jubbaland remains unsettled, and I again urge all concerned parties to address
differences through dialogue, compromise and pragmatism.
95. I note the progress made on some of the commitments outlined in the Mutual
Accountability Framework. I am encouraged by the continued economic reforms in
Somalia and welcome the sustained efforts of the Federal Government towards
achieving the targets of the fourth staff-monitored programme of the IMF for debt
relief. The technical cooperation that exists between the Federal Government and all
federal member states on debt relief is an illustration of the possibility of joint work

20-01738

15/18

S/2020/121

to achieve common objectives, and I hope it can be emulated in other areas and at the
political level.
96. I remain deeply concerned about the continued ability of Al-Shabaab to conduct
attacks in Mogadishu and the regions, as evidenced again by several incidents of
terrorist violence including the 28 December bombing in Mogadishu that killed more
than 90 persons. I reiterate my strong condemnation of the attack and all acts of
terrorism and violent extremism and express my profound sympathy to the families
of the victims. I welcome the completion of a joint threat assessment of security
conditions on the ground by the African Union, the Federal Government, and the
United Nations. It is clear that much more remains to be done to overcome the threat
of terrorism and violent extremism in Somalia, and I urge the Somali authorities at
the federal and state levels, with the support of the international community, to
redouble their collective efforts towards ensuring security for the Somali people.
97. In this year of elections, it will be important for Somali s ecurity forces,
supported by AMISOM, to provide the needed support to ensure the security of the
process while continuing to implement the transition plan to transfer security
responsibility from AMISOM to Somali security forces and institutions. Adequate
planning for security will be an essential component of electoral preparations, and I
urge that it be accelerated. To enable Somali security forces to fulfil their electoral
security responsibilities and to enable transition operations to continue, there i s an
urgent need for transparent consultations on force generation with international
partners to formulate an achievable and realistic plan. I also encourage international
partners to provide support to the Somali National Army so that it has increased
capacity to mitigate the threat of improvised explosive devices.
98. I remain concerned about the humanitarian situation and the persisting high
levels of humanitarian need in Somalia. The climatic shocks that continue to have a
severe impact on Somalia require comprehensive, long-term solutions that offer
prevention and threat mitigation. The recurring events have a negative impact on the
Somali population, in particular pastoral communities and farmers, who are highly
dependent on livestock and agriculture. I call upon all international partners to
continue to support the Federal Government in finding sustainable interventions to
help to mitigate current and future risks and alleviate the suffering caused by such
weather-related humanitarian crises. I urge donors to contribute to the humanitarian
response plan for 2020 to support the delivery of life-saving assistance and provide
livelihood support.
99. I commend the Federal Government for its strengthened engagement with
international human rights treaty mechanisms, including the submission of the first
State party report under the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the signing of the Kampala Convention and the
approval of the national policy on refugee returnees and internally displaced persons.
I continue to encourage the Federal Government to strengthen legislation, including
passage of the sexual offences bill and the bill on female genital mutilation.
100. I note the efforts by the Federal Government to strengthen the compliance of
security institutions with human rights and international humanitarian law and
encourage the increased support of all partners for the prevention and response
measures against violations in the context of the transfer of se curity responsibilities
to Somali security forces. I urge the Federal Government to ensure the independence
of the judiciary branch and the separation of the executive, legislative and judicial
branches of government and note the urgency of establishing an d operationalizing the
Judicial Service Commission, the Constitutional Court and the Independent National
Human Rights Commission.

16/18

20-01738

S/2020/121

101. In addition, the infringement on the freedom of expression and the freedom of
assembly continue to be of concern. The freedom of expression and the freedom of
assembly are essential foundations of a democratic society, and a free press helps to
foster dialogue, peace and good governance, key imperatives in the electoral context
of 2020.
102. I also remain concerned about children detained for their alleged association
with Al-Shabaab and urge the Federal Government to treat all children formerly
associated with armed groups primarily as victims, in line with international juvenile
justice principles.
103. In the interest of enhanced regional relations, durable peace and stability, it is
essential that countries in the Horn of Africa act in a spirit of cooperation. In that
regard, I welcome the statement of 14 November by the Presidents of Somalia and
Kenya on their intent to foster close bilateral ties.
104. I thank the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the European Union, Member States, non-governmental organizations and other
partners for their continued support for peacebuilding, state-building and the people
of Somalia. I pay particular tribute to AMISOM and the Somali security forces for
their brave efforts and the sacrifices that they continue to make for the achievement
of long-term peace and stability in Somalia.
105. I renew my commitment to deepening the partnership between Somalia and the
United Nations for the benefit of the Somali people, in support of the country’s
continued progress. Moving forward, the Federal Government’s support for the
implementation of the UNSOM mandate will continue to be counted on so that the
Mission can fully support key processes that will be carried out in Somalia in 2020.
106. I recommend that the Security Council extend the mandate of the mission for an
additional 12 months. In addition, I express my deep appreciation to my Special
Representative, James Swan, for his steady leadership and to all United Nations staff
members in Somalia for their tireless commitment and excellent work under very
difficult conditions.

20-01738

17/18

S/2020/121

18/18

20-01738
