40

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session,

Taking into account the comments made on this
item and relevant documents submitted to the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session,
Noting also that sustained and intensive efforts in
the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament
have led to increased understanding in identifying
practical approaches towards the prohibition of the
development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and towards their destruction,
Believing that future agreement on the prohibition
of chemical weapons should meet the objective of
complete, effective and verifiable prohibition of the
development, production and stockpiling of chemical
weapons, as well as provide adequate methods of
verification for the destruction of the stockpiles of
chemical weapons, and recognizing that arrangements
for verification should be based on a combination of
national and international arrangements,
Having in mind that agreement on the complete
prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on their destruction
should not impede the utilization of science and technology for the econornic development of States,
Desiring to contribute to an early and successful
conclusion of the negotiations on effective and strict
measures for the complete prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical
weapons and for their destruction,
1. Urges all States to reach early agreement on
the effective prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on
their destruction;
2. Urges the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
and the United States of America to submit their joint
initiative to the Comrnittee on Disarmament in arder
to assist it in achieving early agreement on the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of
all chemical weapons and on their destruction;
3. Requests the Committee on Disarmament, as a
matter of high priority, to undertake, at the beginning
of its 1979 session, negotiations with a view to elaborating an agreement on effective measures for the
prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and for their destruction, taking into account all existing proposals and
future initiatives;
4. Invites all States that have not yet done so to
accede to the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on
Their Destruction, as well as to accede to ar ratify
the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War
of Asphyxiating, Poisonous ar Other Gases, and of
Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva
on 17 June 1925, and calls again for strict observance
by all States of the principies and objectives of those
instruments;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Committee on Disarmament all documents of the
thirty-third session of the General Assembly relating to
chemical weapons and to chemical means of warfare;
6. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to
report on the results of its negotiations to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fourth session.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2826 (XXVI) of 16 December 1972, in which it commended the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction10 and expressed
the hope for the widest possible adherence to that
Convention,
Noting that article XII of the Convention provides
as follows:
"Five years after the entry into force of this
Convention, or earlier if it is requested by a majority
of Parties to the Convention by submitting a proposal to this effect to the Depositary Govemments,
a Conference of States Parties to the Convention
shall be held at Geneva, Switzerland, to review the
operation of the Convention, with a view to assuring
that the purposes of the preamble and the provisions
of the Convention, including the provisions conceming negotiations on chemical weapons, are being
realized. Such review shall take into account any
new scientific and technological developments relevant to the Convention",
Believing that the availability of information as
appropriate on any new scientific and technological
developments relevant to the Convention could contribute to the work of the Review Conference of the
Parties to the Convention,
Bearing in mind that the Convention will have been
in force for five years on 26 March 1980 and expecting that the Review Conference called for in the
Convention will take place near that date,
l. Notes that, after appropriate consultations, a
preparatory committee of parties to the Convention is
to be arranged;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to render the
necessary assistance and to provide such services, including summary records, as may be required for the
Review Conference and its preparation.
84th plenary meeting
J4 December J 978
33/60.

Implementation of
resolution 32/78

General

Assembly

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its conviction that the cessation of
nuclear-weapon testing by all States in all environments
would be in the interest of all mankind, both as a
majar step towards ending the qualitative improvement, development and proliferation of nuclear
weapons and as a means of relieving the deep apprehension concerning the harmful consequences of
radioactive contamination for the health of present
and future generations,
Recalling the determination of the parties to the
Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapons Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water11 and the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 12
10 Resolution 2826 (XXVI), annex.
1 1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol.
1 2 Resolution 2373 (XXII), annex.

480, No. 6964, p. 43.

III.

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the First Committee

expressed in those Treaties to continue neg~tiations
to achieve the discontinuance of all test explos1ons for
all time,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject,
in particular resolution 32/78 of 12 December 1977
and paragraph 51 of resolution S-10/2 of 30 June
1978,
Recognizing the importance to a treaty prohibiting
nuclear testing of the study being carried ~ut by the
Ad Hoc Group of Scientific Experts to Cons1der Int~rnational Co-operative Measures to Detect ~nd ldentlfy
Seismic Events on a global network of statlons for the
exchange of seismological data,
Taking note of that part of the report of the C?nference of the Committee on Disarmament13 relatmg
to the question of a comprehensive test-han treaty,
1. Reiterates its grave concern over the fact ~hat
nuclear-weapon testing has continued unabated agamst
the wishes of the overwhelming majority of Member
States;
2. Reaffirms its conviction that a treaty on the
subject of the present resolution is a matter of the
highest priority;
3. Regrets that a draft treaty has not been concluded during the past year;
4. Notes that the three negotiating nuclear-weapon
States acknowledge the need to bring their negotiations
to a speedy and successful conclusion;
5. Urges those three States to expedite their n~~otiations with a view to bringing them to a pos1t1ve
conclusion as a matter of urgency and to use their
utmost endeavours to transmit the results to the Committee on Disarmament before the beginning of its
1979 session for full consideration;
6. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to
take up immediately the agreed text resulting fr<;>m
the negotiations referred to in paragraph 5 above with
a view to the submission as soon as possible of a draft
treaty, which will attract the widest possible adherence,
to a resumed thirty-third session of the General
Assembly;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session an item relating to the implementation of the present resolution.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/61.

Implementation of General Assemhly
resolution 32/79 concerning the signature and ratification of Additional Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohihition
of Nuclear W eapons in Latín America
(Treaty of Tlatelolco)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1911 (XVIII) of 27 November 1963, 2286 (XXII) of 5 December 1967,
2456 B (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2666 (XXV)
of 7 December 1970, 2830 (XXVI) of 16 December
1971, 2935 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972, 3079
(XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, 3258 (XXIX) of
13 Official

Records of the General Assemh!y, Thirty-thírd
Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/33/27), vol. I, paras. 54-115.

41

9 December 1974, 3467 (XXX) of 11 December
1975 31/67 of 10 December 1976 and 32/79 of
12 December 1977, ten of which contain appeals to
the nuclear-weapon States regarding the signature and
ratification of Additional Protocol II of the Treaty for
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
(Treaty of Tlatelolco), 14
Reiterating its firm conviction that, for the maximum
effectiveness of any treaty establishing a nuclearweapon-free zone, the co-operation of the nucle_arweapon States is necessary and that such co-operatlon
should take the form of commitments likewise undertaken in a formal international instrument which
is legally binding, such as a treaty, convention or
protocol,
Recalling with satisfaction that the United King~om
of Great Britain and Northern lreland, the Umted
States of America, France and the People's Republic
of China are already parties to Additional Protocol 11
of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco),
I. Notes with satisfaction that Additional Protocol
II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latín America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) was
signed in 1978 by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and that the Government of that country has
officially announced that it intends to ratify the Protocol in the very near future;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session an item entitled "Implementation of General Assembly resolution 33/61 concerning
the signature and ratification of Additional Protocol II
of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) ".
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/62.

Effective measures to implement the purposes aml objectives of the Disarmament
Decade

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2602 E (XXIV) of 16 December 1969, in which it declared the decade of the
1970s the Disarmament Decade,
Reaffirming the purposes and objectives of the
Decade,
Recalling its assessment in the Final Document of
the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly
that the objectives established for the Decade appeared
to be as far away as they had been or even further
because the arms race was not diminishing but increasing and outstripping efforts to curb it,u
Deeply concerned at the continued wastage of resources on armaments and the consequent detrimental
effcct on international security and the achievement of
the ncw international economic order,
Recalling the decision taken at its tenth special session concerning a comprehensive programme of disarmament, 1G
Recalling also its decision that the Secretary-General should, with the assistance of a group of qualified
H United Nations, Treaty Scrie.s, vol.
J.i Resolution S-10/2, para. 4.
i,; See

resolution S-10 2, sect. III.
1

634, No. 9068, p. 326.
