UNmED

NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

2459th

MEETING:

NEW

1 AUGUST

1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2459)

....................................

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President ............................

1

Adoption of the agenda

1

...............................................

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Morocco
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15481);
Letter dated 9 November 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Niger to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15483);
Letter dated 8 February 1983 from the Charge d’affaires a.i; of the Permanent
Mission of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15599);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations addressed to the Pfisident of the Security Council (S/15764);
Letter dated 27 July 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Democratic
Yemen to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15890) . . ..a..........................
... ... ... .. ... ...

1

WPV.2459

NOTE
‘Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2459th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
President: Mr. Luc de La BARRE
(France).

1 August 1983, at 3.30 p.m.

de NANTEUIL

Council. I should like to assure all my colleagues that this
is not arrogance on my part, nor any attempt-which
would be absurd-to tamper with the rules of procedure.
Indeed, I should like to see the Council meeting once
again in its own chamber as soon as possible so that the
President may once again find himself immersed, as it
were, like a fish in water, among his fellow members of
the Council.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
.Zimbabwe.
provisional
1. Adoption

Adoption of the agenda

agenda (S/Agenda/2459)

The agenda was adopted.

of the agenda

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15481);
Letter dated 9 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Niger to the United , Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council .
(S/15483);
Letter dated 8 February 1983 from the ChargC d’affaires a. i. .of the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15599);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Qatar to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
‘(S/15764);
.
Letter dated 27 July 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Democratic Yemen to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
,
Council (S/15890)

2. The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
. addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15481);
Letter dated 9 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Niger to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15483);
Letter dated 8 February 1983 from the Charge
d’affaires a. i. of the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15599);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Qatar to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15764);
Letter dated 27 July 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Democratic Yemen to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15890).

.3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with decisions taken at previous meetings on
this item f2401st; 2412th to 2414th. 2438th and 2457th
meetings], I invite the representatives of ‘Afghanistan,
Algeria, Cuba, Democratic Yemen, Egypt, the German
Democratic Republic, Greece, India, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mali, Morocco,
Niger, Qatar, Senegal, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey,
the United Arab Emirates, Yemen and Yugoslavia to take
the places reserved for them. at the side of the Council
chamber; I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a place at the.Council
table.

The meeting was called to order ut 4.20 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Rench): S&z
this is the first meeting of the Council in August, I should
like to express, on behalf of the Council, profound gratitude to the President for the month of July, Mr. Ling Qing,
the representative of China, for the great dipiomatic skill,
patience and courtesy with which he conducted the Council’s proceedings last month.
2. I should like to add that, as everyone can see, we are
not meeting in the customary Council chamber and that,
in a purely physical sense, the President is seated higher
and, unfortunately, farther away from the members of the
..

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zariy (AfghaniStan), Mr. Sahnoun .(AIgeria). Mr. Caballero Rodrfpez
_‘_
1

(Cuba), Mr. Al-Ashtal (Democratic Yemen), Mr. Khahl
(Egypr), Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic), Mr.
Dountas (Greece), Mr. Krishnan
(In&a), Mr. RajaieKhorassani (Islamic. Republic of Iran), Mr. Abulhassan
(Kuwait), Mr. Fakhoury (Lebanon), Mr. Zainal Abidin
(Malaysia), Mr. Traore (Mali). Mr. Mrani .Zentar
(Morocco), Mr. Oumarou (Niger), Mr. Jamal (Qatar), Mr:
Sarr& (Senegal). Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr.
Kirqa (Turkey), Mr. AI-Qasimi (United Arab Emirates),
Mr. Sallam (Yemen) and Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber;
Mr. Terti (Palestine Liberation Organization) took a place
at the Council table

8. I should like also to commend the wise presidency of
your predecessor, the representative of China, whose
tenure was characterized by his well-known statesmanship and wisdom. Indeed, the Arab people feel extremely ’
grateful to the great people of China for their unceasing
support, on all levels, of Arab causes.
9. The painful and tragic events that occurred in the
Palestinian city of Al-Khalil and led to the martyrdom
of a number of students at the Islamic University are not
isolated events. They represent not only criminal acts by
the occupying authorities but also the expression of a
consistent pattern in Israel’s settlements policy in the
occupied Palestinian and Arab territories. Hence, what
happened in Al-Khalil
does not constitute a transient
phenomenon; it must be looked at as the crystallization
and continuous expression of the fact that Israel intends
to commit these barbaric acts in the occupied Arab
territories-particularly
in Palestine-because
it seeks
to displace, the population by inflicting all manner of
oppression and torture in order to be able to undertake
the process of Judaization as a prelude to the annexation and assimilation of land and the displacement of
populations.

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation fr&n French); I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Bahrain, Bangladesh, Djibouti, Iraq, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritania, Oman, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan and Tunisia in
which they-request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
.to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

IO. It follows that. the events that occurred in the city
of Al-Khalil are part of a whole, the most recent expression of a consistent pattern, the reflection of a deliberate
policy. The whole process of establishing settlementswhich has been declared null and void on many
occasions-is a policy designed to preempt the establishment of any national entity for the Palestinians and
to create the prelude to the realization of the Zionist
dogma of annexing and assimilating lands into so-called
Greater Israel.
-

At the invitation Of the President. Mr. Al-Sabbagh (Bahrain), Mr. Wasiuddin (Bangladesh), Mr. Houfane (Djibouti),
Mr. Mohammad (Irae). Mr. Burwin (Libyan Arab Jamahirzya), Mr. Ould Hamody (Mauritania), Mr. Ali (Oman),
Mr. Zowawi (Scudi Arabia), Mr. Ma&
(Somalia). Mr,
EIfki (Sudan) and Mr. L.essir (Tunisia) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
Members of the Council have before them document
S/15895, which contains the text of a .draft resolution
submitted by the following countries: Algeria, Bahrain,
Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritania, Morocco,
Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates and
Yemen.

11. Hence, when the Arabs have recourse to the Security Council as the supreme international
authority
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security, they do so out of respect for the United
Nations and because of their commitment to the Charter
of the United Nations, out of respect for international law
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and out
of respect for all the organs and institutions of the United
Nations, through which the Organization is endeavouring
to r&tore a just peace in the region And ‘throughout the

6. The first speaker is Mr. Cl&is Maksoud, permanent
observer of the League of Arab States, whom the Council
invited at its 2412th meeting in accordance with rule 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

world.

I2; Moreover, the Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States, at a meeting held with members of the
United Nations Secretariat about a month ago, affirmed
the firm resolve of the Arabs to encourage the United
Nations to seek more credibility for its resolutions, more
efficiency for its organs and more reliability for the Articles of the Charter. Hence, when the Arabs have recourse
to the Security Council and the United Nations, it is ,proof
of their commitment to principle; it is the expression of
their conviction, in addition to the expression of a need.
That is why the Arabs are most concerned about the credibility of the United Nations; they would like its resolutions, in particular those of the Council, to regain their
prestige and their effectiveness, so that no one can sav

7. Mr. MAKSOUD
(interpretation from Arabic): I am
honoured, Sir, to extend congratulations to you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month, not only because of your well-known wisdom and
your knowledge of details and the essence of things, but
also because the country you represent is for all of us one
of the friendly major Powers whose policies are characterized by independence and objectivity. We hope that relations between the Arab and French peoples will continue,
as always, to be marked by great -and deep friendship.
2
. .

that the Council’s resolutions have almost become dead
letters that are duly entered in legal annals but are not
applicable or viable. The credibility gap between the declarations of the United Nations and its actions was
brought about by Israel and the other racist entity, South
Africa, with a view to preventing the United Nations from
assuming its duties and performing its functions vis-ri-vis
the world and humanity by implementing its Charter and
resolutions.
13. It is truly painful to see a major Power, the United
States, on many occasioti condoning those who, like
Israel, are attempting to undermine tlie credibility ‘of the
United Nations and particularly the Security Council.
.One therefore wonders about the commitment
to the
spirit and letter of the law that the United States attempts
at -times to invoke, to the effect that the actions by the
Israeli settler-colonialists in Al-Khalil are an internal issue
and that the Israeli military and judicial authorities are
undertaking an ,investigation-as
though the arming of
those whom Israel calls (‘fanatics’* were not part and parcel of the Israeli settler entity in the West Bank, as though
the arming of those people had not been carried out by
licence issued by Israel itself, as though the weapons they
use against the innocent Palestinians were illegal in the
Israeli concept, as though they were insurgents against the
Israeli authorities and not in fact a complementary
weapon serving Israel’s expansionist aims in occupied
Palestine.
14. And SO we wonder, togethe; with the rest of the’
world,’ how those settlers can claim that they want to
settle in the Arab city of Al-Khalil on the basis that there
had once been J&s in Al-Khalil. If we applied this same
logic-and we are ready to apply it-it would be imperative for the people of Palestine who were displaced from
their cities-Haifa,
Jaffa, Lod, Acre and hundreds of’
other cities, towns and villages in Palestine-to
return,.
although there is no comparison between the legitimate
right of Palestinians to return to their cities, towns, and
villages and the fabricated right of persons to claim AlKhalil because they came from Brooklyn and other American cities-a “right” imposed through suppression and
occupation. By contrast, the right of the P@estinians to.
.return to their homeland, their cities, towns and villages
in all of Palestine is continuous, inherited and internationally recognized.
15. Hence, these spurious claims invoked by Israel
through the presence and proliferation of its settlements
are designed to pre-empt Palestinian national unity,
because Israel contests the right of the Palestinian people
to selfdetermination
on what is part of its own land and
country. ’
16. Documents abound-and
further evidence. and
proof emerge day after day-attesting
to- the violation by
the occupier Israel of the national, human and legal rights
of the Palestinian people.
17. The world grows more convinced daily that Israel’s
actions in the occupied territories are in contravention
of international law, in violation of Council resolutions,

a breach of the Charter and even a breach of the
declared demands of the United States, Israel’s only ally
in the area. How else can one explain the failure of the
United States to join in condemning Israel for its actions
that are anomalous under American law and in the context of declared United States policies? How can one
-explain that, whenever we come to the Council, the
United States says it is undertaking initiatives, whether
those of Camp David in the past, Reagan’s initiative-of
about a year ago, or other frequent initiatives designed.to
convince us of the non-viability of resort to the Council?
These initiatives have -been called “the only game in
town”: either acquiesce in this “game” or be prevented
from exercising any other diplomatic
and political
options.
18. Let us assume that we believe that United States
initiatives, since they are undertaken by a super-Power,
deserve our attention. and that they form part of our
policies. For the sake of argument, let us say that we
depend on the seriousness and viability of these initiatives. We did that by informing the United States that
President Reagan’s initiative’ was sufficiently worthy of
attention for us to acknowledge the rightness of some of
its features. We have repeatedly informed the ‘United
States that we have reservations concerning other
aspects of the Reagan initiative. We agreed, selectively,
to study the aspects of this initiative; but Begin and
Israel rejected it 24 hours after it was declared. What
was the result? Israel’s rejection of the Reagan initiative
has become part of the considerations borne in mind by
the United States Administration
in dealing with the
Middle East problem. Yet, the Arabs, at the Twelfth
Arab Summit Conference, held at Fez in November
1981 and September 1982, were prepared to make concessions and to hold a dialogue on this initiative. That
willingness, however, was interpreted as Arab reluctance
to deal seriously with .the United States. Such inverted
logic quickly led io even greater reservations on the part
of many Arabs because, although willing to depend on
the Reagan initiative and the authority of the United
States oyer Israel, they do’not want to be captives.
[The speaker spoke in English.]
Our betting on American initiatives should not and will
not ,,lead to our becoming
hostage to American
initiatives.
.
[The speaker continued in Arabic.]
19. When we look at this situation from the general
perspective; we find that th& United States;in the person
df its President, asked Israel to freeze the establishment
of settlements. It asked for a’freeze, although the former
United States position, often stated by President Carter
and Cyrus Vance, who was then Secretary of State, was’
that the Israeli settlements in the West Bank, Gaza, the
Golan Heights and elsewhere were illegal. There haS
been a change in the United States position for which
many justifications have been invoked.

20. It has been said that the Israeli settlements are
obstacles to peace. But is not every illegal action an
obstacle to the peace process? And is not every obstacle
to the peace process an illegal and illegitimate act?
21. Therefore, we acknowledge the goodwill of the
United States and declare that there is no difference
between President Carter’s description of the settlements as illegal and President Reagan’s comment that
those settlements constitute obstacles to peace. In both
cases we are mindful of our commitment
to international legitimacy; we consider that any impediment to
peace is illegal and that whatever is illegal and illegitimate obstructs the peace process.
22. What has happened? Instead of joining with the
international community in condemning Israel for estab
lishing these settlements, the United States refused to do
so, declaring that a condemnation of Israel or the imposition of sanctions would lead to certain tendencies in Israel
that would make it more intransigent ‘and more inclined
to defy the international will. The United States concluded by saying that Israel could be convinced to
acquiesce in the international will by granting it concessions rather than by punishing it.
23. Thus the exercise of the right of veto by the United
States and its threat of use of the veto has prevented
condemnation ,of Israel and the imposition of any deterrent sanctions against it. What is more, because of this
attitude, the resolutions of the Council continue to be
scorned and its credibility weakened. When the United
States differed with Israel on many occasions, especially
after the invasion of Lebanon, we believed that those differences could lead to an objective approach in United
States policy regarding the Middle East. We also believed
that Israel’s flagrant defiance of the declared policy of the
United States-the full independence and sovereignty of
Lebanon and the fact that settlements obstruct the peace
process-we believed that these official differences would
prompt the United States;in the interest of friendly relations with numerous Arab countries, to lessen its bias in
favour of Israel and its at times flagrant bias in favour of
Israel’s goals in the region.
24. Paradoxically, that difference of opinion was known
to Israel, which reacted to it in an exaggerated fashion,
claiming that that difference constituted a threat to
American-Israeli relations, that Israel was going through
the most critical phase of its relations with the United
States, and that there was a danger that the United States
had started to weaken its traditional and special relations
with Israel. Some believed those claims, and many of us
wanted to believe that this prospect was true to some
extent. Yet, what happened? The United States Congress
approved more assistance for Israel, assistance that
exceeded the request of the United States Administration
itself. We said that the Congress was influenced by factors
to which the United States Administration
may not be
subjected. We hoped that that difference of attitude
between the legislative and the executive branches would
lead the United States to take into account its relations
with the Arab world and its interests in the region.

25. American nublic oninion started to realize the truth
about Israel and its reai intentions. We felt this develop
ment in numerous sectors of public opinion, to such an
extent that one black leader said metaphorically, in describing the suftering of blacks, that sometimes they feel
like the people in the West Bank. That may be an exaggeration, but the fact that that reference was made shows
that large sectors of American public opinion have started
to realize the truth about Israel.
26. We also said that, in its many endeavours in the
context of the Middle East, the United States Government paid attention to its friends. But we found that the
United States began to reconsider the difference of opinion out of its belief that its past differences with Israel
would remain in our memory and that any return to special relations between the United States and Israel would
be forgotten by us-that previous differences would be
remembered, and the establishment of special relations in
the past would be overlooked by the Arabs. How long
shall we remain in this dilemma?
27. If we come to the United Nations and the Council,
we are told: “You are devaluing the United Nations.”
When we repeatedly come to the United Nations, we are
told such recourse diminishes the prestige of the Council.
But if we do not resort to the Council, then to whom or to
what shall we resort? Shall we resort to the United States
initiative, which was stalled as soon as it was declared?
We were told that President Reagan was personally
involved and that the United States Government .could
not prevent the establishment of a single settlement. It did
not even hint to Israel that if it continued to establish
settlements, it might halt the flow of military assistance to
it. If we do not resort to the Council, to international
public opinion, if we can expect nothing from American
initiatives, to whom or to what shall we resort?
28. We are told that the balance of military power still
favours Israel. For how long? Do we want to be forced to
resort to a military option while continuing to legitimize
diplomatic and political options? The answer lies in the
Council and in the collective will to deter Israel from
persisting in violating the Council’s resolutions and the
principles of the Charter.
29. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Kuwait. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
30. Mr. ABULHASSAN
(Kuwait) (interpretation from
Arabic): On behalf of the delegation of Kuwait, I have
the pleasure of congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency for this month. We look forward to your
wise guidance of the affairs of the Council, for your
wisdom and ability are well known. You also represent a
friendly country with weight and influence in intemational politics in general and in the Middle East question
in particular.
31. I also wish to express our gratitude for the skilful
and just manner in which your predecessor, the repre-

sentative of the People’s Republic of China, conducted
the affairs of the Council last month.
32. Once again we meet here not to confront a new
Israeli policy or a new Israeli position but to face
another in the series of abominable crimes that now
collectively constitute the backbone of the racist Zionist
entity implanted in the Arab territory of Palestine. The
crime to which we refer is the act of aggression committed by armed Israelis, in full view of the Israeli Government, against the Islamic University in the town of
Al-Khalil on 19 July, which led to the death of 3 students and injury to over 40.
33. The policy of oppression and terror practised by
Israel in all the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories
is, in our opinion, the immediate result of the continued
occupation of those territories, as well as of Israel’s challenge to international values, convenants and will. The
ultimate goal of all. those Israeli policies is the realization
of so-called Greater Israel.
34. It is shameful to see Israel commit all its aggressive
acts under the pretext of what it calls security. We wonder
what security this is that knows no limits. What security is
this that denies the peace and security of the legitimate
owners of those territories and the peace and security.,of
neighbouring countries?
35. Thanks especially to the Council, the whole world is
convinced of the falseness of the claims of security which
Israel invokes to protect itself and real&
that Israel’s
ultimate goal is the elimination of the Palestinian people
through physical liquidation, the pursuit of that people
wherever they may be, the despoiling of their lands and
the establishment of Israeli settlements on their lands.
36. Kuwait believes that Israel’s policy, of establishing
settlements represents the comer-stone of an ultimate
goal that would make the annexation of the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip a fait accompli.

authorization of the Government. If the purpose of carrying arms is self-defence, as claimed by the Israeli Chief of
Staff, General Moshe Levi, who refused to disarm the
settlers to put an end to the cycle of violence and counterviolence, then this matter raises real doubts about this
country armed to the teeth, incapable of protecting its
citizens and therefore forced to permit them to carry arms
to defend themselves instead of assuming that responsibility itself.
39. The crimes committed by those settlers in the West
Bank and Gaza Strip have been openly repeated, as
evidenced by the criminal attacks on the mayors of Nablus, Ramallah and Al Bireh. Anyone who believes that
Israel will one day reveal the identity of the perpetrators
of those crimes must be a simpleton who cannot conceptualize the true nature of the sick, conspiratorial Israeli
mentality. The report by the Israeli Ministry of Justice,
known as the report of the Karp Commission, confirmed
that the efforts of the police investigating crimes committed by Jewish settlers in the occupied territories are
always hampered by two main considerations: first, the
ambiguity surrounding the authority of the police with
regard to the Jewish settlers in the occupied territories
and, secondly, political interference by the Israeli Government itself.
40. Kuwait calls upon the Council to reaffirm its previous resolutions with regard to the illegality of the
Israeli settlements in the occupied territories and to
exert new efforts to compel Israel to respect the Council’s relevant resolutions.
41. The Palestinians have suffered tremendous horrors
under the pressure of the tyrannical Israeli occupation,
which history will record as one of their darkest periods.
The Palestinian people have struggled and are still strug-,
gling to regain their usurped rights.
42. The Palestinian people, which placed their trust in
this international Organization, call upon the Council to
shoulder the responsibilities entrusted to it by the Charter of the United Nations and to save them from the
barbaric practices to which they are subjected, whether
those practices are in the form of attempts to obliterate
the identity and character of the Palestinian people or
attempts to usurp their land and property and to settle
alien racist groups on their land.

37. The Council has unequivocally expressed itself on
the illegitimacy of Israel’s settlements policy in resolutions
252 (1968) and 465 (1980). Those two resolutions confirm
that all Israeli measures aimed at changing the physical
character, demographic composition, institutional structure or status of the Palestinian and other Arab territories
occupied since 1967, including Al-Quds, have no legal
validity and that Israel’s settlements policy constitutes a
blatant violation of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12
August 1949,2 and a serious obstacle to the achievement
-of peace in the Middle East.

43. The Council must compel Israel to respect the
international
covenants which oblige it to protect the
lives of civilians in the occupied territories and not to
make any changes in the demographic nature and legal
status of the occupied territories.

38. Israel was not merely content with the establishment
of settlements and the importation of tens of thousands of
I the world’s Jews to settle in them; it also implanted armed
bands among the settlers in the West Bank and Gaza, and
there is an understanding and co-ordination between
those bands and the Israeli Government. All the Jewish
settlers in the West Bank and Gaza carry arms, with the

44. Above all, the Council is required to put an end to
the Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories
and to give the oppressed Palestinian people the opportunity to exercise their legitimate and inalienable rights,
including the right to self-determination,
the right to
return to their homeland and the right to establish their
own State on their own soil under the leadership of the

PLO, the sole. legitimate
tinian people.

___
_‘_
.__
,
-,
_’

.representative
,’

of the Pales-

45. Kuwait believes that the countries which provide
Israel with economic and military assistance and moral
support, in spite of its colonialist settler policies which.
have been unanimously and universally condemned, are
in fact encouraging this country, an enemy of peace, to.
persist in its hostility towards peace and in its disdain for
all international laws, values and covenants. My delegation calls upon those countries, foremost among thein the
United States, to ceasi supporting this cohntry that,trampies on human values and, inore important, to stop put-:
ting obstacles in the Council’s way, so that it may ‘carry
out its mandate by condemning this lawless. country and
imposing dn.it the appropriate’ sanctions.

determination provided fdr in the Covenant of the League
of Nations. The criminals of today are the successors of
those who violated Arab rights and shed Arab blood at
the time. It is as though the elimination
of the Arab
national entity were a legitimate legal basis in the service
of the interests of colonialism.
51. The organic relationship and alliance between zionism, on the .one hand, and the colonialist States, on the
other, before, during and after the First World War were
but a means to control the destiny of the Arab nation, to
‘dismember it and to abort its aspirations.

52. Let US speak facts: the Council committed a historic mistake when it rushed into recomminding
the
admission of Israel to the United Nations.. Today, we
and the majbrity of the members of the Council are paying the price for that mistrike, into which the Council was’
46. In calling on the Council .to look into ihe recent
led by Western colonialism. Since 1948, the Middle East
developments, the Arab countries have once again demhas been a hotbed of danger to international peace and
onstrated their belief and trust in the United N&ions,
security. There are attempts to destroy our countries, the
particularly in the Council, and their reliance on it to
cradle of world civilization, thrqugh the establishment of
resolve the question of Palestine and to settle the &nflict
an expansionist racist entity that goes against the logic of
in the Middle E&t. Any .failure by the United Nations to
history. We believe that the international rtgime which we
act will have serious effects on its credibility and on the
estabKshed, and on whose ‘Charter we ,agreed with good
trust of the world’s people in ,it.
will in order to end war, z@gression and colonialism and
47. The PRESIDENT
(i&rpreta&
from Fiench): The ’ to .enable peoplei to exercise their right to self.determination, is threatened with collapse if the Council
next speaker is the representative ‘of the $rian Arab
rdoes nqt shtiulder its responsibilities and carry out its
Republic. I invite him to take.a place at the Council table
duties.‘Here I am addressing the members of the Council.
and to make his statement.
,..
We have entrusted you with the sole responsibility for the
maintenance
of international peace and security;. but time
48. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic) (interprehas proved that the Council often falls short of what is
tation from Arabic): At the outset, Mr. President, I should
expected of it by the peoples, especially the Arab people.like to extend to you our hearty congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency for this month. I am certain
that your wisdom and wide experience and the prominent
53. The United States was the willing heir of colonialism
place occupied by your country in the Arab homeland
and has sought to perpetuate, encourage and expand it,
must help the .Council to carry out its functions in a’
arid tie corisider that that country bkars primary responsimanner consistent with the &al interests of the internability for unqermining the effectiveness of ihe Counbil and
tional community. Your presidency, Sir, has a special sigpreventing it from carrying out its basic duty. By way of
nificance. You know oui region quite well, It is going ’ example, I would note that thiS inajoi Power has declared
through an extremely difficult ,.period in its ,. history
once niore, through its President, that the establishment
because of. policies of aggression, hegemony ‘and foreign, - of Israeli settlements oh our occupied territories is not
occupation. The people of France, resisted nazism, and we
illegitimate. President Reagan answered’a’question posed
take this opportunity to congratulate them on their resistby 41 Bloom, correspondent for the Pittsburgh Jewish
ance when the Nazis occupied their country. The issue
chronicle,, as to whether he, thought that the settlements
before the Council needs your wisdom, your sense of jusconstitute.an’bbstacle
to peace by saying, as reported in
tice and your far-sightedness. You arti eminently qualified ’ The’.waslfingfon Post on 20 June: “No, I don’t. I really
for your function. + : ‘1. (.
.
don’t.“*
:
49. I should like, Sir, to express our highest esteem for ’ ‘54. .Is not that United States position in flagrant violayour predecessor, Mr. Ling Qing, and for his great coun- ,. tion of the commitments entered into by the United States
try and people, which have consistently contributed to
Govemtient under the Charter.of the United Nations and
world civilization and which take a firm stand of principle
the norms of international law, specially the commiton the side of struggling peoples.
‘merits of the U&d
States under the Geneva Convention
,,
.
,.’
‘. relative’to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949?2 The United States violated that
50. -As others have said, thk crimes recently committid
against the population of Hebron are not isolated’events,
convention in Viet Nam and is now violating it in several
othei places.
but are ‘part and parcel of a delibeiate Zionist scheme
dating back to -1897. That scheme was protected by cola:
nialism, which even conse?rated it and included it in the
Mandate over .Palestine, ,thus violating the right to self*Quoted in Ehglish by the speaker.

,

55. What is the meaning of the establishment of settlements on Arab territory? The Council must understand
the significance of the establishment of those settlements:
it means seizing Arab lands and depriving their populations of their livelihood; it means depriving them of drinking water and water for irrigation; it means imposing a
regime of poverty, squalour and slavery. All of that is
intended to force them to abandon their lands and go into
exile.
..

the Council, official Israeli circles and their mouthpieces
in the United States are vigorously striving to absolve the
ruling classes in Israel of responsibility for the crimes of
the settlers in Jerusalem, Nablus, Al-Khalil, the Golan
Heights and elsewhere. Those circles claim that a distinction must be drawn between the bloody settlers and the
Israeli Government, headed by Begin, who is suffering
from melancholia-or,
to put it more simply, from a nerl
vous breakdown.

56.. Early in this century, did not Herzl plan what is
happening today when he wrote in his journal, in ,1904,
that the settlers must uproot the indigenous populations
and cast them across the desert, except for a minority to
be employed in killing poisonous snakes? Herzl’s Zionist
successors -are implementing
his colonialist scheme one
phase after another. Nowadays we hear fevered Zionist
voices, like that of the Minister of the Interior of the
Zionist entity, who brazenly stated, as reported in The
New York Times on 11 July: “We have to understand the
right for Jews to live in Hebron for me as a person is
above discussion. No Jew can be forbidden to settle in
any place in Israel.*‘*

60. Actually, each settler in Israel is keen on implementing the official settlements policy on which Israel
has been based since its beginning as a racist, colonialist,
expansionist entity. Each settler, male or female, considers guarding the usurped properties a bounden duty and
views the uprooting or.murder of an Arab as a constructive step on the road to so-called liberation. Should the
representative of Israel so desire, he can speak here and
respond; but not laugh. His American colleague once
laughed in this chamber and we responded to him and we
are ready to respond to him again, because for this to
happen under your presidency, Sir, is an affront to all of
us. That i’s what is happening today in the Arab city of
Al-Khalil,
but neither the Americans nor other eyewitnesses are deceived by this Zionist strategy. As Daniel
Gavron wrote from Al-Khalil in The Wail Street Journal
of 27 July: “And the settlers know they have the support
of the Begin government, which is committed to rebuilding the ancient Jewish neighbourhood
in the heart of
Hebron.*‘*
Faced with all this evidence, Washington
might perhaps issue the following judgement: “Israel is
innocent by reason of insanity.‘**

57. The New York Times, which is described as “respectable”, published an article by the terrorist rabbi, Meir
Kahane, thus allowing him to poison the ndive minds of
the American public with fascist opinions embodying an
outrageous racist dogma and to instigate a continuous
war against the Arabs. The last paragraph of that article
reads as follows: “For the sake of survival, let us carry out
the second stage: the removal of the Arabs from the Land
of Israel to their own Arab land.“*

.

58 That is no mere wishful thinking: the terrorist
Kahane, who assumes the guise of a man of the cloth and
who practices terrorism in Israel and in the United States
itself, goes from one American university to another training American students in the use of arms and exhorting
them to participate in the crime of settling in Palestine
and in the Golan Heights. What Kahane, with his dual
Israeli-American citizenship, represents is no isolated phenomenon. Those who murder the children of Al-Khalil
and who usurp the land and desecrate the holy places
there belong to the same school as Begin, Sharon, Shamir,
Arens and Kahane. Those men have carried out brainwashing and have filled minds with hatred, spite and
criminal ideas. Not even the minds of women-of
mothers-have
been saved from this epidemic of Arabhatred propagated by Zionism. The New York Times, that
“respectable*’ paper, on 12 July quoted an Americanborn mother who was settled by force in Al-Khalil and
who urged that the Arabs be kicked out of the holy city,
saying: “To tell the truth, we want them to leave. And if
they stay, they have to accept that this is a Jewish country,
not an Arab one. They will have to accept being ruled by
us:‘*
59. As has been stated by Mr. Clovis Maksoud, of the
League of Arab States, and by a number of speakers in
* Quoted in English by the speaker.

61. Israel’s designs extend from the Nile to the Euphrates. This is well known and declared; and Israel seeks
achievement of its objective especially by fanning ‘antiSemitism in the United States in the hope of prompting
Jews to emigrate to our region and to, obtain through
blackmail greater financial resources and political advantages so as to expand and support the Zionist settler
movement, All of this is accompanied by a psychological
campaign. to silence any voice raised, ,against the blackmail, be it moral or material. John Oakes, former editor
of The New York Tities, in a rebuke to the Zionist mayor
of New York, Mr. Ed Koch, wrote in that newspaper on
a..
21 June:
.
“The Mayor, along with a good many other selfanointed spokesmen for the .American Jewish community, is pursuing a dangerously divisive. course-in
effect differentiating the obligations of citizenship of
American Jews from those of other Americans-by
‘this kind of McCarthyesque rhetoric.“*
’
62. Zionist settler colonialism in the Syrian Arab Golan
Heights increases day by day, but in spite of Israeli
oppression and terrorism the inhabitants of the Golan
Heights reject Israeli identity and, as I have previously
mentioned in the Council, are deprived of their civil rights
if they do not acquiesce to Israeli demands. Reports from
the region, where foreign journalists are restricted by that
“island of democracy”. in our midst-a
restriction that
extends to Israeli journalists-affirm
that arrests and

police raids are continuing because of fierce resistance to
settler schemes and the diversion of water resources
through a network of dams to irrigate the Israeli settlements in the Golan Heights. Those settlements now
number 35; the occupation authorities plan to settle
20,000 Israelis in the Golan Heights over a period of five
years, most of whom may be Americans.

_‘,
,-_
,_,
T’,
,‘_
;_
‘_‘_
,‘_
,‘,
_‘,

Israel-financial,
milit&
and political. American financial
support is not confined to the officially declared astounding
sum of $2.5 billion per annum: it has exceeded $10 billion
per annum, according to inforniation published by the
United States Government’s General Accounting Office. In
spite of the censorship practised in this super-democracy in
which we live, in spite of the censorship toconceal the truth,
the report from that office shows that there is no other
foreign Stale that has been treated with the same generosity
that 3 million Jews living on usurped lands in Palestine and
-in the Syrian Golan Heights have enjoyed. Israel’s per
CapiEa share of official and unofficial assistance from the
United States has reached $2,900 per annum. That is equivalent to the per capita income in some relatively developed
States, or to 12 times the wages of workers in the third
world, especially those in underdeveloped countries.
According to published information, the United States has
undertaken recently to meet in full the expenses of the war
waged by Israel against Lebanon, a war which was designed
to destroy Lebanon, its people and its infrastructure. An
article by Joseph Harsch in The Christian Science Monitor
of 14 July expresses the bitterness the American taxpayer
has come to feel-and I hope there are American taxpayers
in our midst-at a time when his rich country is suffering an
acute economic crisis accompanied by unprecedented levels
of unemployment.

63. In spite of all the acts of oppression by the occupation authorities, including the curfew, which lasts for days
on end, our citizens are committed to the national charter
that was endorsed in Majdal Shams, in the Golan
Heights, on 25 March 1981. The mayor of Majdal Shams
stated on 6 January 1983 that: “We have been pressured
by the occupation authorities to carry Israeli identity
cards, but we carry only hatred for them in our hearts.”
64. The Israeli authorities have ‘foreclosed every working opportunity for all those who reject Israeli identity,
but the people of the Golan Heights who were forcibly
evacuated during the 1967 war are prohibited from returning to their homeland despite the Council’s unanimously
adopted resolution 237 (1967), which has year after year
been reaffirmed in the General Assembly and other international bodies.
’
65. The Israeli authorities act in the Golan Heights in
accordance with the concept of innexation, which the
Council has declared null and void in resolution 497
(198 I), a resolution which Israel rejected at the same meeting in which it was urianimously adopted. During past
sessions of the General Assembly, resolutions were
adopted calling upon Israel to revoke its annexation. But
Israel, supported by its ally the United States, failed to
implement any resolution and instead accelerated the
establishment of settlements and intensified its terrorist
practices to the point of preventing students from attending Syrian universities or enrolling in universities in the
occupied Arab territories if they refused Israeli identity.

69. Another reason behind Israel’s growing arrogance
is the sophisticated weapons granted by Washington to
its base, Israel. The United States Secretary of Defence,
Mr. Weinberger, has described Israel as a land-based
carrier that cannot be sunk. He went even further when
he explained Israel’s role in the service of United States
interests in the following words:
“The United States is bound to Israel-by strategic
interests. The United States is bound to Israel by a
common
heritage of freedom and a pioneering
spirit.‘**
70. Yes, it is called “a pioneering spirit”. Where is the
indigenous population of the United States? What has
become of it? It has been slaughtered, murdered and
displaced; it is now imprisoned on so-called reservations. Those are the values of “freedom and a pioneering
spirit”; and that is what is also happening in Israel,
where the PaIestinian ,race is being annihilated by this
heritage of “freedom” and this “pioneering spirit’*.

66. It is truly regrettable that the Council has failed to
take the specific mandatoj
action provided for in Chap
ter VII of the Charter of thi United Nations to force Israei
to revoke its annexation of the Golan Heights. This has
served to encourage the terrorist leaders of Israel to continue Judaizing the Palestinian and Syrian ‘occupied territories, including Jerusalem, the city of cities. Israel’s
‘defiance of the Arab people and the United Nations, especially the Security Council, was expressed by the terrorist Begin on 17 April, on the occasion of the celebration of
so-called‘indeljendence, when he said “our settlements are
not an impediment to peace but, rather, as I said,.they are
a prerequisite for peace”.

71. The Secretary of Defence of this super-Power, not
confining himself to praising Israel and reassuring
American zionisti, went so far as to acquiesce to that
minority which controls the future and destiny of the
American people, when on 13 May he said befoie the
American Jewish Committee:

67. I leave it to the Council to draw its own conclusions
concerning ,the significance of that policy and its aims; it
will end by bringing the world to the brink of disaster.

“No one should question anyone’s strong support of
Israel as being ‘dual loyalty*. Freedom is not easily divisible, and suppoit for Israel’s security is support for our
own security.“*

68. Israel’s arrogance in-realizing its expansionist designs
is linked to important factors which we have already mentioned iti the Council and which we will repeat today. Foremost among them is Washington’s unlimited support for

*Quoted

8
-.
*

.-

in English by the speaker.

and to enable the people of Palestine to exercise its inalienable right to. self-determination and the establishment of
an independent State on its national soil, under the ieadership of the PLO. Our people, like ail the peoples represented in the Council, is struggling to put an end to
occupation and aggression by virture of our natural right
to self-defence. Our Arab nation will never relinquish this
right, regardless of the passage of time and the sacrifices
involved.

The United States considers that the road to world security and to its own security is through the security of
Israel.
72. Canuot a direct relationship be found between this
official United States position and Begin’s statement of
3 May? Begin said-and
the Council will notice the
closeness of the dates on which these two statements were
made:
.

77. We hope that the United States will finally understand, that the rights of our people cannot be bartered
away, that we will never be protectors of United States
interests and that attempts at hegemony and domination
in certain regions will fail because of .the consciousness of our nation and its commitment
to its history,
heritage, land and values. The- manoeuvres of the rapid
deployment forces to be conducted soon in our Arab
region-manoeuvres
in which Israel will, of course, be
participating-will
not weaken the will of our people. We
consider such .a flexing of muscles an actual threat
directed against us; but it will not intimidate us or discourage us from striving to achieve our national goals, foremost among which is the regaining of our usurped rights.
We are confident that the Arab masses and the masses of
liberated peoples ail over the world stand in one trench
against the threat of aggression.
-*
78. Mr. LING ,Qing (China) @z?~rpretutiun fro& Chinese): At the outset, please allow ,me, on behalf of the
Chinese delegation, warmly to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency for the month of
August. We are convinced that your wisdom and dipiomatic skill are a strong -assurance that the Council will
successfully discharge its duties this month.

“The Jewish government will act to strengthen settlements, to expand and consolidate them. . .
“In future negotiations for the signing of a peace
treaty between Israel and its neighbours, any proposal for the removal or evacuation of Jewish settlements will be rejected.“*

73. And yet, in spite of all that, Begin is suffering from
melancholy and nervous depression. Melancholy has
become the illness which has afflicted that Israeli official
because he does not want to return the occupied Arab
territories. The failure to return those territories should
lead to melancholy, not vice versa.
74. Do we still wonder about the source of this arrogance by Israel? The rewarding of the aggressor with
tools of death and destruction such as F-16 aircraft that
are once again pouring into Israel, enabling it through
the revived strategic alliance to control the fate of our
nation, our wealth and our strategic location: that is the
source of its arrogance. As for United States political support of Israel, suffice it to recall that you have seen in the
Council how the United States prevented the implementation of unanimously adopted resolutions condemning the
establishment of settlements the annexation of Jerusalem
and its proclamation as Israel’s capital. The Council, also
unanimously, in resolution 497 (1981), called on Israel to
rescind its annexation of the Golan Heights. The United
States has also prevented the implementation
of resoiutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982), which demand the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of Israel ‘from
Lebanese territory to the internationally recogxiized boundaries of Lebanon.

79. The fact that the Council has held numerous meetings to consider the situation in the occupied Arab territories amply demonstrates the concern of the international
community over the situation in that region. However, in
spite of this fact, there have been recurrent incidents of
Israeli violation of the inalienable rights of the Arab and
Palestinian people in the occupied Arab territories.

75. The Syrian Arab Republic would like once again to
urge the Council to shoulder its responsibility for impiementing its resolutions. International peace and security
are truly jeopardized. Owing to United States policy, the
Council has become a rostrum for rhetoric. My colleague
from Jordan shares that view. Tlie Council has become a
rostrum for rhetoric and not a place for effective intemationai action; however, at one time peoples and States
placed full confidence in the Council’s ability to prevent
wars and eliminate aggression.
76. We call upon the United States to enable the Council to take effective steps, in accordance with Chapter VII
of the Charter, to ensure the unconditional withdrawal of
the aggressors from ail of the occupied Arab territories

80. Recently, the Israeli authorities decided, in spite of
the strong opposition of the Arab people, to establish a
settlement in downtown Al-Khalil. This illegal decision
has further aggravated the tension in that region.
81. On 7 July, a large-scale attack on Arab civilians
occurred in Al-KhaiiI. Roughly 90 per cent of the stalls
operated by Arabs in that city’s market were burnt down
by arsonists, and acting Mayor Mustapha Al-Natshe was
dismissed by the Israeli authorities without cause.
I
82. On 26 July, a band of armed Israeli settlers organized a raid on the Islamic. University in Al-Khaiil and
indiscriminately
machine-gunned students, faculty and
staff members, inflicting heavy casualties. To this day, the
Israeli authorities are still sending military and police reinforcements to step up their suppression of the unarmed

* Quoted in English by the speaker.

.9

.

and defenceless Palestinian and Arab inhabitants.
grave situation is still in the process of unfolding.

This

demands a clear and unequivocal response. from the
Council. The Council should strongly condemn the Israeli
authorities for engineering the incidents in Al-Khalil, stop
all expansionist activities in the occupied territories and
compel Israel to withdraw from all Arab territories occupied since 1967 in order to promote a just and comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question.

83. The representatives of Arab countries and the representative of the PLO have revealed numerous facts which
eloquently show that the terrorist tactics. used by the
Israeli authorities in this instance to persccute‘the indigenous inhabitants are entirely premeditated with the
express aim of changing the demographic composition so
as to legitimize the Israeli settlement scheme.

90.‘. The‘ PRESIDENT
(inferpretation from F&&z): The
next speaker is the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

84. One recalls that the Israeli authorities have unapolOgetically and openly declared their intention to settle
400,000 Israelis in the West Bank in the next five years
and 1.4 million in the next 30 years. The Israeli intention
to annex the occupied Arab territories in the West Bank is
clear as day, and Israel cannot shirk responsibility for this
latest tragedy.
’

91. Mr. RAJAIE-KHORASSANI
(Islamic Republic of
Iran): In the name of God the Compassionate, the Merciful, I take refuge in God from Satan the Accursed.
“Whom God doth guide,-he is on the right path:
whom He rejects from His- guidance,-such
are the
persons who perish.
^.

85. Israel’s wanton crimes of oppression and persecution against the .Palestinian Arab people are not only in
flagrant violation of the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12
August I949,2 but are aiso
an open defiance of resolutions
of the Council.
.

“Many are the Jinns and men We. have made for
Hell: they have hearts wherewith they understand not,
eyes wherewith they see not, and ears wherewith they
hear not. They are like cattle,-nay
more misguided:
for they are heedless (of warning).

86. The Council has on numerous occasions adopted
resolutions explicitly calling on Israel immediately to
cease any action that may change the legal status, physical
character and demographic composition of the Arab and
Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, and to guarantee the welfare- and human rights of
the inhabitants of the. occupied territories. However, in
disregard of those resolutions, the Israeli authorities have
created more” incidents in annexing occupied Arab
territories.

“The most beautiful names -belong to God: so call
on him by them; but shun such men as use profanity in
His names: for what they do, they will soon be
.;
requited.
“Of those We have created are people who direct
(others) with truth. And dispense justice therewith.
“Those who reject Our Signs, We shall gradually
visit with punishment, in ways they perceive .not.“3*

87. _Israel’s policy of aggression and expansion has
further jeopardized peace and security in the region and in
the world at large. In the past 30 years, the Palestinian
people have endured untold sufferings Millions of Paiestinians have been forced from their homeland and thousands have lost their lives. However, the heroic Palestinian
people, under the leadership of the PLO, their sole legitimate representative, have carried out anunremittingstruggle to realize their sacred aspirations to recover their
homeland and establish their own independent State. They
have .won the sympathy and support of the international
community.~

92. As my entire message is based on and developed
according to the Holy Koran, it. is most appropriate if I
address myself from this platform primarily to all Mushms of the world who are represented, or probably misrepresented, in this international body and then to the
Security Council, not with respect to what it is but in
honour of,‘.) what it should be. ,,
93. I, shall proceed in the hght of Koranic wisdom in
order to expose the roots of today’s problem, the problem
of Palestine, a problem that, thanks to zionism and imperialism, is the greatest tragedy of our time. I pray to Allah
that these Koranic verses may revive the divine light in the
hearts of my once-committed Muslim brothers who have
regrettably degraded themselves to pasture in the poisonous’ green land of secularism. As for the non-Muslim
audience, I hope the verses can be taken as a passage
through some of the moral and spiritual codes of Islam
and their implications in terms of international issues. Let
us’hope that the passage may-also ignite in their hearts a
healthy interest in divine faiths in general and in Islam in
particular.

88. The Chinese Government has always opposed the
crimes and illegal activities carried out by the Israeli
authontres in the occupied Arab and Palestinian ter&oties, has strongly condemned the aggressive and expansionist policy of the Israeli authorities in Jerusalem, the
West Bank, Gaza and the Golan Heights and has resolutely supported the just struggle of the Arab countries
‘and the Palestinian people to recover lost territories and
‘to regain national rights.
.’

..

j 89. The Chinese delegation is of the view that the grave
and worsening situation in the occupied Arab territories

*Quoted

10

in Arabic by the speaker.

94. I ,shall therefore elaborate upon the verses I just
*cited; and begin with: In the,name of God the Compassionate, the MercifuI, I take refuge in God from Satan
the Accursed.

hear not. They are like cattle,-nay more misguided:
for they are heedless (of warning).”
Some remain so blind, deaf and dumb that they are sinking into an ocean of garbage; yet they gluttonously swallow more of it.

“Whom God doth guide,-he is on the right path:
whom He rejects from His guidance,-such
are the
persons who perish.”

97. There was a time when those who have signed a
peace treaty with the Zionist enemy prayed only to God,
feared no one but God and sought help only from God,
as they repeated every day in their prayers: “It is YOU
we worship and it is You we ask for help.” In those
days, they were supreme. As the blessings of those prayers
were forgotten, they began to obey anyone but God, particularly the Great Satan. They surrendered either to
American or to Russian materialism.
Consequently,
they proudly enjoyed the humiliation of the Camp David
acbords. They lost sensitivity to the painful and expanding dirty boil of Zionism that has been implanted in the
bottom of their beloved Palestine by the imperialist
Powers.

95. Ever since the Muslim people emptied their hearts
of the divine light and departed from divine guidance,
they have been losing substantially. They forgot their
Islamic identity and thus they became tolerant of colonialism and imperialism. They forgot the Koranic guidance-that reads, in sura III, verse 103:
“And hold fast, all together, by the Rope which God
(stretches out for you), and be not divided among yourselves; and remember with gratitude God’s favour on
you; for ye were enemies and He joined your hearts in
love, so that by His Grace, ye became brethren; and ye
were on the brink of the Pit of Fire, and He saved you
from it. Thus doth God make His Signs clear to you:
that ye may be guided.”

98. King Hussein of Jordan, who is now longing for a
peace treaty with the Zionist entity, was once proud of his
Hashemite ancestry. The Saudi .monarchy, which is now
proud of mimicking the criminal Shah of Iran, humbly
obedient to the United States and Zionist agents and
heretically preventing Muslims from making their pilgrimage, was once proud of pretending to be the gateman of
the House of God and serving the pilgrims. And those
who are zealously awaiting a tamed, defenceless Palestinian quarter in the West Bank, to be called President
Reagan’s Palestinian State, were once the noble citizens of
the blessed land Barak ria Houlahu. They, as well as many
Muslim rulers all over the world, have totally forgotten
sura XVII, verse 1:

They forgot this guidance and ignorantly accepted the
satanic Zionist principle of nationalism all over the Muslim world. They were split up and dispersed into many
small units-kingdoms,
sheikhdoms and tigure-headdams, each fighting the other over where to draw the line
that the mandatory Powers, the satanic Powers, had given
them as national boundaries.
96. Some went so far in their secular and nationalistic
perversion as blatantly to fight to eradicate all elements of
faith in God in favour of proud servility to some grand or
petty satanic Powers. They lost Palestine because they
neglected their duties that stem from sura II, verse 114:

“Glory to (God) who did take His Servant for a
Journey by night from the Sacred Mosque to the
Farthest Mosque, whose precincts We did bless,-in
order that We might show him some of Our Signs: for
‘He is the One Who heareth and seeth (all things).”

“And who is more unjust than he who forbids that
in places for the worship of God, God’s name should
be celebrated?-whose zeal is (in fact) to ruin them? It
was not ,fitting that such should themselves enter them
except in fear. For them there is nothing but disgrace in
this world, and in the world to come, an exceeding
torment.”

They all have become so alienated-as a matter of fact,
we all have become so alienated-and
metamorphosed
that when a group tired of communism, capitalism and
the dirty Shah of westemism intends to retire back to its
homeland of Islam, they all attack like cannibal wolves to
smother anyone who raises the cry of “Allah-o-Akbar.”
Why7 It is simply because, as sura III, verse 14, says:

And the ignominy and the awful doom are that, having
forgotten our duties stemming from that verse, the more
playfully and irresponsibly we Muslims reacted to the
occupation, the more we lost. The Muslim world has been
so impregnated by the filth of blasphemy and secularism
that we not only lost Palestine and all our natural, -economic, human and cultural resources, but even the very
sense of feeling the pain of all that great loss, It is in this
context that the following verse becomes very relevant
and revealing:

“Fair in the eyes of men is the love of things they
covet: women and sons; heaped-up hoards of gold and
silver; horses branded (for blood and excellence); and
(wealth of) cattle and well-tilled land. Such are the possessions of this world’s life; but in nearness to God is
the best of the goals (to return to).”
99. Some gunmen at the University in Hebron killed 3
people and injured 33 others. Zionist soldiers opened fire
on the demonstrators and killed a woman. The Zionist
usurpers are still building more settlements in the West

!‘Many are the Jinns and men We have made for
Hell: they have hearts wherewith they understand not,
eyes wherewith they see not; and ears wherewith they
11

Bank. The ,United States, without whose support the
Zionist base in the Middle East cannot survive for a
moment, is also the close friend of some Arab rulers, who
are longing for a peace treaty with the Zionist enemy, but
who are fortunately still afraid of their own unarmed
people. Of course, the Zionists kill and destroy. They
never claim to be guests who are kind to the host. They
have always been intruders, aggressors and usurpers who
have been killing and destroying from the very beginning.

and their international club. Please do not bank on this
club too much. It is nothing and nothing comes of
nothing.
104. Palestine can be liberated only if the problem of
Palestine is understood and tackled in the light of, and on
the basis of, divine, just principles. The occupation of
Palestine is not the cause of the tragedy; it is the effect of a
more fundamental occupation, the occupation of the
entire hearts and minds of the Muslims by secular, materialist and mundane values. Unless we purify ourselves of
this mundane, modem jahiliya, we are not liberated, and
hence we cannot liberate anything. Those who want to
help the people of Hebron or who wish to liberate Palestine should well remember the solution.

100. It is under such circumstances that the Council is
meeting today. Please tell us: we meet to do what? Who
are some of the members of the Council? The meeting of
the Council after the massacres of Sabra and Shatila
[2396th meeting] was very crowded. There was even an
emergency special session of the General Assembly.
What happened then? Of course, there are others besides
my delegation who have the guts to tell the truth, and I
am so pleased to see that others are criticizing the Council
or looking at it more realistically. It is nice to hear many
more voices expressing the impotence of the Council in
the implementation
of the Charter of the United Nations.
But, since its inception, the Council has never promised
to be any different or better than it is now. Sad is the fact
that a pacifying resolution by the same Council might be
taken so seriously by the clients, as weare, as if it were the
liberation of the occupied land.

That solution

is as follows, in sura IV, verse 75:

“And why should ye not fight in the cause of God
and of those who, being weak, are ill-treated (and
oppressed)?- men, women, and children, whose cry is:
‘Our Lord! Rescue us from this town, whose people are
oppressors; and raise for us from Thee one who will
protect; and raise for us from Thee one who will help.“’
105. Fi sabi Illah: that means “for the sake of God”: in
the way of God, and not for nationalism or any other
“ism”.

101. It is interesting that sometimes we present detailed
accounts of the Zionist crimes emotionally and accurately
to the Council, as if permanent members of the Council
cannot read the newspapers, or none of them have an
embassy in the Zionist base to inform their foreign ofIices
of the crimes perpetrated in Hebron .or in Lebanon.

106. Those who play at diplomacy to help the people of
Al-Khalil, those who show concern for the cause of Palestine and those who pretend to feel the pain of domination
in the claws of zionism and imperialism must remember
this, from sura II, verse 194:
“If then any one transgresses the prohibition against
you, transgress ye likewise against him. But fear God,
and know that God is with those who restrain
themselves.”

102. I should like again to address myself to my Muslim
brothers and to remind them that adversity is not that
gunmen in Hebron killed 3 people and injured 33. More
painful is the fact that, like polite plaintiffs, we present
our humble complaints to the same gunmen, who have
formed this international body for their own purposes
and who have subsequentiy maintained their full control
over it. Indeed, we who have more faith in the temple of
the United Nations than in almighty God deserve this
humiliation
and much more. Brothers! Is it not that we
have totally forgotten sura III, verse 139:

107. To prepare for the Zionist aggressor, we cannot
play at diplomacy, brothers, or negotiate for a word or a
phrase. We have to mobilize all our resources. The
Koranic dictum is this, in sura VIII, verse 60:
“Against them make ready your strength to the
utmost of your power, including steeds of war, to strike
terror into (the hearts of) the enemies, of God and your
enemies, and others besides, whom ye may not know,
but whom God doth know. Whatever ye shall spend in
the Cause of God, shall be repaid unto you, and ye
shall not, be treated unjustly.*’

“So lose not heart, nor fall into despair: for ye must
gain mastery if ye are true in Faith.”
You have forgotten sura V, verse 57:
“0 ye who believe! Take not for friends and protectors those who take your religion for a mockery or
sport-whether
among those who received the Scrip
ture before you, or among those who reject Faith; But
fear ye God, if ye have Faith (indeed).*’

108. Full mobilization
means all the assets that are
deposited in the Zionist banks; this, of course, includes
the large sums the Saudi Arabians,’ upon the command of
the Americans, pay in desperation to your Government,
Mr. President, for the deadly weapons that your Govemment so generously makes available to the Zionist Saddam
in order to kill us. However, France is not the only permanent member of the Council that is involved in this
.practice. As a matter of fact, all of the old guardians of

103. It is too sad that Muslim rulers have forgotten the
endless power of their own people and the resources that
almighty God has given them and have consequently
become so humble and low in front of the super-Powers
12

international peace and security are equally committed to
the Charter. But I assure the Council that Saddam and his
supporters- and, indeed, the Zionists-are
the losers, as
the Council shall soon witness.

115. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

109. Full mobilization
means the entire market of the
Muslim world, the entire economy of the Muslim world.
It means all the raw materials-so
many good things: it
means all the oil and its power, and, above all, it means
the endless ocean of the Muslim population, plus the
oppressed people all over the world-in
Africa and in
Latin America-who
are longing for emancipation.

116. Mr. CABALLERO
RODRIGUEZ
(Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish): First of all, Sir, I wish to congrati
ulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. We wish you success in carrying
out this important responsibility.
117. We wish also to convey our congratulations to the
representative of the People’s Republic of China on the
manner in which he guided the Council during the month
of July.

110. But this full mobilization becomes possible if, and
only if, our good Muslim brothers resort to Islam and if
they remember that:

118. When reviewing the records of the Security Council, the General Assembly and other bodies of the United
Nations system, one frequently encounters the complaints
and criticisms by the representatives of Israel and its
United States ally regarding what they consider a useless
exercise and a waste of resources owing to the excessive
attention given by this forum to the problems of the Middle East and, in particular, to the question of Palestine. It
is only logical that both countries should be concerned
over the fact that the international community is considering this question. It is only logical that they are bothered
by the fact that international public opinion should hear
the crimes being committed by the Israeli governing
clique against the Palestinian people and other Arab peoples. It is logical also that Tel Aviv and Washington
should become angry over the fact that their complicity
and joint responsibility for the deteriorating situation in
the Middle East have been exposed in this forum. Both
the Israeli leaders and their strategic allies would very
much prefer that the international
community played
along with their sophisticated campaign of disinformation
aimed at presenting the victims as the victimizers and vice
versa, thereby facilitating the implementation
of their
expansionist and neo-colonialist plans against the Palestinian people and, in general, against all Arab peoples.

“The most beautiful names belong to God: so call
on him by them; but shun such men as use profanity in
His Names: for what they do, they will soon be
requited.”
And if they neglect the remembrance of divine names,
then the following will be the consequence for them:
“Of those We have created are people who direct
(others) with truth. And dispense justice therewith.
“Those who reject Our Signs, We shall gradually
visit with punishment, in ways they perceive not.”
That is exactly where some Muslims
ways they perceive not”.

are going now: “in

111. Instead of preparing for Muslims actually to move
to Palestine, rulers of the Islamic countries come to the
President of the Council and to the Council itself: to that
agent which actually forged a birth certificate for the illegitimate child left behind by the international conspiratorial engagement of global Zionism and imperialism 35
years ago. It is too sad that our Muslim brothers are
deliberately confusing a part of the problem for a part of
the solution.

119. But times have changed. Each day it becomes
increasingly difficult to hide the truth from world public
opinion, and, gradually, the cause of the Palestiniin
people, the cause of the Arab peoples, has become the
cause of mankind.

112. Shortcomings and malfunctionings of the Council
in this context are irrelevant, I mean that even if the Council were functioning efficiently, it would still not be even
the least appropriate clinic for treating the malady of
Palestine.

120. With every passing day there is increasing worldwide condemnation of the insane policy of the nazi-fascist
clique in Tel Aviv and increasing demand for a just and
lasting settlement of the conflict in the Middle East.

113. The Muslim people of Iran shall not spare any
effort or sacrifice to liberate the holy land of Palestine.
The herds of criminal Zionists who have gathered
together around some conscientious members of the
Council shall be respectfully escorted back to their stables
in the United States and Europe where they came from.

121. The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, which
now encompasses 101 countries, has played an important
role in this. At the Seventh Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New
Delhi from 7 to 12 March, the Heads of State or Govemment reiterated their conviction that there could not be
any just and lasting peace in the Middle East without
Israel’s total and unconditional withdrawal from all Palestinian and Arab territories occupied since 1967, including

114. Palestine shall be completely cleansed of the Zionists and their American and Western supporters,, who
have wishfully but wrongly speculated on them, hoping to
plunder the rest of the Muslim world. That is impossible.
-

13

Jerusalem, and without a just solution to the question of
Palestine on the basis of the recovery and exercise in Palestine of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, in
particular
the right to return, the right to selfdetermination without external interference and the right
to independence .and national sovereignty, including the
right to establish an independent Palestinian State in their
homeland, Palestine. The heads of State also reaffirmed
that the PLO is the sole legitimate representative of the
Palestinian people -and that it alone has the full right, to
participate independently and on an equal footing in all
international conferences, activities and ,events and they
rejected all plans, arrangements and agreements that were
not in keeping with these nrincioles [see S/2567.5 and
Con-. I and 2,-annex, PoIitik
Decl’arahon].
122. These principles, as well as innumerable resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly, have
daily been violated by the Israeli leaders in their efforts to
obstruct any peace initiative not in keeping with their expansionist and aggressive policies and their plans aimed at
destroying the resistance of the Palestinian people, and the
people themselves, and at subjecting the other Arab
peoples.
123. This explains the well-known .policy of faits
accomplis that has been pursued by the Zionists since well
before the creation of the State of Israel and all its criminal actions over the past few years, such as the intensification of the settlements policy in the occupied Palestinian
and Arab territories, the annexation of the city of Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan Heights, the genocidal acts
against the Palestinian and Lebanese peoples, the constant threats against Syria and other Arab countries and
the resurgence of repression of all kinds against the Palestinian people in the occupied territories, such as the terrorist actions which only recently have added to the long list
of innocent Palestinian victims of the Israeli forces, which
have tried in vain to drown in blood the Palestinian people’s legitimate struggle against their oppressor. On this
policy of the Israeli Government, the President of Cuba,
Fidel Castro, in his statement on the occasion ‘of the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, stated:
“We were all shocked and horrified by the satanic
spectacle of the guerrilla invasion of southern Lebanon
and the treacherous aggression against Syria, the
genocidal attack-on Beirut and the cruel killings in
Sabra and Shatila. The heroic conduct and indomitable courage of the Palestinian combatants and .the
Lebanese patriots won the admiration of the entire
world. Never has the Palestinian cause seemed more
just than now, when it stands in stark contrast to the
wanton brutality of its adversaries. The world.will not
forget the heroism of those against whom aggression is
committed or the barbarity of the aggressors.
“It is tragic that the Jewish people, who aroused
compassion and universal sympathy when Hitler
threatened their extermination, have been induced by
zionism to take part in this insane genocide. Yet even
in Israel there has arisen a clamour for peace and a

demand for the punishment
these killings.

of those responsible for

“But these crimes would not have been possible if the
notorious centre of world imperialism had not provided
the ‘Israeli aggressors with the weapons. The despicable
adventurism of Begin and Sharon exists only because of
an unconscionable and openly confessed strategic
alliance between Israel and the United States.?
..
124. Those words, uttered by President Fidel Castro last
March, are particularly relevant today. After the aggression and the genocidal action in Lebanon, Israel has intensified its repressive policies in the occupied territories and
openly declares that it will increase the number of Israeli
settlements, a policy that has recently gained even greater
dimension, since Israel plans to create Jewish settlements
in densely populated Palestinian centres, which will mean
the further destruction of Palestinian homes and neighbourhoods, more expulsions, more bloodshed, morefaits
accomplis.
125. How can one explain that Israel is able with impunity
to continue this policy of disregard for the various resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly, in
open defiance of the will of the entire international community? All this can be’explained, as has already been stated by
so many previous speakers in the debate, by what we daily
read in the press and by the declarations of the spokesmen
for the Tel Aviv regime and for the United States Administration regarding the grdwing political, diplomatic, economic and military support that Israel has been receiving
from its strategic ally, the United States. This strategic
alliance also explains the arrogance of the Israeli imperialists in other parts of the world, such as Central America,
where we find the long Zionist tentacles supplying military
assistance to the former guards of Somoza, who, with the
open support of the Reagan Administration,
are vainly.
trying to stem the course of history and drown in blood the
victorious revolution of the heroic sons of Sandino.
126. Today the Council is meeting to consider the latest
criminal actions of the Israeli occupying forces, particularly in the city of Hebron. If the insane policies of the Tel
Aviv rtgime are not stopped, how many more crimes will
we have to consider in the Security Council and the General Assembly? That is why the time has come for the
Council fully to exercise the responsibilities conferred on
it by the Charter of the United Nations and take appropriate action to put a timely end to the misdeeds of the Israeli
occupying forces and promote a just and lasting settlement of the Middle East conflict, especially its root cause,
the problem of Palestine.
127. Mr. SALAH (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic):
I wish to take this opportunity to express- to you, Sir,‘on
behalf of my delegation and my Government and on my
own behalf, sincerest congratulations on your assumption
of the presidency for the month of August. I became
personally acquainted with you during my, stay in your
great country, France, and I am aware of your outstanding ability. That ability, together with your skill and wisdom, as well as your country’s policies of principle in

upholding right and justice, makes us happy to see you
presiding over the Council and discharging this lofty
responsibility.
128. I wish also to express my thanks and that.of my
Government to Mr Ling Qing, the representative of
China-and
to his country-for
the tact, flexibility and
competence with which he guided the Council’s proceedings last month. We were able to appreciate. his wellknown skills and diplomacy when the Council was seized
of the situation in the occupied Arab territories in informal consultations and formal meetings.
129. Most unfortunately, I must point out the factthat
the representative of Iran used this forum in a way that
was contrary to its. purposes. I ,do not object to the reiigious lesson he presented to the Council-although
I am
not convinced that this is the right place for it-nor do I
wish to discuss his attacks on Arab nationalism, but I
believe that this is also not the place to give vent to any
misgivings about that.
130. Similarly, I do not object to what he said about
Jordan and its foreign policy, although I consider that to
be fishing in troubled waters and some sort of
opportunism.
131. However, I vehemently reject what he said about
the Hashemite family, for which ail Muslims and Arabs
have the greatest respect and love because of its religious
position in our region and the services that it continues to
render, with prudence and wisdom, to the Arab cause.
.132. The PRESIDENT
(inrerprerarion from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Bangladesh. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
133. Mr. WASIUDDIN
(Bangladesh): Sir, the Bangladesh delegation is pleased to see France presiding over
the Council. The very friendly and cordial relations
existing between our two countries are a source of great
satisfaction to us. The deep and sincere feelings with
which France advocates the cause of international peace
and the just struggles of oppressed peoples is well
known. We have no doubt that, with your outstanding
diplomatic skill, the deliberations of the Council will
lead to positive results.
134. I should also like to take this opportunity to convey our deep appreciation to your distinguished predecessor, Mr. Ling Qing, the representative of the People’s
Republic of China, for his outstanding leadership in guiding the work of the Council during the month of July. We
have all noted the skill, ability and energy with which he
conducted the Council’s work.
135. The Council is again seized of a crisis arising out of
Israeli aggression and barbarity in the occupied Arab and
Palestinian territories. The recent criminal and shameful
attacks carried out by a band of armed Israeli settlers,
under the guidance of Israeli occupation
_. authorities,

against Arab civilians in the Israeli-occupied Arab city of
Al-Khaiil are not isolated incidents’of repression but constitute yet another link in the long chain of Israel’s policy
of relentless expansion, its unabated aggression against its
Arab neighbours ,and its ruthless design to liquidate the
Palestinian nation. The Speakers-who preceded me, particularly the representatives of Jordan and ,the PLO+ have
already given a detailed account of the treacherous and
disgraceful attacks which took place in the Israelioccupied Arab city of Al-Khalil on 7 ,and 26 July. .Ie 136. The international press and news media coverage,
particularly the reports published recently in The New
York Times and The Christian Science Monitor, have also
given a graphic ‘description of the shootings and killings
which took place in Al-Khalil. It is also evident from that
press coverage that the Israeli policy of annexation has
been challenged by the determined opposition of the
Palestinian people and that the continuing brutal oppression and indiscriminate killing in the occupied territories
have only intensified their determination to resist such
acts of oppression and State terrorism.
.,,
137. The United Nations, through the Security Council
and the General Assembly, has tried repeatedly to bring
justice to the suffering Palestinian people. But one of its
Members, Israel, has deliberately and arrogantly rejecteci
one United Nations resolution after another and openly
flouted the voice of this world body. After making its
moves to change the status of Holy Jerusalem and the
Syrian Golan Heights, which were condemned unequivocally by the international community, Israel, in pursuit .of
its drive to liquidate the Palestinian people and its sole
legitimate representative, the PLO, invaded Lebanon last
summer. In open violation of all international law and the
decision of the United Nations, Israel has continued to
occupy a major part of that country. In .the face of determined opposition by the heroic Palestinian people, Israel
has once again unleashed a reign of terror in the occupied
territories.
138. Despite the brutal repression, the heroic Palestinian youth have demonstrated that they cannot and will
not be subjugated by violence. It is also evident that the
inalienable rights .of the Palestinian people cannot -be
denied them and that their sole legitimate representative,
the PLO, cannot be silenced. 139. Bangladesh’s stand on the question of Palestine
and the Middle East is firm and unequivocai; it is not
based on political expedience. Our consistent position
stems from our firm belief in the’ purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. It is founded on our
enduring commitment to the cause of oppressed peoples
all over the world struggling to free themselves from the
bondage of colonialism, aggression and exploitationpeoples engaged in establishing their inalienable right to
self-determination,
national freedom and political independence. It is rooted in the ideals of tolerance and the
conviction that men and women of all religions and all
races can live together in an environment of peace, justice
and equality. It is geared to uphold the right of every

:

people freely to determine and to build its own social,
economic and political system by ways and means of its
own free choice.

with all the authority and resources at its disposal, to
implement its own resolutions and decisions. Israel must
bc made to realize that it ‘cannot get away anymore with
violations of the Charter of the United Nations and the
decisions of the Council.

140. To this end, Bangladesh has consistently maintained that the situation in the Middle East, particularly
the question of Palestine, can be solved only by the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of Israel from all
occupied Arab and Palestine territories, including the
Holy City of Jerusalem, and by restoring the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, including its right to an
independent State of its otin in Palestine. Further, it is
also essential that the PLO, the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, participate in any peace
process on an equal footing. Any plan or solution that
ignores these basic requirements cannot attain a just and
durable peace.

143. Recent developments in .the occupied territories
have demonstrated beyond any shadow of doubt that the
lack of firm and expeditious action on the part of the
Council only contributes to an aggravation of the situation. A particularly heavy responsibility therefore falls on
the permanent members of the Council to enable it to
carry out its primary responsibility to bring peace to the
afflicted region.
144, In conclusion, I wish to reiterate my delegation’s
readiness fully to uphold the adoption of any concrete
and effective measures by the Council, in accordance with
thk Charter, for bringing an end to Israeli aggression and
occupation and for the promotion of a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.

141, The very recent barbarous attack on Palestinians
is not -just another instance of such outrageous actions
for which Israel is notorious; it further confirms the real
intention of the Israeli authorities of which the Council
has been warned time and again. There can be no shadow
of doubt that the. primary intention is to terrorize the
people of Palestine so that they vacate their homeland,
which Israel appears determined to annex.

The meeting rose at 7.05 p.m.

NOTES

142. This is indeed a matter of the utmost gravity and
concern khich, if permitted to go unchallenged, will have
serious international repercussions and set a most dangerous precedent for other expansionist Powers to follow. As
such, it is imperative for the Council to proceed urgently,

’ See Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (Washington,
D.C., U.S. Govr?ment Printing Office, 1982). vol. 18, No. 35, p.
1081. .’
* United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
’ The Holy Koran, VlI:178-182

.(

16

‘_

‘.
.,

HOW TO OBTAIN
UNITED
NATIONS
PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Genr\a.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez;vous
g : Nations L’nie\.
Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

I-IOJIYYMTb

OPI-AHM3AHMM
OB-bE,!IMHEHHbIX
HAUIIH
Hat&i
MOiiCHO
KYttHTb
B KHHiliHbtX
\lara3llHaX
pafiorrax Mupa. Hasonure
cnpasrn 06 ir3naHtrax 8 Bau.te%r KHW~CHO\I
nmutrre
no anpecy: Oprann3ausr
06aennnennbix
Haurrii,
Cevuna
no

i’i3RaHt4X
OpraHH-JatlHH
H arett-rc-max
BO acex

Mara3tine
nponame

nnri

H3naHkiA,

M3AAHMR

063,eiUiHeHHbtX

Hbto-kiopx

HUH

XeHesa.

COMO
CONSEGUIR
PUBLICACIONES
DE LAS NACIONES
UNIDAS
Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas panes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirljase a: Naciones Unidas. Section de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

00400

9040205-August

1991-2.050
