S/2014/337

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 May 2014
Original: English

Letter dated 9 May 2014 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the communiqué of the twenty-fifth extraordinary
session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) on the situation in South Sudan, in which the
IGAD Heads of State urged the parties to the conflict to comply fully with the
Cessation of Hostilities Agreement signed on 23 January 2014. In the same
communiqué, the Heads of State requested the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council to provide all necessary support for the
deployment of a Protection and Deterrence Force as part of the Monitoring and
Verification Mechanism established under the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement.
Thereafter, I received a letter dated 8 April 2014 addressed to me by the Chair of
IGAD, Mr. Hailemariam Desalegn, Prime Minister of Ethiopia, in which he recalled
the request by IGAD for Security Council and African Union Peace and Security
Council support to the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism and further
requested the support of the United Nations for the deployment of the Mechanism.
Further to the IGAD communiqué of the twenty-fifth extraordinary session,
dated 13 March 2014, and the letter of 8 April 2014 from the Chair of IGAD, the
United Nations, in coordination with the African Union, has consulted IGAD on the
type of support required for the deployment of the Protection and Deterrence Force.
On 5 May 2014, the United Nations received a proposal from IGAD outlining the
concept of the Protection and Deterrence Force for the Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism.
The Secretariat is presently examining this proposal and in the coming days
should be in a position to provide recommendations to the Security Council.
As you are aware, Mr. Salva Kiir, President of South Sudan, and Mr. Riek
Machar met today, 9 May 2014, in Ethiopia, where they signed the Agreement to
Resolve the Crisis in South Sudan. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) may be called upon to provide security for the monitoring and
verification teams already deployed in Bor, Bentiu and Malakal.
Pending the decision of the Security Council on the request of IGAD, I request
the Council to consider endorsing the provision by UNMISS of security to the
monitoring and verification teams on an interim basis and within its existing
capabilities.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

14-53421 (E)

140514

*1453421*
