S/2006/497

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 July 2006
English
Original: French

Note by the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit to you herewith a letter dated 10 July 2006 from
the Chairman of the Working Group of the Security Council on Children and Armed
Conflict addressed to the President of the Security Council (see annex). This letter
introduces the report on the activities of the Group since the adoption of resolution
1612 (2005) on 26 July 2005.

06-42351 (E) 130706 130706

*0642351*

S/2006/497

Annex
[Original: French]

Letter dated 10 July 2006 from the Chairman of the Working
Group of the Security Council on Children and Armed Conflict
addressed to the President of the Security Council
In my capacity as Chairman of the Working Group of the Security Council on
children and armed conflict, I have the honour to submit a report on the activities of
this Group since the adoption of Security Council resolution 1612 (2005) on 26 July
2005 (see enclosure).
I should be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a
document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Jean-Marc de La Sablière
Chairman
Working Group of the Security Council
on children and armed conflict

2

06-42351

S/2006/497

Enclosure
Report on the activities of the Working Group of the
Security Council on Children and Armed Conflict since the
adoption of resolution 1612 (2005) on 26 July 2005

I. Introduction
The Security Council adopted at its 5235th meeting on 26 July 2005 resolution
1612 (2005) on children and armed conflict, jointly sponsored by Benin and France.
In paragraph 8 of the resolution, the Council “Decides to establish a working
group of the Security Council consisting of all members of the Council to review the
reports of the mechanism referred to in paragraph 3 of this resolution, to review
progress in the development and implementation of the action plans mentioned in
paragraph 7 of this resolution and to consider other relevant information presented
to it; decides further that the working group shall:
(a) Make recommendations to the Council on possible measures to promote
the protection of children affected by armed conflict, including through
recommendations on appropriate mandates for peacekeeping missions and
recommendations with respect to the parties to the conflict;
(b) Address requests, as appropriate, to other bodies within the United
Nations system for action to support implementation of this resolution in accordance
with their respective mandates”.
After consultations among the members of the Security Council, it was agreed
that Mr. Jean-Marc de la Sablière, Permanent Representative of France to the United
Nations, would serve as Chairman of the Working Group (see S/2005/659).
Since that decision, which effectively established it, the Working Group has
held four formal meetings, on 16 November 2005, 21 February 2006, 2 May 2006
and 26 June 2006. Following each one of those meetings, the Chairman issued brief
press statements which are available on the website of the Permanent Mission of
France to the United Nations.

II. Establishment of the Working Group
At its meeting of 16 November 2005, the Working Group decided as follows:
Initially, it would hold a meeting every two months, possibly including ad hoc
meetings when necessary;
The initial meetings would focus on the establishment of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 of resolution 1612 (2005) in
order for the Working Group to provide assistance and support to the SecretaryGeneral, as appropriate. An effective mechanism is the key to the proper functioning
of the Working Group.
Three tasks were assigned to the Chairman:
(a)

06-42351

Preparing detailed terms of reference for the Group;

3

S/2006/497

(b) Preparing a provisional programme of work for 2006 spreading out the
Group’s work throughout the year. The programme of work provides the SecretaryGeneral and members of the Group with a clear indication as to when specific issues
will be taken up and allows them to make appropriate arrangements;
(c) Preparing guidelines for submission of reports by the Secretary-General
to the Group so as to provide for a format that is as clear as possible.
The Chairman submitted the three above-mentioned documents at the
meeting of 21 February 2006. Following extensive consultations, agreement was
reached on those texts at the 2 May 2006 meeting. It was agreed that the Working
Group’s terms of reference would be issued as a document of the Security Council
through the President of the Security Council. That document was issued on 3 May
2006 (S/2006/275). The two other documents are internal documents of the Working
Group and have been provided to the Secretary-General, his Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict and the Executive Director of the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) only.
In the document detailing its mandate, the Working Group recalled that it
“shall conduct its work in accordance with the provisions of resolution 1612 (2005)”
and indicated how it would go about doing so:
“The Working Group will examine information on compliance and
progress in ending the recruitment and use of children and other violations
being committed against children in situations of armed conflict on the agenda
of the Security Council and in situations of armed conflict not on the agenda of
the Security Council mentioned in annex II to the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2005/72). The discussion on the latter situations shall be done in
close consultation with countries concerned. The Working Group will review
this arrangement one year after the adoption of its terms of reference. The
consideration of any information by the Working Group shall not prejudge or
imply a recommendation as to whether or not to include a situation on the
agenda of the Security Council.
“The recommendations of the Working Group to the Security Council do
not prejudge of the Council’s decisions thereon.”
At its meeting of 2 May, the Working Group tasked the Chairman with
preparing an informal “toolbox” for the Working Group identifying possible types of
direct action or recommendations that the Working Group could make to the Council
within its mandate. Discussions on the draft working paper prepared by the
Chairman are ongoing.

III. Substantive issues addressed
1.

First meeting (23 November 2005)
At its inaugural meeting, which started with the screening of a film entitled “A
duty to protect: justice for child soldiers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo”
produced by the non-governmental organization Witness in 2005, the Working
Group heard presentations by Ms. Jane Lute, Deputy Director of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, and Mr. Kul Gautam, Deputy Executive Director of

4

06-42351

S/2006/497

UNICEF. They provided an update on the implementation of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism, using the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Somalia as
examples. The UNICEF representative also referred to other countries.
Ms. Lute noted that the first reports of the mechanism were to be submitted to
the office of the Special Representative by the end of January 2006. The office and
UNICEF had undertaken joint field missions to implement the mechanism,
including in Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Gautam made the following five points: UNICEF conceived of its role as
providing support for the Security Council resolutions as part of its mandate to
promote the best interest of the child; in that spirit, the mechanism should
strengthen, and not threaten, the humanitarian programmes of UNICEF; the safety
of those in the field in charge of implementing the mechanism must be ensured at all
times; excluding certain parties to conflicts from the scope of the mechanism would
seriously undermine the credibility of both the mechanism and the United Nations
agencies responsible for its implementation; the mechanism must be strengthened
gradually, with its reports being subject to close monitoring by the Security Council.
At that same meeting, the Group mandated the Chairman to convey to the
Secretary-General and the President of the General Assembly the need to urgently
fill the post of Special Representative in view of the key role that the latter must
play in the establishment of the mechanism and follow-up to resolution 1612 (2005).

2.

Second meeting (21 February 2006)
At its second meeting, on 21 February 2006, the Group heard briefings by the
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hédi Annabi, and by
Ms. Rima Salah, Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF.
Mr. Annabi briefed the Group on the implementation of resolution 1612
(2005). In particular, he informed the Group about the joint mission of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNICEF to Côte d’Ivoire, which
focused on the implementation of resolution 1612 (2005). Other visits were being
prepared (Burundi, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, Sudan, Nepal and
Sri Lanka). Two technical forums on the monitoring and reporting mechanism had
been organized by UNICEF. Participants had expressed concern that the Council
should be able to take concrete decisions. The mechanism should not merely be a
system for producing documentation. Finally, some thought should be given to the
impact of its establishment on the resources of United Nations agencies and of
partner non-governmental organizations.
Ms. Rima Salah, Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF, and the Chairman of
the Group, speaking in his national capacity, enumerated the key lessons that had
emerged from the joint visit by Mr. Philippe Douste-Blazy, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of France, and Ms. Salah to Uganda and Burundi on 4 and 5 February 2006.
Ms. Salah’s statement was illustrated by a brief UNICEF documentary.
The Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF made the following
recommendations, inter alia: peace process in Burundi should be strengthened; a
political solution was needed to the conflict in northern Uganda; the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) must immediately cease recruiting, and must demobilize,
the children it was using; the Government of Uganda must protect all civilians and

06-42351

5

S/2006/497

help displaced persons to return home when conditions permitted. It should provide
security in and around the camps, in particular for humanitarian staff; the national
armed forces should set up a system for preventing the recruitment of children. She
added that the humanitarian agencies had specifically requested that the two lists
relating to the monitoring and reporting mechanism should be merged. Ms. Salah
concluded her report by thanking the French Foreign Minister for inviting her to
take part in the mission, and commended him on his personal commitment.
The Chairman of the Group, speaking in his national capacity, said that it was
essential to focus on the sustainable reintegration of children into society, in
particular children’s education; Mr. Douste-Blazy would provide follow-up with the
European Union bodies to ensure that existing tools, in particular financial, were
fully mobilized.

3.

Third meeting (2 May 2006)
At its third meeting, on 2 May 2006, the Working Group welcomed the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy. UNICEF was represented by Mr. Daniel Toole,
Director of the Office of Emergency Programmes.
Speaking for both herself and UNICEF, Ms. Coomaraswamy welcomed the
progress made in combating impunity for individuals who violated children’s rights
as attested by Thomas Lubanga’s transfer to The Hague. She was still in the process
of preparing her action plan, but she wished to strengthen her office’s focus on
refugee and displaced children and on child victims of sexual violence. In that spirit,
she invited the Group not to focus on child soldiers alone. She stated that she would
shortly be visiting Uganda, at that country’s invitation, and that she would send a
special adviser to undertake a similar visit to Sri Lanka. She would also be going to
Nepal, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan. She emphasized the
importance of her cooperation with UNICEF and her desire for the Group’s work to
be as transparent as possible. She circulated a table illustrating the resolution’s
implementation, disaggregated by country, to the members of the Group.

4.

Fourth meeting (26 June 2006)
At its fourth meeting, on 26 June 2006, the Working Group was briefed by
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
by Ms. Rima Salah, Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF.
At that meeting the Group discussed the Secretary-General’s first report on a
specific situation of armed conflict which is on the agenda of the Security Council
and in which grave violations of the rights of the child are committed, i.e. the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2006/389). Ms. Coomaraswamy introduced
the Secretary-General’s report and noted its three main conclusions:
It was the responsibility of all regional actors, including the neighbouring
States, to bring the violations to an end; groups and individuals, in particular
Laurent Nkunda, that totally disregarded Security Council decisions should be
denied access to ways and means of continuing their crimes; their freedom of

6

06-42351

S/2006/497

movement throughout Congolese territory and towards neighbouring countries such
as Rwanda must be ended;
The Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo must be supported
in its efforts to discharge its obligation to protect children affected by the armed
conflict, including against sexual violence; it must strengthen the military and
civilian systems of justice and put an end to impunity;
The international community must provide the resources needed to support the
reintegration of children into their communities of origin.
The Ambassador of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, invited by the
Working Group to express his views on the report, assured the Group of the
determination of the Congolese authorities to put an end to the abuses and to
cooperate with the international community to that end. The Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo welcomed the report of the Secretary-General
and the recommendations contained therein, with the exception of that on the
establishment of a truth and reconciliation commission, the content of which would
need to be made explicit. He urged the international community to help the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in implementing programmes
for the promotion and protection of the rights of the child. With regard to acts of
violence by certain elements of the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (FARDC), the Ambassador referred to a “shared responsibility” if those
involved had previously been integrated under the brassage process with the support
of the international community. He called for international cooperation to secure the
arrest of Laurent Nkunda. The Democratic Republic of the Congo was very
favourable to the prospect of a visit by Ms. Coomaraswamy.
The Working Group then held an exchange of views, the main elements of
which were as follows:
The quality of the report was emphasized by everyone, and the SecretaryGeneral’s analysis and recommendations met with a favourable response;
There was encouraging and positive cooperation by the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo;
Measures to combat impunity were essential; several speakers referred to the
additional steps taken by the International Criminal Court and to the transfer of
Thomas Lubanga. Some members called for firm measures against L. Nkunda in
particular;
Most of the participants called for the adoption of vigorous specific
recommendations;
The role of donors was critical in assisting the Congolese authorities in
discharging their obligations;
The Working Group should ensure that, in the discussions to be held with the
authorities yet to be elected on the continuation of an international presence in the
country, the protection of children remains a priority;
There was general support for the Secretary-General’s intention to send his
Special Representative on a mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
particular to contribute to discussion of renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

06-42351

7

S/2006/497

Ms. Coomaraswamy stated that she would travel to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and base her activities on the recommendations of the Council following its
consideration of the report, which she expected to see adopted in the very near
future.
Following the discussion, the experts were entrusted with negotiating the
Group’s draft recommendations to the Council as follow-up to the SecretaryGeneral’s report. These recommendations will be adopted no later than the next
meeting of the Working Group.
Ms. Rima Salah then introduced the Secretary-General’s “horizontal note”
drawing attention to three crises, in Chad, Sri Lanka and Somalia. She also briefed
the Working Group on the status of the review of the “Cape Town principles” on
children in armed conflict, to be concluded at a conference in Paris at the end of the
year.
Ms. Coomaraswamy reported on her recent mission to Uganda (3-10 June
2006). The LRA represented the principal threat to children in the north of the
country. While the Ugandan authorities had no active policy of recruiting children, it
was the case that children were present in Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF)
and Local Defence Unit (LDU) contingents. She informed the Group on the
commitments made by President Museveni to rectify this de facto situation.
Lastly, the Working Group entrusted the Chairman with drawing the attention
of the Secretary-General to resolution 1612 (2005), paragraph 3, on the monitoring
and reporting mechanism, which provides for an independent review of the
implementation of the mechanism whose findings and recommendations are to be
reported to the Security Council by 31 July 2006.

IV. Final observations
The Working Group of the Security Council on children and armed conflict
has, in the space of a few months, made a positive start and has adopted a set of
decisions necessary for its effective functioning.
The Group has also acted as an effective spur in accelerating the appointment
of a new Special Representative of the Secretary-General, which ultimately took
place on 7 February 2006, and in following up and promoting the establishment of
the monitoring and reporting mechanism in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of
Security Council resolution 1612 (2005).
At its meeting of 26 June 2006 the Group embarked on a new stage of its work
by beginning consideration of specific situations of armed conflict involving child
victims; at that meeting it began with consideration of a report by the SecretaryGeneral on the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Working Group is now
engaged in the negotiation, to be concluded by its next meeting in August, of the
recommendations to be submitted to the Security Council as follow-up.
The month of July 2006 thus represents a turning point in the activities of the
Working Group. The ministerial debate in the Security Council scheduled for
24 July under the French presidency of the Council will come at the right moment to
spur on these activities and help in successfully moving on past this turning point.

8

06-42351
