II.

35/120.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Dissemination of information on decolonization

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the question of publicity for the work of the
United Nations in the field of decolonization,"
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
concerning the dissemination of information on decolonization, including in particular General Assembly
resolution 34/95 of 13 December 1979,
Reiterating the importance of publicity as an instrument for furthering the aims and purposes of the
Declaration and mindful of the continuing pressing need
for taking all possible steps to acquaint world public
opinion with all aspects of the problems of decolonization with a view to assisting effectively the peoples of the
colonial Territories to achieve self-determination, freedom and independence,
A ware of the increasingly important role being played
in the widespread dissemination of relevant information by a number of non-governmental organizations
having a special interest in decolonization,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the question of publicity for the work of the United
Nations in the field of decolonization;
2. Reaffirms the importance of effecting the widest
possible dissemination of information on the evils and
dangers of colonialism, on the determined efforts of the
colonial peoples to achieve self-determination, freedom
and independence and on the assistance being provided
by the international community towards the elimination
of the remaining vestiges of colonialism in all its forms;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard to
the suggestions of the Special Committee, to continue to
take concrete measures through all the media at his disposal, including publications, radio and television, to
give widespread and continuous publicity to the work of
the United Nations in the field of decolonization and.
inter a/ia:
(a) To continue, in consultation with the Special
Committee, to collect, prepare and disseminate basic
material, studies and articles relating to the problems of
decolonization and, in particular, to continue to publish the periodical Objective: Justice and other publications, special articles and studies, including the Decolonization series, and to select from them appropriate
material for wider dissemination by means of reprints in
various languages;
(b) To seek the full co-operation of the administering Powers concerned in the discharge of the tasks referred to above:
(c) To intensify the activities of all information centres, particularly those located in Western Europe;
(d) To mantain a close working relationship with
the Organization of African Unity by holding periodic
consultations and by systematically exchanging relevant information with that organization:
"Ibid., chap. 111.

25

(e) To enlist the support of non-governmental organizations having a special interest in decolonization in
the dissemination of the relevant information;
(/) To ensure the availability of the necessary facilities and services in this regard;
(g) To report to the Special Committee on the measures taken in implementation of the present resolution;
4. Invites all States, the specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system and
non-governmental organizations having a special interest in decolonization to undertake or intensify, in cooperation with the Secretary-General and within their
respective spheres of competence, the large-scale dissemination of the information referred to in paragraph 2
above:
5. Requests the Special Committee to follow the
implementation of the present resolution and report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.

92nd plenary meeting
I I December 1980

35/159.

Non-interference in the internal affairs of
States

The General Assembly,
Recalling, especially, paragraph 2 of its resolution
34/101 of 14 December 1979 and previous resolutions
on non-interference in the internal affairs of States,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General,3 6
containing the views of Member States on ways by
which greater respect for the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of States can be assured,
Reaffirming that a declaration on non-interference in
the internal affairs of States would be an important contribution to the further elaboration of the principles for
strengthening equitable co-operation and friendly relations among States, based on sovereign equality and
mutual respect,
Noting that a number of Member States have expressed support for the preparation of such a declaration,
Taking note of the report of the Chairman of the Ad
Hoe Working Group of the First Committee on the
Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention and
Interference in the Internal Affairs of States, 37
Considering that the Ad Hoe Working Group was unable to conclude negotiations for the adoption of such a
declaration at the thirty-fifth session.
I. Requests the Ad Hoe Working Group of the First
Committee on the Declaration on the Inadmissibility of
Intervention and Interference in the Internal Affairs of
States to continue its discussions and negotiations at the
thirty-sixth session, with a view to finalizing the elaboration of a declaration on the inadmissibility of intervention and interference in the internal affairs of States
and adopting it at that session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide, within the context of the facilities allotted for
meetings of the First Committee, facilities for the Ad
"'A/J4/ 192 and Add. I and 2. A 134,! I93 and Add.1 and 2,
Al.1~/505 and Add.1-3.

"Ojjicial Records of the General Assembly. Thirty~fifth Session. First
Commillee, 52nd meeting, pp. 116-118.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

26

Hoe Working Group to undertake its deliberations during the thirty-sixth session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Review of the implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security".
94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980

35/169.

Question of Palestine
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling and reaffirming its resolutions 181 (11) of 29
November 1947, 194 (III) of II December 1948, 3236
(XXIX) of 22 November 1974, 3375 (XXX) and 3376
(XXX) of 10 November 1975, 31/20 of 24 November
1976. 32/40 A and B of 2 December 1977, 33/28 A to C
of 7 December 1978, 34/65 A to D of 29 November and
12 December 1979 and ES-7 /2 of 29 July 1980,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, 38
Having heard the statement of the Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of the Palestinian
people, 39
l. Expresses its grave concern that no just solution to
the problem of Palestine has been achieved and that this
problem therefore continues to aggravate the Middle
East conflict, of which it is the core, and to endanger international peace and security, and that Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 does not
provide for the future and for the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people, the attainment of which is a
conditio sine qua non for a just solution of the question of
Palestine;
2. Reaffirms that a just and lasting peace in the Middle East cannot be established without the achievement,
inter alia, of a just solution of the problem of Palestine
on the basis of the attainment of the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people, including the right of return and
the right to self-determination, national independence
and sovereignty in Palestine, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and the principles of international law;
3. Stresses the basic principle that the future of the
Palestinian people cannot be discussed in their absence
and, therefore, calls once more for the invitation of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of
the Palestinian people, to participate, on the basis of
General Assembly resolution 3237 (XXIX) of 22
November 1974, in all efforts, deliberations and conferences on the Middle East which are held under the
auspices of the United Nations, on an equal footing with
other parties;
4. Endorses the recommendations of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People contained in paragraphs 45 to 48 of its report and draws the attention of the Security Council to
tht: need for urgent action thereon;
5. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the Palestinians
to return to their homes and property in Palestine, from
"Ibid.. Thirty-fifth Session. Supp/en1<'nl No. 35 (A/35/35).
"Ibid., Thirty-fifth Session. Plenary Meetings, 75th meeting.
paras. 85-141.

which they have been displaced and uprooted, and calls
for their return;
6. Reaffirms also the inalienable rights in Palestine
of the Palestinian people, including:
(a)
The right to self-determination without external
interference, and to national independence and sovereignty;
(h) The right to establish its own independent
sovereign State;
7. Strongly reaffirms its repeated endorsement of the
recommendations of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, as contained in paragraphs 59 to 72 of its report on its thirtyfirst session, and as reproduced in the annex to the present resolution;
8. Demands the complete and unconditional withdrawal by Israel from all the Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupied since June 1967, including
Jerusalem, in conformity with the fundamental principle
of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by
force;
9. Demands that Israel should fully comply with the
provisions, in particular, of Security Council resolution
465 ( 1980) adopted unanimously on I March 1980;
10. Further demands that Israel should fully comply
with all the resolutions of the United Nations relevant to
the historic character of the Holy City of Jerusalem, in
particular Security Council resolutions 476 ( I 980) of 30
June I 980 and 478 (1980) of 20 August 1980, and rejects
the declaration of Israel that Jerusalem is its capital;
I I. Expresses its opposition to all policies and plans
aimed at the resettlement of the Palestinians outside
their homeland;
12. Condemns Israel for its non-compliance with the
provisions of General Assembly resolution ES- 7 /2 and
Security Council resolutions 465 (1980) and 478 (1980)
and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
13. Requests the Security Council to convene in order to consider the situation and the adoption of effective measures under Chapter VII of the Charter;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Question of
Palestine".

95th plenary meeting
I 5 December I 980
ANNEX
Recommendations of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, endorsed by the General
Assembly at its thirty-first session'"

I.

Bi\Sll CONSIDER/\ I IONS AND r;utDHINES

59. The question of Palestine is at the heart of the Middle East
problem, and. consequently, the Committee stressed its belief that no
solution in the Middle East can be envisaged which does not fully take
into account the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people.
60. The legitimate and inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to
return lo their homes and property and to achieve self-determination,
national independence and sovereignly are endorsed by the Committee in the conviction that the full implementation of these rights
will contribute decisively to a comprehensive and final settlement of
the Middle East crisis.
"'The recommendations endorsed by the General Assembly in its
resolution 31 1 20 were originally issued as part two of Official Records
of the General Assernhlv. Thirty-first Session. Supplement No. 35
(;\ /31 /35)
