General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

258

2. Requests the President of the General Assembly,
after due consultation with the chairmen of the regional
groups, to appoint the members of the Committee on
the basis of equitable geographical distribution and representing the principal legal systems of the world;
3. Requests the Committee to elaborate at the
earliest possible date an international convention to prohibit the recruitment, use, financing and training of mercenaries;
4. Authorizes the Committee in the fulfilment of its
mandate to take into account suggestions and proposals from any State, bearing in mind the views and comments communicated to the Secretary-Genera13 and
those expressed during the debate on this item at the
thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to compile a list
of ali relevant legislation of Member States and any
other conventions and protocols additional thereto of
international and regional organizations on mercenaries and to place such materials at the disposal of the
Committee;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Committee with any assistance and facilities it may require for the performance of its work;
7. Requests the Committee to present its report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session an item entitled "Report of the Ad
Hoc Committee on the Drafting of an lnternational
Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing
and Training of Mercenaries".

8 Jst plenary meeting
4 December 1980
*
*

*

The President of the General Assembly subsequently informed the
Secretary-General' that he had appointed as members of the Ad Hoc
Committee on the Drafting of an lnternational Convention against the
Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries thirty-four of
the thirty-five States to be appointed by him in accordance with
paragraphs l and 2 of the above resolution.
As a result, the Ad Hoc Committee is composed of the following
Member States: ALGERIA, ANGOLA, BAHAMAS. BANGLADESH,
BARBADOS, BENIN, BULGARIA, CANADA, OEMOCRATIC YEMEN,
ETHIOPIA, FRANCE, GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC, GERMANY,
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF. GUYANA, INDIA, [TALY, JAMAICA, JAPAN,
MONGOLIA, NIGERIA, PORTUGAL, SENEGAL, SEYCHELLES, SPAIN,
SURINAME, TURKEY, UKRAINIAN SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLIC, UNION
OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT
BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
URUGUAY, YUGOSLAVIA, ZAIRE and ZAMBIA

35/49.

Draft Code of Offences against the Peace and
Security of Mankind

The General Assembly,
Recalling the draft Code of Offen ces against the Peace
and Security of Mankind prepared by the lnternational
Law Commission in 1954, 5
Bearing in mind its resolution 33/97 of 16 December
1978, by which it decided to accord priority and the
., A/35/366 and Add.1-3.
'A/35/793 and Add. l.
' Officia/ Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session. Supplement No. 9 (A/2693). para. 54.

fullest possible consideration to the item entitled "Draft
Code of Offences against the Peace and Security of
Mankind",
Recalling the belief that the elaboration of a Code of
Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind
could contribute to strengthening international peace
and security and thus to promoting and implementing
the purposes and principies set forth in the Charter of
the United Nations,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution
33/97,''
Noting that further comments and observations on
the draft Code of Offences against the Peace and
Security of Mankind are yet to be submitted by Member
States and relevant international intergovernmental organizations,
Taking into account the statements made during the
debate on this item, ·
1. Requests the Secretary-General to reiterate his invitation to Member States and relevant international intergovernmental organizations to submit or update, not
la ter than 30 June 1981, their comments and observations on the draft Code of Offences against the Peace
and Security of Mankind and, in particular, to inform
him of their views on the procedure to be followed in the
future consideration of that item. including the suggestion of having the item referred to the I nternational Law
Commission;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, on the basis of
the replies submitted by Member States and relevant
international intergovernmental organizations and the
statements made during the debate on this item, to
prepare an analytical paper in order to facilitate the
further consideration of the item;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
a report to the General Assembly al its thirty-sixth session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Draft Code of Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind" and
to accord it priority and the fullest possible consideration.

81st plenary meeting
4 December ! 980

35/50.

Report of the Special Committee on Enhancing
the Effectiveness of the Principie of Non-Use of
Force in lnternational Relations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31 /9 of 8 November 1976, in
which it invited Member States to examine further the
draft World Treaty on the Non-Use of Force in lnternational Relations submitted by the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics,' as well as other proposals made
during the consideration of this item,
Recalling a/so its resolution 32/ 150 of 19 December
1977, whereby it established the Special Committee on
'· A/35/210 and Add.l and 2 and Add.2/Corr.l.
' See Ojficial Records o{the General Assembly, Thirty-fifth Session .
Sixth Committee, 10th- l 5th and 40th meetings: and ibid.. Sixth Commillee, Sessional Fascicle, rnrrigendum.
'/bid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 41 (A/34/41 and
Corr.1.). annex.

IX.

Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principie of Non-Use
of Force in lnternational Relations,
Reca/ling, in particular, its resolutions 33/96 of 16 December 1978 and 34/13 of9 November 1979, in which it
decided that the Special Committee should continue its
work,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee, 9
Taking note of the fact that, owing to lack of time, the
Special Committee was not able to consider in depth the
new proposals submitted to it during its last session,
Taking into account that the Special Committee has
not completed the mandate entrusted to it,
Reaffirming the need for universal and effective application of the principie of the non-use of force in international relations and for assistance by the United
Nations in this endeavour,
Expressing the hope that the Special Committee will,
on the basis of ali the proposals before it, complete the
mandate entrusted to it as soon as possible,
l. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee
on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principie of NonUse of Force in International Relations;
2. Decides that the Special Committee shall continue
its work with the goal of drafting, at the earliest possible
date, a world treaty on the non-use of force in international relations as well as the peaceful settlement of disputes or such other recommendations as the Committee
deems appropriate;
3. Requests the Special Committee to consider
thoroughly, and to take duly into account, all the
proposals submitted to it with a view to ensuring a successful completion of its mandate;
4. Invites the Governments which have not yet done
so to communicate their comments or suggestions or to
bring them up to date, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 31 /9;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the necessary facilities and services;
6. Invites the Special Committee to submit a report
on its work to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda ofits
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Report of the
Special Committee on Enhancing the Effectiveness of
the Principie of Non-U se of Force in I nternational Relations".

81 st plenary meeting
4 December 1980

35/51.

259

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United N ations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work of
its thirteenth session, 10
Recalling its resolutions 2205 (XXI) of 17 December
1966, by which it established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law and defined the ob' /bid., Thirty-fifth Session, Supplement No 41 (A/35/41).
'º !bid.. Supplement No. 17 (A /35/ 17)

ject and terms of reference of the Commission, 3108
(XXVIII) of 12 December 1973. by which it increased
the membership of the Commission, 3 I /99 of 15 December 1976, by which Governments of Member States
not members of the Commission were entitled to attend
as observers the sessions of the Commission and its
working groups, and 34/142 of 17 December 1979, by
which the co-ordinating function of the Commission in
the field of international trade law was emphasized, as
well as its previous resolutions concerning the reports of
the Commission on the work of its annual sessions,
Recalling a/so its resolutions 3201 (S-YI) and 3202
(S-YI) of I May 1974, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974 and 3362 (S-YII) of 16 September 1975,
Reaffirming its conviction that the progressive harmonization and unification of international trade law, in
reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of international trade, especially those affecting the developing countries, would significantly contribute to universal economic co-operation among ali Sta tes on a basis of
equality, equity and common interests and to the elimination of discrimination in international trade and,
thereby, to the well-being of ali peoples,
Having regard for the need to take into account the
different social and legal systems in harmonizing the
rules of international trade law,
Stressing the usefulness and importance of organizing
symposia for promoting better knowledge and understanding of international trade law and, especially, for
the training of young lawyers from developing countries
in this field,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
United Nations Commission on lnternational Trade
Law on the work of its thirteenth session:
2. Takes note of the successful conclusion of the
United Nations Conference on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods, held at Yienna from 10 March
to 11 April 1980, which has resulted in the adoption of
the Convention on Contracts for the International Sale
of Goods 11 and a Protocol Amending the Convention
on the Limitation Period in the lnternational Sale of
Goods: 1 '
3. Commends the United Nations Commission on
lnternational Trade Law for the progress made in its
work and for its efforts to enhance the efficiency of its
working methods;
4. Notes with satisfaction that the United Nations
Commission on lnternational Trade Law has unanimously adopted the Conciliation Rules of the Commission; 11
5. Calls upon the United Nations Commission on
lnternational Trade Law to continue to take account of
the relevant provisions of the resolutions concerning the
new international economic order, as adopted by the
General Assembly at its sixth and seventh special sessions;
6. Welcomes the decision of the United Nations
Commission on lnternational Trade Law to the effect
that its Working Group on the New lnternational
Economic Order shall be composed of ali States members of the Commission;
7. Takes note with appreciation of the fact that the
United Nations Commission on lnternational Trade
1

"

"A/CONF.97/18, annex l.
'·' {bid annex \ 1
'' Offi;ial Records o/ the General Assembly, Thirtv-fi.frh Session,
Supplement No. 17 (A;35017), paras. 105 and 106. ·
'' !bid .. para. 14.1.
