General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

20

and calls upon the Governments concerned to co-operate
so that the Commission may continue its efforts towards
that end;
8. Calls upon the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine to intensify its efforts for the
implementation of paragraph 11 of resolution 194 ( III)
and to report thereon as appropriate, and not later than
1 October 1967.
1469th plenary meeting,
17 N ovember 1966.

2202 (XXI). The policies of apartheid of the
Government of the Republic of South Africa
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on this question, in particular
resolutions 1761 (XVII) of 6 N ovember 1962, 2054
(XX) of 15 December 1965 and 2144 (XXI) of
26 October 1966,
Recalling the provisions of Security Council resolutions 181 ( 1963) of 7 August 1963, 182 ( 1963)
of 4 December 1963, 190 (1964) of 9 June 1%4 and
191 (1964) of 18 June 1964,
Taking note of the reports of the Special Committee
on the Policies of Apartheid of the Government of the
Republic of South Africa2 and endorsing its proposals
for an international campaign against apartheid under
the auspices of the United Nations,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the
Scminar on Apartheid, 3 held at Brasilia from 23 August
to 4 September 1966,
Gravely concerned at the intensification of the policies
of apartheid in South Africa and the direct support
given by the Government of South Africa to the colonialist and racist régimes on its borders, thus aggravating the situation in southern Africa,
N oting with concern that the policies of the Government of South Africa aim at perpetuating apartheid
in South Africa, that they strengthen the colonialist
and racist régimes on its borders and that they threaten
the integrity and sovereignty of the neighbouring independent States,
l. Condemns the policies of apartheid practised by
the Government of South Africa as a crime against
humanity;
2. Reaffirms that the situation in South Africa and
the resulting explosive situation in southern Africa
continue to pose a grave threat to international peace
and security;
3. Deplores the attitude of the -main trading partners
of South Africa, including three permanent members
of the Security Council, which, by their failure to cooperate in implementing resolutions of the General
Assembly, by their refosal to join the Special Committee on the Policies of Apartheid of the Government
of the Republic of South Africa and by their increasing
collaboration with the Government of South Africa,
have encouraged the latter to persist in its racial
policies;
4. Draws the attention of the main trading partners
of South Africa to the fact that their increasing collaboration with the Government of South Africa despite
2 Jbid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 34, documents A/6356 and A/6486.
a ST /T AO/HR/27.

repeated appeals by the General Assembly has aggravated the danger of a violent conflict, and requests
them to take urgent steps towards disengagement from
South Africa and to facilitate effective action, under
the auspices of the United Nations, to secure the elimination of apartheid;
5. Appeals to all States:
(a) To comply fully with the decisions duly taken
by the Security Council which solemnly call on them
to cease forthwith the sale and delivery to South Africa
of arms, ammunition of all types, military vehicles and
equipment and materials intended for their manufacture and maintenance;
( b) To discourage immediately the establishment of
closer economic and financia! relations with South
Africa, particularly in investment and trade, and also
to discourage loans by banks in their countries to the
Government of South Africa or South African companies, and to submit reports to the Secretary-General
on steps taken in this respect, such reports to be transmitted by the Secretary-General to the General Assembly and the Special Committee;
(e) To consider effective political, moral and material assistance to ali those combating the policies of
apartheid, in the light of the recommendations of
the Seminar on Apartheid;
( d) To make adequate and generous contributions
to humanitarian programmes designed to assist the
victims of apartheid;
( e) To endeavour to grant asylum and extend travel
facilities and educational and employment opportunities
to refugees from South Africa;
6. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To organize as soon as possible, in consultation
with the Special Committee on the Policies of Apartheid
of the Government of the Republic óf South Africa
and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
an international conference or seminar on the problems of apartheid, racial discrimination and colonialism
in southern Africa, and to transmit the report of that
conference or seminar to the General Assembly at its
twenty-second session;
( b) To take steps, in consultation with the Special
Committee on the Policies of Apartheid of the Government of the Republic of South Africa, for .the
periodic publication of statistics on South Africa's
international trade ;
(e) To provide all the necessary assistance to the
Special Committee on the Policies of Apartheid of the
Government of the Republic of South Africa in publicizing and reporting on any tightening of economic
and financia! relations between other States and South
Africa;
( d) To consult with the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development in order to obtain
its compliance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 2105 (XX) of 20 December 1965 and
2107 (XX) of 21 December 1965 and with those of
the present resolution, and to report to the General
Assembly at its twenty-second session;
(e) To provide the Special Committee on the Policíes of Apartheid of the Government of the Republic
of South Africa with all the necessary means, including
appropriate financia} means, for the effective accomplishment of its task;

Resolutiom adopted on the reporlll of the Speeial Political Committee

7. Once again draws the attention of the Security
Council to the fact that the situation in South Africa
constitutes a threat to international peace and security,
that action under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations is essential in order to solve the problem of apartheid and that universally applied rnandatory
econornic sanctions are the only rneans of achieving a
pcaceful solution ;
8. Invites the Special Cornrnittee on the Policies of
Apartheid of the Governrnent of the Republic of South
Africa to continue to take all steps to discharge its
mandate more effectively and, to that end, authorizes it :
(a) To hold sessions away from Headquarters or
to send a sub-committee on a rnission to consult
specialized agencies, regional organizations, States and
non-governmental organizations on ways and means to
promote the international carnpaign against apartheid
and to investigate various aspects of the problem of
apartheid;
( b) To continue and to increase co-operation with
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Irnplementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
with a view to the consideration of the activities of
foreign economic interests in southern Africa which
impede the efforts to elirninate apartheid, racial disc_timination and colonialism in the region ;

9. Requests the Secretary-General and the specialized agencies to consider appropriate assistance for the
employment in their secretariats and programmes of
qualified South Africans who are victims of apartheid ;
10. Invites the specialized agencies, regional organizations, States and non-governmental organizations to
co-operate with the Secretary-General and the Special
Committee on the Policie:; of Apartheid of the Govcrnment of the Republic of South Africa in the accomplishment of their tasks under the present resolution.
1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2054 B (XX) of 15 Decembcr 1965 establishing the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,'
to which is annexed the report of the Committee of
Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa,
l. Commends the Secretary-General and the Committee of Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa for their efforts to promote the Fund ;

2. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments,
organizations and individuals that have contributed to
the Fund;
3. Renews its appeal to Governments, organizations
and individuals to contribute generously to the Fund.

1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.
"Official R.tcords of th, General Assembly, Twenty-first
Stssion, Anntxts, agenda item 34, document A/6494.

21

2213 (XXI). Effect8 of atomic radiation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 913 (X) of 3 Decembcr
1955, which established the United Nations Scientific
Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, and
its subsequent resolutions reaffirming the desirability
of the Committee continuing its work,
Concerned about the potentially harmful effects to
present and future generations resulting from the levels
of radiation to which man is exposed,
Conscious of the continued need for compiling information about atomic radiation and for analysing its
effects on man and his environment,
1. N ates wi,th appreciation the report adopted by
the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects
of Atomic Radiation at its sixteenth session ;11
2. Commends the Scientific Committee for thc
valuable contributions it has made since its inception
to the wider knowledge and understanding of the effects
and levels of atomic radiation;
3. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue its
programme, including its co-ordinating activities, to
increase the know ledge of the levels and effects of
atomic radiation frorn all sources ;
4. Notes the intention of the Scientific Committce
to hold its next session in 1967 and to report further
to the General Assembly;
5. Commends the World Meteorological Organization for its work in carrying forward the scheme for
monitoring and reporting levels of atmospheric radioactivity;
6. Expresses its appreciation for the assistancc
rendered to the Scientific Committee by the specialized
agencies of the United Nations, the International
Atornic Energy Agency and the non-governmental organizations concerned ;
7. Recommends that ali the parties concerned should
continue their co-operation with the Scientific Committee;
8. Requests thc Secretary-General to continue to
provide the Scientific Committee with the assistance
necessary for the conduct of its work and the disseminatfon of its findings to the public.
1497th plenary meeting,
17 December 1966.
2220 (XXI). Comprehensive review of the whole
question of peace-keeping operations in ali
their upect8

The General Assembly
l. Decides to refer the report of the Special Political
Committee on the comprehensive review of the wholc
question of peace-keeping operations in all their aspects•
to the General Assembly at its fifth special session, to
be held not later than 30 April 1967;
2. Requests the Special Committee on Peace-keeping
Operations to continue the review of the whole question
of peace-keeping operations and to report to the General
Assembly at its fifth special session.
1499th plenMy meeting,
19 December 1966.
11 lbid., Twenty-first Stssion, Supplem,nt No. 14 (A/6314
and Corr.1).
6 [bid., Twenty-first Sesswn, Annexts, agenda item 33, document A/6603.
