S/PV.9199

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9199th meeting

Tuesday, 22 November 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Oppong-Ntiri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mrs. Kamboj
Ms. Moran
Mr. Abbas
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-70592 (E)
*2270592*

S/PV.9199

The situation in the Middle East

we will hear from Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director for
Operations and Advocacy, those attacks could also
lead to further deterioration of the economic and,
consequently, humanitarian situations.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Saudi Arabia and Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hans
Grundberg, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen; and Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director for
Operations and Advocacy, United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Grundberg.
Mr. Grundberg: In this briefing, I intend to provide
an overview of the situation in Yemen following the
formal expiration of the truce on 2 October and to brief
the Security Council on current mediation efforts and
the way forward.
Seven weeks have passed since the United Nationsmediated nationwide truce in Yemen expired. In that
period, despite incidents of concern and the expiration
of the truce, fortunately, we did not see a return to fullfledged war. In that connection, I note the courageous
and difficult decisions taken in order to avoid that path.
In recent weeks, however, Ansar Allah carried out
attacks against oil terminals and ports in Hadramaut
and Shabwah governorates, with the aim of depriving
the Government of Yemen of its main source of
revenue — exporting oil. Those attacks, the last of
which occurred yesterday in the Al-Dabba port in
Hadramaut, have significant economic repercussions.
Attacks on oil infrastructure and threats to oil
companies undermine the welfare of the entirety of the
Yemeni people. They risk setting off a spiral of military
and economic escalation, a pattern we have seen play
out before over the course of Yemen’s war. Beyond the
risk of escalating violence and undermining current
mediation efforts, attacks on civilian infrastructure
are prohibited by international humanitarian law. As
2/19

22/11/2022

Even though overall levels of violence have
increased only slightly, as compared to the six-month
truce period, in recent weeks we have seen a concerning
uptick in incidents in Ma’rib and Taiz, including
incidents involving civilian casualties. Such incidents
demonstrate how fragile the situation remains and
serve to underscore, once more, the need for the parties
to urgently reach an agreement to renew the truce. I
reiterate my call on the parties to exercise maximum
restraint during this critical time.
The absence of a major military escalation thus
far has facilitated my continued discussions with
the parties, as well as with countries of the region.
It has also allowed for the elements operated under
the truce, such as regular flights between Amman
and Sana’a International Airport and fuel deliveries
to the Al-Hudaydah port, to continue for the benefit
of the Yemeni people. The Organization’s efforts to
convince the parties to renew and expand the truce
continue. In that context, I would like to express my
appreciation for the coordinated efforts of countries
of the region, including the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
and the Sultanate of Oman, in support of the efforts of
my Office. In the light of the military and economic
developments I just outlined, it is vital that the ongoing
discussions yield positive results as soon as possible.
In addition to the efforts related to a renewal of the
truce, I am engaging the parties on not only expanding
the truce, but initiating discussions on a path towards
a more comprehensive settlement of the conflict. I
have outlined ideas and options to them on steps to be
taken, and I repeat my message that the international
community and, more important, the Yemeni people
expect them to demonstrate actionable commitment to
a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
The recent developments reaffirm my conviction
that addressing urgent humanitarian and economic
issues is needed in the immediate term if we are to
avoid the situation for civilians deteriorating further.
But more durable solutions can be reached only in the
context of a comprehensive settlement of the conflict.
Many of the economic issues being discussed, such as
that of revenue management for the payment of salaries,
require cooperation between the parties in order to be
sustainable. That is why I want the parties to the conflict
22-70592

22/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

to not only renew the truce but — crucially — to commit
to taking steps towards a comprehensive resolution of
the conflict. A political process under United Nations
auspices will be needed to reach such a resolution, and
the sooner we can start that work in earnest, the greater
our chances of reversing the devastating trends of
this war. I outlined options to the parties in that regard,
and I will keep advocating for an approach that looks
beyond the immediate interests of the warring sides.
In that context, I would like to reiterate my
conviction that, for any settlement to be sustainable, it
needs to be broad-based and include all segments of
Yemeni society, including young people, civil society
and women. The International Day for the Elimination
of Violence against Women on 25 November serves as
a stark reminder — not just on that day, but on every
day of the year — of the disproportionate effects that
Yemeni women continue to suffer as a result of the
conflict and the integral role that women should play
in all aspects of an inclusive political settlement. Time
is not on the side of Yemeni women as their basic
rights, including the freedom of movement, are further
violated. That is now affecting all Yemeni women in the
north, including our United Nations staff, and we need
to be clear that there are no excuses for such actions.
I would like to conclude by reiterating my sincere
appreciation for the sustained support of the Security
Council. Its support will continue to be vital in
order to convince the parties to abandon short-term
calculations in favour of political, economic and
security cooperation towards a sustainable settlement
of the conflict in Yemen.
The President: I thank Mr. Grundberg for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ghelani.
Ms. Ghelani: As the Special Envoy already
mentioned, many of the truce’s provisions continue
to hold despite its expiration on 2 October. That is
providing a continued and much-needed reprieve
for the people of Yemen. However, the humanitarian
dividends of the truce need much more than six months
to take hold, and the people affected by the conflict
need a sustained guarantee of peace before they decide
to return home to rebuild their lives, for some after
having been displaced multiple times. They also need
to see improvements in their everyday lives beyond a
reduction in fighting. Many people, particularly those
in the southern parts of the front lines, told us that they

S/PV.9199

had yet to see the positive impacts of the truce on their
livelihoods and economic situation.
Localized clashes continue to impact civilians
in some parts of the country. We remain concerned
about the possibility that large-scale hostilities may
again resurge in Yemen. In the last week of October,
according to verified figures, shelling and sniper fire
killed two civilians and wounded another eight, many
of them children, in Taiz. Earlier this month, in Ma’rib,
four displaced civilians were killed and at least another
five were injured when a weapons storage facility
exploded due to the fighting. Vulnerable groups bear
some of the heaviest costs of the clashes. According
to open-source reporting, child casualties surged by
43 per cent between September and October.
Landmines and unexploded ordnance continue to
account for the largest share of civilian casualties. As
we said in previous briefings, the reduction in fighting
since April has allowed civilians to move freely. But
that has increased their exposure to landmines and
unexploded ordnance, with more than 164 civilians,
including 74 children, killed or injured between July
and September. People too often fall victim to those
horrific devices, risking injury, and even death, while
striving to access health facilities, schools and other
essential services.
The parties to the conflict must take all feasible
precautions to protect the civilian population under
their control against the dangers resulting from military
operations, including by identifying, marking and
decontaminating dangerous areas. As mentioned in our
briefing last month (see S/PV.9152), we also underline
the need for increased funding for mine action activities
and the facilitation of importing equipment.
The threats to civilians in Yemen extend far beyond
the immediate impact of the hostilities, especially for
vulnerable groups facing severe protection risks, as
was mentioned. Migrants and refugees also experience
significant dangers. So far this year, more than 50,000
migrants have taken the sea route from the Horn of
Africa to Yemen in search of a better life. Just last
month, another migrant raft sank, leaving three people
dead and another 28 missing.
Hunger continues to haunt more than half the
population in Yemen, preying on the most vulnerable.
As mentioned in our briefing last month, new estimates
indicate that the number of people facing acute food
insecurity between October and December is slightly

22-705923/19

S/PV.9199

The situation in the Middle East

lower than our initial projections in early 2022. That
is very good news, but it does not eclipse the fact that
17 million people still do not know where they will get
their next meal.
In that context, we welcome the recent arrival of
a shipment carrying 14,000 metric tons of wheat flour
under the Black Sea Grain Initiative on 15 October,
as well as three further grain shipments, which left
Ukraine on 23 October and 13 and 17 November.
We have been briefing the Security Council on a
regular basis regarding the humanitarian operating
environment, which is now becoming increasingly
difficult every month. Humanitarian access is still
largely constrained by bureaucratic impediments,
restrictions on movement and an unacceptable level of
interference. The civilian population is again bearing
the brunt of those restrictions, and people are not
receiving the life-saving services and supplies that they
need in a timely manner. Between July and September,
more than 70 per cent of the reported access incidents,
or nearly 500 out of 673 such incidents, were due to
bureaucratic impediments, the vast majority of which
took place in Houthi-controlled areas.
Despite all our efforts, restrictions have become
more widespread and entrenched. Over recent months,
the restrictions on movement imposed by the Houthi de
facto authorities, which particularly impact female staff
and beneficiaries, are leaving us less room to operate.
We are struggling to maintain the space that we need
to provide principled humanitarian aid, especially at
a time of uncertainty, when we actually need to scale
up services.
We recently conducted an evaluation that
systematically looked at all aspects of the aid operation.
In following up on that, the humanitarian community
is working to further address access constraints and
advocate for humanitarian space, while also undertaking
efforts to strengthen accountability, transparency and
oversight in the aid operation.
In addition, the deteriorating security situation
is leaving humanitarians increasingly exposed to
carjackings, kidnappings and other incidents. That
is obstructing safe access particularly in Abyan and
Shabwah governorates, where we urgently need to scale
up our operations. More than 30 carjacking incidents
have occurred in Government-held areas so far this
year. Five United Nations staff members are still
missing after being abducted in Abyan in February.
4/19

22/11/2022

Two additional United Nations colleagues in Sana’a
remain detained after more than a year. We continue our
repeated calls for all staff to be released immediately.
We also take this opportunity to remind all parties to
the conflict that, under international humanitarian law,
they must facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage
of humanitarian relief for civilians in need and must
respect and protect humanitarian staff and assets.
As we previously briefed the Council, Yemen’s
continuing economic instability and the collapse of
basic services remain key drivers of the humanitarian
needs and leave much of the Yemeni population
dependent on aid. That dependency is exacerbated by
a long-standing gap in development funding, which is
impeding investment in long-term solutions. We are
also concerned that the continued attacks and fighting
on and around ports could have an adverse impact on the
economy, as mentioned, and may subsequently lead to
the further deterioration of the humanitarian situation.
With just over a month left in the year, the
humanitarian response plan is now 55 per cent funded.
Despite all the challenges, aid agencies are reaching
10.5 million people on average every month. We would
like to express our appreciation to all donors for their
support, especially in these times of global economic
uncertainty, while also calling for further support to
maintain the life-saving humanitarian services.
Let me conclude by reiterating the concern with
which I opened my briefing: any escalation in the
fighting will have devastating consequences for the
people of Yemen and will send us back to square one.
People in Yemen need a return to normalcy so that they
can rebuild their fractured lives. The time to deliver
that is now.
The President: I thank Ms. Ghelani for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me thank
Special Envoy Grundberg and Ms. Ghelani for their
briefings today. We are encouraged that most truce
measures continue to hold since the lack of extension
in October, but we call for an end to the disturbing
pattern of Houthi terrorist attacks on international
shipping. The targeting of ships in the southern ports
of Al-Dabba and Qan‘ah poses a serious threat to peace
and risks depriving millions of Yemenis from access to
basic goods. We call on the Houthis to take the peaceful
22-70592

22/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

route by pursuing a negotiated, Yemeni-led political
settlement under United Nations auspices.
The humanitarian crisis continues to suffer from
interwoven challenges, and the independent interagency
humanitarian evaluation found that, despite its growing
scale, much of the aid quality has been unacceptably
low. The relative peace of the past eight months has
not alleviated the impact of the preceding years of
violent war. As many as 17 million Yemenis remain
exposed to an acute food insecurity crisis, with many
more projected to be affected in the coming years. That
humanitarian crisis underlines the importance of the
Black Sea Grain Initiative, which was recently renewed
until March 2023. This month, the Initiative facilitated
the import of more than 60,000 metric tonnes of wheat
into Yemen, and it will continue to be an important
lifeline for Yemenis, as we heard again today from
Ms. Ghelani.
Internal displacement remains prevalent across
Yemen. For those who do chose to return home, the
risks of explosive remnants of war are real. The United
Kingdom is supportive of ongoing demining initiatives
and urges the international community to unite behind
that issue.
As we approach the start of the global 16 Days of
Activism against Gender-based Violence, the United
Kingdom reiterates its commitment to working towards
a future in which all women and girls live free from
the fear of violence. We call for an end to the Houthiimposed mahram restrictions, which are directly
curbing the freedoms of Yemeni women.
The only permanent resolution to all of those
issues is long-term peace. And as I said, that will
require a negotiated, Yemeni-led political settlement
under United Nations auspices. The truce continues to
represent the best opportunity for progress, and for the
sake of the Yemeni people, this opportunity must not
be squandered.

S/PV.9199

to a more durable peace and instead have taken actions
that run counter to the strong, ongoing international
support for United Nations-led peace efforts in Yemen.
The recent Houthi terrorist attacks on the Al-Dabba
oil terminal and the Qan‘ah seaport are unacceptable.
They are an affront to the Yemeni people and the
entire international community. Those Houthi attacks
on commercial vessels delivering essential goods are
directly exacerbating the suffering of Yemen’s people
and threaten to plunge the country back into conflict.
In addition, on 16 November, the United States
Navy interdicted 170 tons of lethal materials used as
missile fuel components and explosives that were
hidden aboard a ship bound for Yemen from Iran. The
seized fuel component was enough to enable the launch
of more than a dozen medium-range ballistic missiles.
A group seeking peace does not launch strikes
on seaports and oil terminals, cutting off flows of
humanitarian supplies and basic goods for the people in
the country. A group seeking peace does not attempt to
covertly import fuel for medium-range missiles. Those
actions will only further cripple Yemen’s economy,
lead to a resurgence in civilian deaths and worsen the
humanitarian crisis.
We urge the Houthis to take another path: seize this
moment and choose to end eight years of devastating
war. We call on the Houthis to engage in good faith and
United Nations-led negotiations and return Yemen to the
path of peace through a negotiated, inclusive Yemeniled political settlement. Millions of Yemenis are calling
for peace, justice and economic stability — they are not
calling for more weapons. There is no military solution
to this conflict.

Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Grundberg and Director Ghelani for
their briefings today. Their dedication and efforts to
help facilitate peace are commendable.

The truce provided considerable life-saving
benefits to the Yemeni people, including a dramatic
decline in civilian casualties, increased access to fuel
and commercial flights out of Sana’a airport for the
first time since 2016. Agreement on a peace process
would further set Yemen on the path to recovery and
provide even greater benefits to Yemenis, such as the
payment of public sector salaries, road openings, more
flights and streamlined import processes.

Nearly two months have passed since the truce
expired on 2 October. Like our colleague from the United
Kingdom, we are encouraged that key elements of that
truce continue to hold, but remain deeply concerned
that the Houthis have failed to set negotiations on a path

Despite the current global divisions, there is
remarkable unity for such a solution within the Security
Council and throughout the region. We welcome the
continuous support of the Government of the Republic
of Yemen for United Nations efforts and the support

22-705925/19

S/PV.9199

The situation in the Middle East

from Saudi Arabia, Oman and other regional countries
for initiatives aimed at peace. We also commend the
restraint those partners have shown in the face of the
Houthis’ recent attacks.
As we seek to end the conflict, it is important that we
continue to support the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism for Yemen (UNVIM), which has
played a critical role in ensuring that commercial goods
can flow into Yemen unimpeded, helping to address the
humanitarian crisis. Although UNVIM’s immediate
funding crisis has been averted, it is essential for it to
have the funds to continue operations in the long-term.
Finally, I note that it is critical that we maintain
momentum in resolving the situation of the FSO SAFER
oil tanker. With the funds for phase one now in place,
it is essential we avoid any delays in the timeline for
the operation.
The United States remains committed to supporting
active peace efforts in Yemen. Today the Houthis are
faced with the choice of bringing peace and prosperity
to all Yemenis or continuing a pointless cycle of violence
that has destroyed the lives of so many. The United
States urges the Houthis to negotiate in good faith,
address Yemenis’ calls for justice and accountability
and show their support for an inclusive and durable
peace for the country in word and deed.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to thank Mr. Hans Grundberg and
Ms. Reena Ghelani for their briefings.
Yemen has reached a critical phase since the truce
ended, with the Houthi terrorist militia continuing its
hostile posture towards the Yemeni people and their
legitimate Government. That has, in turn, deepened the
Houthis’ isolation at both the regional and international
levels, and demonstrated the magnitude of the threat
they pose to regional security and peace.
Since our previous meeting on Yemen (see
S/PV.9152), the Houthi militia has launched several
terrorist attacks using drones against oil facilities and
oil tankers in Hadramaut and Shabwah. Those attacks,
which my country strongly condemns, constitute a
serious threat to international maritime navigation,
global energy supplies and the Yemeni economy.
The Houthis have also bombed civilian facilities and
internally displaced persons camps in the Ma’rib and
Taiz governorates, resulting in civilian deaths and
injuries, including among women and children. In
6/19

22/11/2022

addition, they have bombed roads and bridges, such as
the bridge linking Lahij and the besieged city of Taiz.
The Houthis continue to perpetrate the most heinous
violations, including by launching campaigns to
intimidate and arrest people.
Those crimes reflect the Houthis’ determination to
return the situation in Yemen to the way it was prior
to the truce, in contrast to regional and international
endeavours to renew it. Their crimes look exactly like
the tactics deployed by other terrorist groups to achieve
political gains by launching attacks against civilians.
While the Presidential Leadership Council has shown
significant flexibility and self-restraint, the Houthi
militias continue to cling to incapacitating terms in the
negotiations. Although several advantages of the truce
remain in place, including the flow of oil derivatives
through the port of Al-Hudaydah and the arrival of
commercial flights into Sana’a airport, the Houthi
militias continue to respond to all attempts to restore
calm and build bridges with more provocations. Such
behaviour is no longer surprising from a group that has
deliberately sought to foil the negotiations since the
beginning of the crisis.
The United Arab Emirates continues to strongly
support the efforts of the Special Envoy to reach an
agreement that will renew and expand the truce. We
reaffirm that a peaceful solution is the normal path
to end the conflict and enable the Yemeni people
to begin the reconstruction and building process.
Now is the time to agree on solid ground to resume a
comprehensive political process under the auspices of
the United Nations.
Opportunities for peace in Yemen remain
open, but only if the Houthis commit to a political
solution. We reiterate our deep concern regarding the
continued violations of the arms embargo imposed by
resolutions 2216 (2015) and 2624 (2022). Last week,
nearly 170 tons of explosive material were seized in the
Gulf of Oman by the United States Navy. We affirm
that any threat posed by the Houthi terrorist group to
neighbouring countries, including through launching
missiles or the use of drones, is considered a direct
aggression against those countries and will be met with
an immediate and firm response by the Arab coalition
to support legitimacy in Yemen.
With the considerable military escalation and
targeting of Yemeni economic interests, human
suffering is increasing in Yemen. Attacks by the Houthis
22-70592

22/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

on oil facilities may have catastrophic environmental
consequences in the Arabian Sea and the Gulf of Aden.
At the same time, the dilapidated FSO SAFER tanker
remains a serious environmental threat. Additionally,
the Houthi militias must remove all barriers that prevent
humanitarian access in areas under its control and stop
imposing restrictions on the movement of humanitarian
workers, especially Yemeni women.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms
its continued support for improving living standards
in Yemen. We also emphasize the importance of
continuing to speak with one voice in the Council
against the hostile behaviour that undermines peace in
Yemen. The Council should take deterrent measures,
including by applying further pressure and imposing
sanctions, to dissuade the terrorist Houthi militias from
continuing to threaten the security and stability of
Yemen and the region.
Mr. Abbas (Kenya): I thank Special Envoy
Grundberg and Ms. Ghelani for their briefings. I also
welcome the participation of the representatives of
Yemen and Saudi Arabia in this meeting.
Last month, a bus fell off a cliff while navigating
Houthi checkpoints around Taiz. It left three passengers
dead and 22 others seriously injured. It was a painful
reminder of the urgency of fully reopening those roads
in Taiz currently controlled by the Houthis. The Houthis
have also recently targeted civilian infrastructure,
including the Al-Dabba oil terminal in Hadhramawt
and Qan‘ah port in Shabwah. We condemn those
destructive acts, which are in violation of international
humanitarian law and also heighten and perpetuate
tensions that could lead to a resumption of hostilities.
The objective of the Houthis may be to deny
the Government of much-needed revenue from oil
derivatives, but they must realize that those suffering
most from their actions are innocent Yemenis, including
the most vulnerable, namely women, children and
people with disabilities.
The reported interception of a vessel smuggling 70
tons of ammonium perchlorate — a substance used to
make rocket and missile fuel and explosives — suspected
to be bound for Yemen, is an indicator that Yemen could
be used as a base to destabilize the entire region. We
call for urgent and independent investigations into that
serious matter and the necessary action taken against
those responsible.

S/PV.9199

The truce was an opportunity for the parties to
set aside their narrow interests, prioritize the wider
interests of their country and its people and engage in
a Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned process facilitated by
the Special Envoy for a sustainable political solution.
As we have said before, now is not the time to escalate
tensions or reactivate front lines — there is too much at
stake. An eruption of another cycle of violence would
lead to further civilian casualties, internal displacement
and the disruption of much-needed humanitarian
assistance and access.
With three quarters of Yemenis relying on
agriculture and livestock for their survival, the climate
crisis is pushing communities already reeling from the
effects of a prolonged conflict to the brink. Yemeni
farmers have seen it all: if it is not protracted conflict
destroying their livelihoods, then it is extreme drought;
if it is not drought, then it is flooding. Therefore, even
as we address the immediate humanitarian concerns,
there is an urgent need to consider long-term solutions
and pragmatic approaches, including investing in
climate-resilient agriculture to improve food security
and encourage self-reliance.
We remain deeply concerned by the presence
of landmines and other explosive remnants and their
destructive impact on civilians, including women and
children. We advocate for increased demining action in
all affected areas, prompt facilitation of the necessary
equipment used in mine clearance activities and support
for the victims.
We continue to monitor progress on the FSO SAFER
tanker and appreciate the generous contributions made
to date. We hope that the emergency operation can
commence as soon as possible.
To conclude, Kenya reaffirms its solidarity with
the people of Yemen in their desire and quest for a
comprehensive and lasting peace and stability.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Envoy Grundberg and Ms. Ghelani for their
respective briefings. I also welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representatives of Yemen and Saudi Arabia
at today’s meeting.
As the Special Envoy noted in his briefing, the
security situation in Yemen is very fragile. In the past
month, we have witnessed a spate of armed clashes in
locations such as Ma’rib and Taiz, while the Al-Dabba
and Qan‘ah oil terminals came under attack. The spread

22-705927/19

S/PV.9199

The situation in the Middle East

of fighting is worrisome. Military means cannot solve
the Yemeni issue, and the escalation of the conflict
will only bring more suffering to the Yemeni people.
We strongly condemn the attacks on civilians and
civilian infrastructure and call on the parties to the
conflict, especially the Houthis, to put the interests of
the Yemeni people first, to stay committed to the path
towards a political settlement, to cease all hostilities
and to ease tensions on the ground as soon as possible.
China fully acknowledges the overall restraint shown
by the Yemeni Government in the process.
The six-month truce has brought significant peace
dividends to the Yemeni people. Restoring the truce is
not only in the common interests of the Yemeni people,
but also an expectation shared by countries in the region
and the wider international community. The window
of opportunity for peace in Yemen remains open and
rightly so. Special Envoy Grundberg has been working
relentlessly to re-establish the truce. Saudi Arabia,
Oman and other countries in the region have also played
an active and constructive role in that regard, which
China appreciates. We call on the relevant parties, in
particular the Houthis, to actively cooperate with the
Special Envoy and set reasonable expectations on key
issues, such as the payment of civil servants’ salaries,
in order to find a solution at an early date, re-establish
the truce as soon as possible and reach an agreement
on launching a more extensive political process. China
supports the Gulf Cooperation Council’s initiative
on the issue of Yemen and encourages countries with
influence on the situation in Yemen to continue to
provide constructive assistance in de-escalating the
situation and restoring the truce.
Yemen is facing one of the most serious
humanitarian crises in the world, with more than
23 million people in urgent need of humanitarian aid
and an acute malnutrition problem. At the same time,
funding shortfalls have forced many United Nations
humanitarian and development programmes in Yemen
to curtail or even suspend their operations. That is truly
disturbing. We call on the international community
to act immediately to scale up humanitarian and
development assistance to Yemen, provide adequate
funding for United Nations operations in the country
and support the efforts of the Presidential Leadership
Council in improving living standards and stabilizing
Yemen’s economy and currency in order to ease the
plight of the Yemeni people. All parties in Yemen should
also facilitate and cooperate with assistance operations.
8/19

22/11/2022

Sufficient funds have been raised for the first
phase of the operation to address the situation of the
FSO SAFER oil tanker. That is encouraging news.
Regardless of whether the issue is viewed from an
economic, humanitarian, security or environmental
perspective, it is crucial that the potential risks of the
oil tanker be eliminated without delay. We hope that the
United Nations will speed up the implementation of the
action plan to ensure the safe transfer of the tanker’s
crude oil as soon as possible and avoid a disaster.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Hans Grundberg,
and the Director for Operations and Advocacy, United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, Ms. Reena Ghelani, for their briefings on the
political and humanitarian developments in Yemen.
We are disappointed that the truce between the
official Yemeni authorities and the Houthis that ended
almost two months ago has not yet been restored. We
note, however, that the situation on the ground now is
noticeably better than it was at the beginning of the year.
The armed clashes are sporadic. The internationally
recognized Government is exercising restraint and
a relapse into open warfare has so far been avoided.
Commercial flights to Sana’a continue to operate and
oil tankers continue to dock at Al-Hudaydah port.
Nevertheless, the fragility of the current situation
of neither peace nor war is obvious to everyone. In the
circumstances, we consider any provocative unilateral
actions unacceptable, especially those of a military
nature, which would violate the provisions of the
ceasefire and lead to further escalation. We call on
all the parties in Yemen, in particular the Houthis,
to exercise maximum restraint and continue to work
constructively with the Special Envoy, whose mediation
efforts to find a mutually acceptable solution to the
protracted conflict in Yemen we continue to support.
At this stage, the task of Council members, as
international mediators, is to prevent the results of
the six-month truce from being nullified. We have
repeatedly said that seeking to resolve the intra-Yemeni
conflict exclusively through pressure will have the
opposite result. We are convinced that the only way
to overcome the deadlock in the negotiating process is
through direct contacts with the Houthi movement. In
that regard, we welcome any communication channels
and opportunities that could lead to practical results on
22-70592

22/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

the ground and help to stabilize the situation and finally
open the way to a full-fledged political process. We see
no alternative to finding the necessary solutions through
broad intra-Yemeni dialogue with the participation of
all parties to the conflict. For our part, we will continue
to provide significant assistance to the international
mediation efforts in Yemen by maintaining contacts
with all of the country’s leading political parties and
actively encouraging them to engage constructively.
We are becoming concerned about the increasingly
clear fixation of our Western colleagues on the
issue of resuming uninterrupted exports of Yemeni
hydrocarbons. They risk overlooking fundamental
issues hindering a solution to the crisis. We would like
to caution them against making that kind of mistake,
which is already having a very negative impact on the
settlement of a number of other crises in the Middle East.
The six-month truce significantly improved the
daily life of ordinary Yemenis, but the humanitarian
situation in the country remains dire. In many regions,
including in Taiz, there are shortages of basic goods, food
and medicine. We reiterate that providing Yemenis with
basic goods should continue on a non-discriminatory
basis. We call on all players involved in the Yemeni
settlement to continue to cooperate in that area with
international financial organizations and to support
the work of United Nations specialized agencies. Any
restrictions on the delivery of humanitarian assistance
and on humanitarian work are unacceptable.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Hans Grundberg,
and the Director for Operations and Advocacy, United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, Ms. Reena Ghelani, their valuable briefings
on the latest developments in Yemen. I also welcome
the participation in this meeting of the Permanent
Representatives of Yemen and Saudi Arabia.
Gabon notes with great concern the renewed
tensions and security incidents targeting civilians in
Yemen since the end of the truce. We firmly condemn
the recent drone attacks on the Al-Dabba oil port in
the Hadramaut governorate and the port of Qan‘ah in
the south of the country in Shabwah on 21 October and
9 November. Against the backdrop of an economic war,
such attacks are likely to seriously threaten the peace
process and stability in Yemen, and if not neutralized as
soon as possible could draw the country into a conflict

S/PV.9199

even more intense than the previous one. In that regard,
we call on the parties to exercise maximum restraint,
abide by international humanitarian law, work in
concert with the Special Envoy and refrain from any
action that could jeopardize the hard-won peace and
stabilization efforts in the country.
The renewal of the truce in Yemen remains a crucial
issue for my delegation. The truce made it possible to
make significant progress in people’s everyday lives,
notably in terms of reducing the number of civilian
casualties, ensuring regular fuel supplies, providing
basic services and allowing free movement and the
resumption of commercial flights to and from Sana’a.
Despite the alarming signs around the developments on
the ground, we hope that the parties will put the interests
of the Yemeni people ahead of their own and avoid any
temptation to use force. We therefore urge the parties
to resume negotiations in order to prioritize a peaceful
settlement of their disputes and with the support of the
Special Envoy to commit to a new multidimensional
agreement in the framework of an inclusive dialogue
involving women and young people.
My country takes note of the commitment of the
Government of Yemen to supporting the Special Envoy’s
efforts to provide adequate conditions for a renewal of
the truce. We also welcome the positive role played by
the region to re-establish the humanitarian truce.
The humanitarian situation remains critical. War
has plunged the country into a serious humanitarian
crisis — one of the worst in the world. Given the scale
of the situation, the benefits of the truce prove lacking.
The economy remains in shambles, thereby exacerbating
the suffering of the Yemeni people. The challenges in
gaining access to basic products, education and basic
health care leave thousands of households in need and
lead to many population displacements.
The effects of explosive remnants of war on
civilians are also a source of concern. According to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the number of victims of explosive remnants of war
has increased since the end of the truce, making those
devices responsible for the largest number of civilian
victims during the conflict period.
The Yemeni people need everyone’s support, in
particular during the winter months. We therefore
encourage donors to make a greater contribution to the
humanitarian response plan for Yemen, which, to date,
is only 48 per cent funded.

22-705929/19

S/PV.9199

The situation in the Middle East

In conclusion, Gabon reiterates its support for
the Yemeni people, who demonstrate considerable
resilience, and for Special Envoy Hans Grundberg
and his tireless efforts to maintain dialogue between
the parties with the aim of reaching a truce and, in
the longer term, a comprehensive peace agreement
in Yemen.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I thank Special Envoy
Grundberg and the Director for Operations and
Advocacy of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Ghelani, for their sobering
briefings today.
Last month, we expressed our disappointment that
the truce in Yemen was not renewed (see S/PV.9152).
That is a disappointment for the international
community, but much more particularly for Yemenis,
who had hoped that the truce would create further
momentum for progress towards an enduring political
solution. While we do not have positive news today on a
renewal, we continue to believe that the truce represents
the best opportunity for sustainable peace in Yemen and
stability in the region. We reiterate our wholehearted
support for the Special Envoy in his ongoing efforts.
The progress achieved in the past months on the
humanitarian, political and economic fronts, no matter
how modest, should not be overlooked.
It is essential that all parties refrain from reckless,
risky actions. Last month, the Council spoke with one
voice to condemn the 21 October Houthi drone attacks
on the Al-Dabba oil terminal. We re-emphasize that
condemnation today, particularly in the light of the fresh
strike yesterday. Such attacks, including on the port of
Qan‘ah, on 9 November, are totally unacceptable. They
constitute a serious threat to maritime security in the
region and are not the actions of a credible interlocutor.
We urge all parties, and the Houthis in particular, to
refrain from military action and engage constructively
and urgently with the United Nations process. We once
again stress that there can be no military solution to the
conflict in Yemen and acknowledge the role of regional
actors in facilitating genuine dialogue.
As we continue in our collective efforts towards
a negotiated, inclusive and Yemeni-led settlement,
we cannot sideline half the population. As we know,
women in Yemen play crucial mediation and leadership
roles, including at local and community levels. We must
work to support women leaders, elevate a broad range
10/19

22/11/2022

of women’s voices and protect those who are targeted
by harassment, threats and violence.
We are extremely concerned about the impact
of the lapsed truce on Yemeni women, including the
imposition of travel restrictions. Women and children
are also disproportionately victims of unexploded
ordnance and remnants of war. We therefore support
the Special Envoy’s inclusive approach, including
his commitment to reserving non-transferable seats
for women representatives in talks. We welcome his
convening of a consultative meeting on gender inclusion
on the margins of a European Union event earlier this
month. We remind all parties that the participation of
women is not negotiable and should never be used as a
bargaining chip. Diverse Yemeni women must have a
say in the shaping of their own futures.
With the already formidable threat of food and
economic insecurity, it is crucial that the elements of the
truce, which have brought marked relief to the Yemeni
people, be preserved. That includes steady flows of fuel
into Al-Hudaydah port and commercial flights through
Sana’a airport. We encourage all parties to continue to
implement those measures in good faith for the benefit
of the Yemeni people. That is particularly important
during the trying winter months and for Yemen’s
millions of internally displaced persons, including
in Ma’rib. We must work to address funding gaps for
the humanitarian response, including critical shelter
programmes, and to protect the humanitarian space.
Finally, we call on all actors to fully respect
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. We cannot lose sight of the need
to pursue accountability for alleged violations and
abuses perpetrated against Yemenis, with impunity,
throughout the course of the conflict.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I would like to extend a
warm welcome to Special Envoy Hans Grundberg
and commend his continued efforts to secure peace
and stability in Yemen. I would also like to thank
Reena Ghelani for her valuable update on the
humanitarian situation.
As we have heard, the situation in Yemen is dire. We
are concerned about the increase in civilian casualties
over the past few months, including the loss of 11
children. Parties to the conflict must do their utmost
to protect civilians. All perpetrators of violations of
humanitarian law and of human rights violations and
abuses must be held accountable for their actions.
22-70592

22/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

We condemn the recent attacks by the Houthis on
Al-Dabba port and on the oil tanker in the Qan‘ah port.
Those attacks represent a serious threat to the peace
process and stability in Yemen. As we stated last month,
it is urgent to come to an agreement to extend and
expand the truce to make room for a political process.
We commend all efforts that can lead to progress in
the United Nations-led process. Those efforts must also
ensure the inclusion of women at all stages. We support
the Special Envoy’s consultation with Yemeni women
from diverse backgrounds and regions.
The importance of supporting the most vulnerable
in the conflict in Yemen, the children, cannot be
overstated. Forty per cent of Yemen’s population is
under 14 and at least 8 million children are in need
of assistance, with 1 million in acute need of child
protection assistance. We call on all parties to fully and
swiftly implement action plans to end and prevent abuses
against children. Moreover, the recommendations of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
must be swiftly implemented.
While we note positively the Government’s
ongoing efforts to remove unnecessary bureaucratic
impediments for humanitarian workers, those efforts
must continue to facilitate access for life-saving
humanitarian work. Landmines also have a heavy
impact on civilians, in particular children. We heard
Ms. Ghelani underscore the need for support to work on
demining and urge the parties to fully cooperate with
those efforts. Donors must also scale up their support
for mine clearance and mine-risk education.
In conclusion, the Council can be assured that
Norway remains committed to supporting the people
of Yemen.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start
by thanking both our briefers for their informative
briefings. I also welcome the delegations of Saudi
Arabia and Yemen to today’s meeting.
As we gather for our second Security Council
meeting after the end of the truce, the situation in
Yemen remains largely unaltered. Although the truce
was broken, there has been no significant movement of
troops or rise in hostilities. Despite incidents of drone
attacks, one of which the Council firmly condemned
in a press statement in October, the overall scenario
remains relatively stable, with no increase in casualties.
In this context, we commend the Government of
Yemen for the restraint it has displayed. The fact that

S/PV.9199

some of the effects of the truce endure even if it is no
longer in place benefits all Yemenis, for example, the
maintenance of flights to and from Sana’a, the flow
of essential shipments and the progress of the FSO
SAFER salvage operation. Rather than be discouraged,
let us build upon this foundation to further improve
and stabilize the country while we hope that the truce
agreement will be restored at the earliest opportunity,
bearing in mind the current efforts by Special Envoy
Grundberg in this regard.
Brazil also notes the Special Envoy’s recent visits
to Muscat and Riyadh and reaffirms its strong support
for his work in favour of a lasting solution to the
crisis in Yemen. Unfortunately, the dire situation in
Yemen lingers on, and the prospect of peace appears
to be distant. Almost a decade of civil war has plunged
Yemen into an unparalleled humanitarian crisis. The
Yemeni people have borne the brunt of the many
hardships befalling the country, from the collapse of
public services to widespread unemployment and
inflation, from malnutrition and famine to human
rights violations.
The issue of land mines and unexploded remnants
of war is of particular concern, as the lower intensity of
the conflict prompts greater movement of civilians, with
the most vulnerable, namely, women and children, being
further exposed to the risk of such devices. I therefore
urge the relevant authorities to undertake all efforts to
enable the full resumption of mine-clearance activities
throughout the country, such as the importation of
field-clearing equipment and the facilitation of visas
for specialized personnel.
Brazil remains committed in its support for the
activities of the United Nations Mission to support
the Hodeidah Agreement and the United Nations
Verification and Inspection Mechanism, both of which
have been instrumental in helping to sustain a lifeline
for the Yemeni population. Furthermore, we echo
the calls for the reduction of movement restrictions
and bureaucratic hindrances affecting the crucial
humanitarian work performed by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and other
United Nations agencies.
Yemen deserves a safer and brighter future in
peace and stability. Yemen deserves to harness its full
potential for growth and development. Let us seek
further unity in the Security Council and beyond to

22-7059211/19

S/PV.9199

The situation in the Middle East

secure the political settlement we hope for by building
upon the gains achieved so far.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank Hans
Grundberg and Reena Ghelani for their briefings.
I would also like to welcome the presence of the
representatives of Yemen and Saudi Arabia in this
afternoon’s meeting.
I have three messages today. First, the Security
Council must do everything possible to avoid a new
increase in tensions. As we know, the breakdown of
the truce has not been accompanied by an escalation
on the ground, which is good news. But the situation
is unstable and could quickly deteriorate. France
therefore calls on all parties to show restraint — and
on the Houthis to refrain from any provocation that
could again tip Yemen into a new cycle of violence. We
strongly condemn the recent terrorist attacks by the
Houthis on oil terminals in Hadramaut and Shabwah.
The objective of these attacks is to economically stifle
the Yemeni Government.
Although the clashes on the ground remain
localized, the Security Council cannot be satisfied with
the status quo. In Ta’iz in particular, the situation is
untenable, and its inhabitants are virtually cut off from
the outside world. It is urgent to renew the truce on the
ground, which is the first step towards the resumption
of a political process. In order to do this, it is first
necessary to re-establish trust. In this respect, France
welcomes the gestures made towards the Houthis by
the Yemeni Government. We call on the Houthis to
show tangible signs of their willingness to negotiate,
particularly with regard to access to Ta’iz.
Secondly, humanitarian access must be improved.
United Nations and humanitarian personnel must
be allowed to move without fear of being targeted
or arrested. It is imperative that the Houthis stop
intimidating female aid workers by imposing male
guardians. We are also very concerned about the
Houthis’ desire to impose a tax on health-care
workers. We reiterate the importance of ensuring full
humanitarian access and better working conditions
for humanitarian actors, so that they can assist all
Yemenis in vulnerable situations. We also call for the
immediate and unconditional release of United Nations
and humanitarian personnel held by the Houthis.
Eight years of war and conflict have left their
mark, and mines and explosive remnants of war pose a
12/19

22/11/2022

serious danger to the population and are causing many
civilian casualties. This is a major challenge that needs
to be addressed, including with continued funding for
mine-clearance activities, as mentioned, and more riskeducation sessions for the population.
As Yemen continues to face a severe humanitarian
crisis, migrants and displaced persons are among the
most vulnerable. In particular, they face higher risks of
abduction, torture, detention and exploitation. We call
on the parties to the conflict to ensure that these fragile
populations receive all the assistance they need.
It is also important to rapidly launch the first
phase of the operational plan to rescue the oil tanker
FSO SAFER; the threat of an ecological disaster is
still imminent.
Finally, France would like to express its full
support for the Special Envoy and his efforts to revive
the political process. All stakeholders must commit
themselves without delay and in a constructive manner
to a political process to end the crisis. France welcomes
the commitment of the Yemeni Government in this
regard as well as the constructive involvement of certain
regional actors. It is essential that all these mediation
efforts be carried out in proper coordination with those
of the Special Envoy.
More than a month after the expiration of the truce,
we note with regret that, for the moment, the Houthis
are showing no real willingness to negotiate with the
Yemeni Government and the Special Envoy. We hope
that they will put the interests of the Yemeni people
before their own and assume their responsibilities.
In this difficult context, France commends the work
of the Special Envoy and his strong commitment to
involve Yemeni women in the peace process. We know
that the full participation of women in peace processes
increases the chances of success. It is therefore essential
that they be involved in the decision-making process
concerning the future of their own country.
France remains committed to working alongside
the Special Envoy to put an end to this conflict.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by thanking Special Envoy
Grundberg and Director Ghelani for their briefings. We
welcome the delegations from Yemen and Saudi Arabia
to this afternoon’s meeting.
22-70592

22/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

As mentioned by the Special Envoy, the truce
has not been renewed, but, in general terms, some of
its provisions remain in force, such as flights to and
from Sana’a and the entry of fuel from the port of
Al-Hudaydah. Nevertheless, we would caution that
there is a hidden risk of escalation. This is evidenced by
the attack against the oil facilities in Al-Dubba, as well
as attacks committed against civilian infrastructure in
Hadramaut and Shabwah.
Mexico reiterates its support for the efforts of
the Special Envoy aimed at renewing the truce, and
it welcomes regional efforts, such as those of Saudi
Arabia and Oman. In this regard, the mediation efforts
that have taken place at the local level for the cessation
of hostilities in Ma’rib and Hadramaut are encouraging.
On the other hand, we condemn the threats and
incitement to violence that the Houthi have directed
against foreign corporations. This type of provocation
inhibits economic revival and the production and
export of energy, and it infringes on the freedom of
movement in the area. In this fragile context, we once
again urge all parties, especially Ansar Allah, to show
flexibility in order to renew the truce and definitively
cease hostilities.
The Yemeni economy has been significantly
affected by eight years of armed conflict, which has had
an extremely high humanitarian cost. In the last quarter
of this year, 17 million people, or 56 per cent of the
population, will face acute food insecurity. In addition,
4.5 million people have been displaced by violence.
Mexico expresses its concern about the insufficient
funding of the humanitarian response, as mentioned by
Director Ghelani. Equally concerning are the access
difficulties faced by agencies on the ground. The
magnitude of the needs requires that access be facilitated
for the entire population. We therefore call for the
removal of administrative and bureaucratic obstacles
and an end to threats against humanitarian workers.
We reiterate our support for the Special Envoy’s
proposed multitrack framework to promote a sustainable
and inclusive peace that includes measures for economic
recovery. That is the only way to prevent the population
from continuing to depend on humanitarian assistance.
On the other hand, we express great alarm at the
number of casualties caused by mines and explosive
remnants. In the past six months alone, 300 incidents
were recorded. It is imperative that we redouble our

S/PV.9199

efforts to address that problem, which means facilitating
the import of equipment and granting the necessary
visas for specialized personnel.
In conclusion, we welcome the progress made in
planning the operation to address the FSO SAFER oil
tanker situation. We hope that the transfer of fuel to
another vessel will begin soon in order to avoid an
environmental, economic and humanitarian catastrophe.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): I thank Special Envoy
Grundberg for the information provided, and I thank
Director Ghelani for the clear introduction on the
humanitarian situation in Yemen. Let me reaffirm
Albania’s full support for the relentless efforts of the
Special Envoy towards the political process in Yemen.
I also welcome the presence of the representatives of
Saudi Arabia and Yemen in the Chamber.
We support all international efforts to achieve
the renewal of the truth as the best way to provide
the Yemeni people with the hope to live in peace and
security and leave behind the dark days of fighting
and conflict. In that respect, we appreciate the sincere
engagement of Saudi Arabia, the Sultanate of Oman
and other regional actors in facilitating those efforts.
Although there has been no serious deterioration of
the situation on the ground since the expiration of the
truce, insecurity and uncertainty have increased, and
fear of further escalation is alive among the Yemeni
people. We therefore call for the parties to exercise
full restraint and engage constructively in talks to go
back to the truce renewal and, in a broader perspective,
to restore the political process. We have said it before
and would like to reiterate that there is no military
solution to the conflict in Yemen. The international
community and the Security Council should maintain
their support for a Yemeni-led and -owned political
process facilitated by the United Nations. The unity of
the Security Council in that regard is therefore crucial,
while the political process must be timely and inclusive,
with the meaningful participation of women and youth.
Peace can be restored through efforts in good faith and
with trust. We call on the Houthis to refrain from their
maximalist requests and to work constructively.
Peace and security concern all Yemenis. The
recent attacks on Taiz and clashes in Ma’rib and other
Government-controlled areas will only move the
country away from a truce and plunge it back to fighting,
with all the dire consequences for civilians, including
children. Respect for international humanitarian law

22-7059213/19

S/PV.9199

The situation in the Middle East

is an obligation. Let me also reiterate Albania’s strong
condemnation for the Houthi terrorist attacks on civilian
ports and call on them to cease acts that exacerbate the
suffering of the Yemeni people.
We remain deeply worried about the worsening
humanitarian situation in Yemen and the continued
shrinking space for humanitarian workers in the
country. We call on all parties to not interfere with
humanitarian workers in Yemen, who must be able to
conduct their work freely, without hindrances and with
full access to all areas. All parties must guarantee the
security of humanitarian workers. We will continue to
seek clarity for the unknown situation of the staff of
United Nations and non-governmental organizations,
as well as other civilians abducted by armed groups and
the Yemenis employed by the United States Embassy
who continue to be incarcerated. We call for their
immediate release.
I would also like to join others in expressing concern
about the increasing number of incidents — affecting
mainly children — caused by the landmines in Yemen.
The situation must be addressed as soon as possible,
and all United Nations efforts in that regard are
strongly welcomed.
Let me conclude by reiterating the importance
of the full implementation of resolution 2216 (2015),
on Yemen. We are deeply worried that the sanctions
regime on Yemen has reportedly been violated. The
interception of a stateless boat carrying more than 170
tons of a urea fertilizer and ammonium perchlorate — an
Iranian shipment — is yet further clear testimony of
the continued obstructive activities of Iran in Yemen.
While the international community, including the
Council, is actively engaged for peace in Yemen, it must
not tolerate such destructive behaviours. I reiterate
that the unity of the Security Council remains crucial
to supporting an inclusive political process, with the
meaningful participation of women and young people,
in order to address the real concerns and aspirations of
the Yemeni people.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I thank Special Envoy Hans
Grundberg for his briefing. We recognize his ongoing
efforts to resume the truce and bring the Yemeni
parties back to dialogue. I also thank Ms. Reena
Ghelani, Director for Operations and Advocacy at the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) for her briefing. We appreciate the important
contribution of OCHA, the humanitarian community
14/19

22/11/2022

and aid workers in Yemen in delivering life-saving
humanitarian assistance to the people of Yemen.
Yemen is at a crossroads. One path leads to the
peaceful resolution of the conflict and the other leads
to the resumption of active hostilities, which will only
exacerbate the suffering of the Yemeni people. The
choice is clearly for the parties to the conflict to make.
We urge them to embrace the path towards peace by
shedding the military approach and by extending and
expanding the truce into a comprehensive nationwide
ceasefire. The focus should be on cooperative and
confidence-building measures in order to alleviate the
lives of Yemeni people and, eventually, by starting an
inclusive political dialogue to end the conflict.
In that regard, we are concerned by the actions
of Ansar Allah and condemn its attacks on ports and
shipping vessels in Yemen, as well as its threats to
shipping vessels travelling in and out of Yemen. The
use of sophisticated missiles and drones in those attacks
raises questions over the implementation of the targeted
arms embargo established by the Council. I reiterate
India’s call for the strict implementation of the arms
embargo in order to effectively eliminate such threats
in future. Those attacks, which have targeted the oil
sector in particular, will have severe consequences for
the already-fragile economy of Yemen. Such actions
can also turn Gulf of Aden and the Red Sea into a
potential conflict zone, thereby destabilizing maritime
security in the region.
On the humanitarian side, two wheat shipments
of almost 85,000 metric tons have departed for Yemen
under the Black Sea Grain Initiative within the past 30
days. We welcome that development and hope that this
important Initiative will continue to benefit Yemen.
India has also taken steps to address food security in
Yemen by prioritizing wheat exports to the country.
Despite our national regulations on wheat exports, we
have continued to export wheat to Yemen to mitigate
the adverse impact of supply changes in the global
commodity markets. We remain committed to doing so
in future as well.
Let me conclude by calling upon all parties to
engage constructively with the Special Envoy in his
efforts to renew the truce and seek a political solution
to the conflict. The Security Council should send a
strong and clear signal to anyone who stands in the way
of these efforts.
22-70592

22/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ghana.
Let me begin by thanking Special Envoy Hans
Grundberg and Ms. Reena Ghelani for their briefings.
At the outset, we note with regret the continuing
inability of the parties to reach an agreement to extend
the truce in line with the proposal of the Special
Envoy, since it elapsed early last month. We renew
our appeal to the international community to take the
necessary steps to prevail on the parties to renew the
truce agreement and forestall any possible escalation
of military hostilities with its attendant consequences
for civilian lives. Regional stakeholders with influence
over the parties must leverage those relationships to get
the parties to end the conflict and take the path of peace.
We condemn recent reports of attacks in the country,
including the aerial attack against a vessel at Al-Dubba
oil terminal in Hadramaut governorate on 21 October
2022, for which Ansar Allah claimed responsibility. We
remind the parties that any escalation of hostilities will
reverse the marginal progress made under the truce
agreement and exacerbate the humanitarian situation
in the country. We therefore implore the parties,
particularly, Ansar Allah, to refrain from actions that
may derail the relative calm and tranquillity that the
people of Yemen have enjoyed in recent times.
It is imperative that the interests of the people of
Yemen should reign supreme as the parties engage
in negotiations. In this regard, as we welcome the
continuing engagement of the Government of Yemen
with the Special Envoy in his quest to extend the truce,
we urge the two parties, especially Ansar Allah, to be
flexible and undertake constructive dialogue in the
spirit of compromise and with a view to reaching a
peaceful resolution of the conflict.
On the humanitarian front, we call for continued
international support to address the widespread food
insecurity in Yemen that puts parts of the country’s
population at high risk of famine. International support
in that regard must be increased to help bridge the
humanitarian funding gap and make food and other
essential supplies reach all those in desperate need in the
country. We remain concerned about the fate of missing
and detained humanitarian workers in the country and
call for necessary information on their whereabouts as
well as for their immediate and unconditional release.

S/PV.9199

As highlighted in today’s briefing, the danger posed
by explosive remnants of war in Yemen, particularly in
Al-Hudaydah remains high. We are deeply concerned
that notwithstanding the lull in hostilities, landmines
continue to claim the lives of many Yemenis. We call
for global and concerted efforts to address the problem.
It is regrettable that the continuing blocking of
roads into and out of the city of Ta’iz remains one of the
main sticking points in the negotiations to extend the
truce. We call on the parties, particularly Ansar Allah,
to take immediate steps towards lifting the siege to help
ease the suffering of the affected people.
On the issue of the FSO SAFER oil tanker, we
commend all stakeholders who have made various
contributions to enable the first phase of the operation
to commence, and we call for expedited action by the
United Nations and all those involved in the process
so as to avert humanitarian and environmental disaster.
In conclusion, we entreat the parties to be flexible
and make the needed concessions to renew the truce
agreement in the interest of all Yemenis.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your country’s presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I wish you every success in your
tasks. I would also like to thank your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Gabon, for a successful
presidency last month. I also thank Mr. Grunberg and
Ms. Ghelani for their briefings.
The Presidential Leadership Council once again
reiterates its commitment to comprehensive and
lasting peace on the basis of the agreed terms of
reference of the political solution, namely, the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation
Mechanism, outcomes of the comprehensive National
Dialogue Conference and relevant Council resolutions,
particularly resolution 2216 (2015).
At the time when our Yemeni people cherished the
hope of reviving the peace track by agreeing on the
humanitarian truce under the auspices of the United
Nations, and optimism reigned in Yemen after eight
years of war and stalemate, that hope dissipated as
expected when the Houthi terrorist militias, supported

22-7059215/19

S/PV.9199

The situation in the Middle East

by Iran, chose to unprecedentedly escalate the situation
and refused to renew the truce. That clearly proves
hindering of the peace efforts and continuing their
terrorist actions in Yemen and beyond. It also proves that
those militias do not want peace, so as to alleviate the
suffering of the Yemeni people and end the catastrophic
humanitarian crisis. Their rejection also threatens
security and stability in Yemen and the region, as well
as completely undermining peace efforts.
The Presidential Leadership Council reiterated
its commitment to all the truce items and remains
committed to them to this day, notwithstanding the
refusal of the Houthi militias to renew the truce, not
meeting their commitments and not opening the main
roads to Ta’iz, which has been besieged for eight years.
The Yemeni people had hoped to witness another step
towards achieving peace that would yield more benefits
for them through renewing the humanitarian truce
for an additional six months, allowing more travel
destinations and paying salaries for civil servants, in
line with the 2014 register, in the regions under the
Houthis control.

22/11/2022

sponsor black markets for oil derivatives, even though
millions of tons of fuel are flowing into Al-Hudaydah
port. In addition, they impose restrictions against
rights and freedoms, while preventing women from
travelling by air and setting up security check points
to prevent them from travelling between different
governorates. Recently, they imposed the so-called job
code of conduct, which compels all civilian employees
to adopt the extremist ideologies of the Houthi militias,
and whoever refuses to accept is to be terminated from
their job.

Although the Presidential Leadership Council
has fully accepted and supported the truce in order to
move from war to peace and meet the aspirations of
the Yemeni people, those militias seek to undermine
all the achievements made for the Yemeni people
during the past six months. They have evaded the
entitlements of peace while targeting the economy and
the infrastructure by perpetrating a determined war
crime, including targeting the ports of Al-Dabeibah,
Al-Nusheima and Qan‘ah ports in Hadramaut and
Shabwah governorates in recent weeks, and repeating
that yesterday on 21 November when they launched a
new terrorist attack using Iranian drones targeting the
Al-Dabba oil terminal in Hadramaut when a commercial
oil tanker was anchored in the port.

Every day, those militias launch new threats
targeting national economic infrastructure in Yemen
and in neighbouring countries, including by sending
letters to some Members States of the United Nations
saying that commercial ships flying their flags
in territorial waters or when approaching Yemeni
ports could be attacked. That reflects the terrorist
nature of that group and is a flagrant challenge to
all international appeals by the Security Council to
extend the truce, stop the escalation and positively
engage with the efforts of the United Nations through
its Special Envoy for Yemen, while maintaining the
peace track and resuming the political process. That
requires the international community and the Security
Council to assume their responsibilities, take firm
measures against that dangerous escalation and put an
end to those threats and terrorist acts, which seek to
prolong the conflict in Yemen and threaten regional
and international peace and security. We call on the
international community to find a realistic approach
to dealing with the Houthi militias by moving from
condemning such terrorist acts to collective action to
address the terrorist threats by classifying the Houthi
militias as a terrorist group, having demonstrated their
aggressive and terrorist nature, which poses a threat to
peace in Yemen, the region and the world.

Those terrorist acts have led to preventing exports
from those vital ports, with the aim of creating
comprehensive humanitarian and economic crises
across the country and obstructing the economic reform
process that had been launched by the Presidential
Leadership Council and the Yemeni Government over
recent months. Moreover, those militias have developed
other means to threat international maritime shipping
by randomly placing mines in international shipping
routes and attacking commercial tankers with drones,
booby-trapped boats and guided missiles, not to mention
piracy and the seizing of ships. Those militias also

The Yemeni Government warns that the terrorist
attacks on economic facilities and infrastructure
will obstruct the Government’s efforts, destroy the
foundations of the national economy and the capabilities
of the Yemeni people, exacerbate the catastrophic
humanitarian crisis and lead to the Government’s
inability to pay the salaries of employees and fulfil
its obligations to provide basic services to its citizens,
as well as torpedo peace efforts. In that regard, we
appreciate the role of the Special Envoy and his team
in order to establish peace and stability in Yemen,
and the importance of redoubling the pressure of the

16/19

22-70592

22/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

international community and the Council on those
militias to deal positively with peace efforts and give
priority to the interest of the Yemeni people over the
interests of the militias leaders and supporters of the
Iranian regime.
The Houthi militias have caused the killings of
approximately half a million Yemenis, including
women and children, displaced about 5 million others,
internally and across other countries and continents,
and planted millions of internationally banned mines,
devices and other explosives. As members have heard,
170 tons of explosives and explosive material sent by
the Iranian regime to the Houthis were confiscated.
Those militias compelled thousands of children and
young people to be soldiers and sent them to die in
crematoriums, began to obliterate the Yemeni national
identity, crushed rights and societal gains and eliminated
the climate of coexistence and pluralism that prevailed
in Yemen throughout history. In addition, today more
than 80 per cent of our population is waiting today for
aid from relief agencies because of the intransigence of
the Houthi militias and their rejection of all efforts and
endeavours to establish peace, stop the war and end the
catastrophic human suffering.
The Yemeni Government, based on the directives
of the Presidential Leadership Council, approved the
preparation of a strategy according to well-studied
mechanisms that include the legal and economic tracks
and ensure that the decision to classify the Houthi
militias as a terrorist group does not affect commercial
activity and the private sector, as well as the smooth
flow of food commodities and the implementation of
a number of reforms in the field of institutional and
service building, fighting corruption and protecting
rights and freedoms, including activating the role of
judicial and oversight bodies, in addition to assessing
the level of implementing the plan of economic,
financial and administrative reforms, activating the
performance of State institutions, working to accelerate
the implementation of those reforms in a way that
will reflect positively on the national economy and
Government efforts during that stage, and arranging
priorities in line with urgent needs and alleviating the
suffering of citizens.
We commend the role of our brothers in the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
and their continuous efforts to alleviate the suffering
of Yemenis and the response of the two brotherly
countries to the development needs that will result in

S/PV.9199

the implementation of a number of vital projects, in
addition to the hoped-for improvement in the value of
the national currency and economic conditions. We also
appreciate the support provided by the United States
of America and the United Kingdom to strengthen the
account of the Central Bank of Yemen by $300 million
from the International Monetary Fund’s Special
Drawing Rights, in a move that will support the national
currency, continue the import of food commodities and
improve living conditions.
In conclusion, the Yemeni Government reaffirms its
full support for the United Nations plan to address the
situation of the FSO SAFER oil tanker in order to prevent
an environmental, humanitarian and economic disaster.
We call for a speedy transition to the implementation
of the plan and welcome the announcement by the
United Nations that field work will begin to empty the
tanker in the first quarter of 2023. We stress the need
to maintain pressure on the Houthi militias to prevent
their continued manipulation of that dossier and use it
as a political blackmail card.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Alwasil (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to sincerely thank the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Hans Grundberg, and the Director for Operations
and Advocacy at the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Reena
Ghelani, for their briefings and their concrete efforts
to promote peace and security in Yemen and alleviate
the human suffering of the brotherly Yemeni people.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia reiterates its firm and
steadfast position of supporting the political efforts of
the United Nations represented by Mr. Hans Grundburg
and the humanitarian efforts represented by Mr. Martin
Griffiths, and all humanitarian workers. The Kingdom
will spare no effort in supporting the United Nations
efforts aimed at establishing security and peace
in Yemen.
We are meeting today to discuss the Yemeni crisis
after the refusal of the Houthi militias to extend the
truce agreement, as the entire international community
is silently watching the delicate and critical conditions
that Yemen is currently going through, and their dire
consequences on the Yemeni citizen, the security of
the region, the security of navigation and regional and
international sea lanes, which necessitates that the

22-7059217/19

S/PV.9199

The situation in the Middle East

Security Council discuss the current Yemeni scene
in all transparency and objectivity. We are meeting
again, after our previous meeting on 14 November,
to discuss the impact of serious security and political
developments that warns of further instability and
insecurity in Yemen and the region. We have all
witnessed the resumption of the Houthi militias’
terrorist acts that targeted the ports of Al-Dabba port
in Hadramaut, the sea ports of Qan‘ah and Al-Nashima
in Shabwah and the targeting of refugee camps in
the city of Ma’rib, in addition to the exploitation of
Yemeni ports, namely, Al-Hudaydah and Ras Issa, to
perpetuate the smuggling of weapons, ammunition and
contraband to the Houthi militias, and the smuggling
of military experts from neighbouring countries and
international terrorists from some regional countries
that support those militias. The United States marine
force confiscated in mid-November explosive material
contrary to relevant international resolutions, including
resolutions 2624 (2022) and 2216 (2015).
The Houthi militias still require the following
conditions for the extension of the truce.
First, the Arab Coalition to Support Legitimacy
in Yemen should pay the salaries of its outlaw fighters
who are committing humanitarian crimes against the
Yemeni people, and secondly, those salaries should be
paid in United States dollars, not in the local currency.
In flagrant violation of the truce agreement, those
militias still refuse to deposit the revenues from the
Al-Hudaydah ports in the Central Bank of Yemen, in
accordance with the first truce agreement. The Houthi
groups are currently using the revenues from those
ports to fund their military operations in Yemen. They
also continue to impose a blockade of the city of Taiz,
which is witnessing a dire humanitarian situation,
while the international community is unaware of the
humanitarian catastrophe in that city.
Moreover, the Houthi militias are depriving the
Yemeni people in areas not under their control of their
livelihoods by targeting the export of natural resources
from which the salaries of teachers and employees
in the public and health sectors are paid. Attacks on
commercial and oil vessels in all ports controlled by the
legitimate Government therefore constitute criminal
acts that seek to impoverish and starve the Yemeni
people. Through those actions, the terrorist militias
are taking the Yemeni people hostage, controlling
their destiny and exposing entire Yemeni generations
18/19

22/11/2022

to the danger of wars and armed conflicts, while
prioritizing its extremist ideological interests above
all considerations.
As the international community is aware, the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is one of the largest donors
to the brotherly people of Yemen. My country will
continue to support the Yemeni people alongside
Yemen’s regional and international partners. At the
same time, we are aware of the scope of the humanitarian
and security challenges in Yemen, especially with
regard to the mechanisms for distributing humanitarian
assistance. Hence, there is a need from all of us to
find more effective ways to address the humanitarian
crisis and the best means to develop our humanitarian
response plans in line with the current situation on
the ground.
We must also prevent the Houthi militias from
controlling and diverting humanitarian assistance,
thereby depriving those in need. The truth should
be told to the international community, namely, that
the Houthi militias continue to interfere with the
distribution of humanitarian assistance through their
humanitarian arm, the so-called Supreme Council for
the Management and Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. We believe that that body is the primary cause
for exacerbating the humanitarian crisis in Yemen.
We clearly call for promoting the independence
of humanitarian work, without any influence or
interference from that inhumane body.
On the other hand, it should be noted that the
Stockholm Agreement is in real crisis that needs the
attention of the Security Council. The Houthi militias
control all Al-Hudaydah ports, which are now plagued
by sea mines and are being used by the Houthi militias
for military activities. They have been turned into a
hub to smuggle weapons, internationally prohibited
materials, terrorists and those wanted internationally, in
the absence of any international inspection mechanisms.
The question here is whether international silence
regarding those violations serves the Yemeni people.
The Houthi militias disavow from the obligations
they made to the United Nations Special Envoy in the
context of the first truce agreement, and we are all
witnesses to their intransigence and refusal to discuss
any proposal to extend the truce or to reach a peaceful
and lasting settlement to the Yemeni crisis. Regrettably,
we are also seeing how some international parties are
ignoring the violations of the Houthi militias. We
22-70592

22/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

condemn those who justify the heinous practices and
support militias that adopt obscure ideologies.
Lastly, the current situation is extremely serious
and threatens to collapse at any given moment. It seems
that there is no effective international strategy or vision
that would compel the Houthi militias to disarm and
engage in reaching a final peaceful settlement to the
Yemeni crisis.
The deterioration of the security and humanitarian
situations in Yemen will affect the entire region.
Classifying the Houthi militias as a terrorist group is
today a matter of the utmost urgency, as the actions of
those militias and their illegal practices require such
a measure. That is particularly true in the light of the
failure of peaceful negotiations and efforts during

S/PV.9199

previous years towards achieving tangible results.
The international community must take a clear stance
against terrorist activities that use ballistic missiles
and drones targeting Yemenis, neighbouring States and
commercial and oil vessels.
In conclusion, we reiterate from this Chamber that
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will not hesitate to defend
itself and will respond firmly to any threat to its national
security or to that of Gulf or Coalition countries.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

22-7059219/19
