S/PV.7785

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7785th meeting

Saturday, 8 October 2016, 2.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Ayrault
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-31523 (E)
*1631523*

S/PV.7785

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 2.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Andorra,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Morocco, the Netherlands,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey and the United Arab
Emirates to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2016/846 and S/2016/847, which contain
the texts of two draft resolutions, respectively.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Ayrault (France) (spoke in French): Faced
with the unbearable horror of Aleppo’s martyrdom, the
Security Council must again assume the responsibility
entrusted to it by the international community to
guarantee peace, ensure security and protect civilians.
We heard yesterday from Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura. His description
resounded like a warning cry. If this situation continues,
by the end of the year we will bear witness to the
destruction of Aleppo. The message Staffan de Mistura
addressed to the Security Council is unambiguous. If
we do not act, the city will soon be no more than a field
of ruins and will go down in history as a place whose
inhabitants were abandoned to their executioners.
Fifteen days ago in this Chamber, on behalf of France
I called for an immediate ceasefire (see S/PV.7774).
Since then, following a stillborn agreement, the Syrian
regime has confirmed its objective with breathtaking
brutality — and it has nothing to do with the fight
against terrorism. Its objective is the capitulation
of Aleppo. Daraya, Hama, Aleppo — with each,
2/21

08/10/2016

the tactics of the Syrian regime have been the same:
indiscriminate bombing and the methodical destruction
of civilian infrastructure to inflict maximum suffering
on the population. Most recently, this has included
eliminating the supply of drinking water in Aleppo
and the systematic targeting of hospitals and health
personnel. Each time, those who back Damascus
provide decisive support for a strategy that seeks
exclusively to secure the surrender of fighters and the
exodus of civilians through operations that involve a
cycle of potentially devastating ethnic cleansing.
How can we collectively tolerate this? The
Secretary-General has spoken of war crimes. We
all recall Guernica, Srebrenica and Grozny. What is
happening before our eyes in Aleppo is the sinister
repetition of those tragedies. If it does not pull itself
together, the international community will share the
responsibility for these events.
The regime and its supporters claim to act on
behalf of the fight against terrorism. I denounce that
fraudulent claim with great force. Bashar Al-Assad does
not fight terrorism; he feeds it. Since the beginning of
the conflict, he has targeted the moderate opposition
above all because it embodies the only hope for the
eventual restoration of a united and peaceful Syria. He
has organized a lethal understanding between himself
and Da’esh and Al-Qaida, groups with which he has
shared goals and which he deliberately spares.
France has paid the price of terrorism. It cannot
allow this critical fight, which should bring us all
together, to be derailed by punitive actions that
ultimately only strengthen those it claims to wish to
eliminate. Destroying hospitals, starving civilians,
massacring women and children, and besieging cities
as in the Middle Ages merely fuels radicalization and
terrorism. We must therefore halt this vicious cycle on an
urgent basis. Today, faced with this horror, the Security
Council must make a simple and obvious decision. It
must demand immediate action to save Aleppo, an end
to all bombing by the regime and its allies, and the
unhindered and unconditional delivery of humanitarian
assistance to a population that desperately requires it.
That is what the situation in Aleppo calls for.
And that is what France, alongside most members
of the Council, has promoted tirelessly. A week
ago, alongside Spain, we submitted a simple draft
resolution in response to this emergency. What does
it say? It reaffirms the obvious unacceptability of the
16-31523

08/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

indiscriminate repression by the Syrian regime of its
own people. It recalls all the decisions taken by our
Council since the onset of the crisis. It sets out the
conditions for a just and lasting peace — a political
solution whose outline we defined long ago. Finally, it
expresses a desire for unity around the goal that brings
us together — the fight against terrorism.
The draft resolution also makes clear and precise
demands, including an immediate halt to the bombing
and military flights over Aleppo; humanitarian access;
respect for the truce, guaranteed by an effective
verification mechanism whose modalities are open; the
withdrawal of all forms of support or collaboration with
terrorist groups designated by the Security Council;
and the resumption of the political process.
Some would impose conditions on the halt to the
bombing, including the precise identification of the
whereabouts of terrorist groups and their separation.
That is a sham because it is unachievable so long as the
bombing continues. That much is obvious. Moreover,
smashing a city with bombs and massacring civilians is
tantamount to doing the terrorists’ work for them, not
fighting them. I reiterate that the genuine emergency
is an end to the bombing, which is the only valid
precondition because it determines everything else.
We patiently negotiated the draft resolution in
good faith and with the desire to unite the international
community around a single goal. The legitimate
concerns raised by some have been taken into account,
and it is with an open heart and extended hand that I have
personally striven in recent days and hours to create the
conditions for consensus, in all sincerity and without
ulterior motives, driven by the sole desire to promote
the return of peace in Syria, to end the martyrdom
of a people and to promote a solution to the plight of
millions of refugees and displaced persons. I feel that
the broad majority of Council members understand and
approve of this approach.
The adoption of the draft resolution could restore
to the inhabitants of Aleppo, the Syrian people and the
rest of us a glimmer of hope for an end to the spiral of
violence and for a new political dynamic based on the
immediate resumption of negotiations for a transition,
the outlines of which were unanimously defined by the
Security Council a little less than a year ago.
If instead our draft is rejected, despite enjoying
broad support, what will we have left? There will be
more death, more refugees, and more displaced. But we

S/PV.7785

must neither reject it nor give up. Each of us will have
to imagine the consequences and take the serious and
necessary decisions to ensure that the perpetrators of
war crimes do not go unpunished, that those responsible
for the use of chemical weapons are identified and
punished, and that those who abet an exhausted regime
shoulder the consequences. All those who refuse to
give up must come together and act.
In 2011, a people rose up peacefully
against oppression. For five years, despite savage
repression, that people has not given up. Let us not
leave that sorely tested and suffering people to choose
between an inhumane executioner or the abject terrorism
of Da’esh and the Al-Nusra Front. I call on every
member of the Council to assume its responsibilities to
save the population of Aleppo, come together for peace
and send the Syrian regime the message it should have
heard long ago.
What is at stake today is, first of all, the fate of
Aleppo and its population, but it is also above all the
hope of finally ending a conflict of whose catastrophic
costs we must all pay the price. Faced with such dire
stakes, to hinder the adoption of the draft resolution
before us today would be to allow Bashar Al-Assad
to keep on killing. It would above all be offering a
senseless gift to the terrorists. My dearest wish is that
the Council does not offer such a gift.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): Along with France, Spain has supported this
draft resolution (S/2016/846) on Aleppo in order to try
to respond to a desperate situation. During more than
five years of a heart-breaking conflict in Syria, we have
seen indiscriminate attacks against civilians. We have
seen both parties destroy hospitals, schools and even
humanitarian convoys. We have seen with alarm the
use of chemical weapons by the Syrian army. In spite
of that, we are here today because the worst phase of
the war in Syria could still lie ahead. The offensive by
President Al-Assad against eastern Aleppo is a tragedy
against which the international community cannot turn
its back.
As the French Minister for Foreign Affairs has
correctly said, this draft resolution seeks to avoid a
humanitarian catastrophe. We therefore demand an
immediate halt to aerial attacks, which are terrorizing
the 275,000 civilians trapped in the eastern part of the
city. The main goal of the draft resolution is to save
from disaster an ancient city at risk of being levelled

16-315233/21

S/PV.7785

The situation in the Middle East

to the ground by the brutality of a fratricidal war.
Spain’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. José Manuel
García Margallo, clearly expressed our view here in the
Security Council when the increase in clashes began
in late September (see S/PV.7774). He identified three
essential steps on which we must focus our efforts.
The first was to ensure that a ceasefire takes
effect; the second was to ensure humanitarian access;
and the third was to create the necessary conditions
to relaunch United Nations mediation. The draft
resolution in effect calls for the immediate observance
of a ceasefire throughout the entire country. We also
aim to improve the monitoring mechanism, which has
not worked as desired in recent months. We call on the
Security Council — for the first time since the war in
Syria began — to send a clear message to the parties to
isolate the terrorist groups in Syria, who are posing a
threat to the entire international community.
Secondly, we aim to ensure once and for all that
humanitarian access is in the hands of the professionals
of the United Nations and of the Red Crescent. It is
intolerable that the Syrian Government continues to
block assistance to its own population, using fictitious
bureaucratic hurdles and deliberate tactics, such as
removing medical materials, which amount to war
crimes. The draft resolution therefore establishes that
it ought to be the United Nations that determines the
number of beneficiaries and the needs of almost 900,000
civilians in Syria. We also call for an investigation into
the attack on the United Nations-Red Crescent convoy
at Urum Al-Kubra on 19 September. We will not rest
until we have done everything possible to ensure that
those responsible are held accountable before justice.
We hope that, wherever they may, they will listen
clearly to this message today on the part of all members
of the Security Council.
Lastly, the draft resolution calls for a return to
the path of dialogue as soon as possible, while also
expressing our full support for the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General.
France and Spain have done everything within
their power to garner the support of the 15 members
of the Security Council. This has been a sincere
effort to incorporate the various points of view, while
always respecting the main purpose of the draft
resolution — nothing less than avoiding catastrophe in
Aleppo and slowing the escalation of violence. We note
that we are near to achieving consensus. We still hope
4/21

08/10/2016

that the countries seated around this table will allow the
adoption of this draft resolution. We still have time to
make the right decision.
Lastly, Spain would like to express its gratitude to
the many States Members of the United Nations that
are sponsoring this draft resolution. We interpret that
support as a message that the Security Council should
fulfil the responsibility entrusted to it by the Charter.
From the seat we occupy here as a non-permanent
member of this organ, we will work tirelessly to ensure
that is the case.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
Today we are participants in one of the strangest
scenarios in the history of the Security Council. We are
about to vote on two draft resolutions (S/2016/846 and
S/2016/847), and we are all perfectly aware that neither
of them will be adopted. Considering that the crisis in
Syria is going through an agonizing stage that demands
the greatest possible political cooperation on the part
of the international community, such a waste of time
is unacceptable.
We all know the background to the Syrian crisis.
After destroying Libya and considering that a great
success, the troika of the three Western permanent
members of the Security Council turned on Syria. And
this time, most unfortunately, Paris — which in 2003
joined with Moscow and other clear-thinking capitals in
an effort to deter the United States and United Kingdom
from an opportunistic invasion of Iraq — has become
one of the loudest promoters of an ill-conceived policy
of regime change in Damascus.
It grieves us to point out that in all the years of
the Syrian crisis, the French delegation in the Security
Council has never once made any constructive
proposals, with its rare initiatives clearly calculated
for propaganda effect and doomed to failure. And that
is what happened this time. Our French colleagues
approached us about a week ago, informing us that they
wanted us to support a draft resolution on Syria, and
emphasizing that Paris did not want a Russian veto.
On 6 October, those assurances about the desire to
avoid a Russian veto were confirmed at a higher level.
But 24 hours later, after only one round of serious
consultations, a draft resolution, doomed to receive
the Russian veto that we had repeatedly and justifiably
discussed, was put in blue and submitted for a vote.
16-31523

08/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

We should point out that Spain — which was
specifically invited to be a member of the International
Syria Support Group by Russia — has continually
reminded us of its co-authorship of the draft resolution.
The Spanish diplomatic efforts are disappointing. In
particular, the French-Spanish draft resolution features
a ban on all military flights over Aleppo, and not only
over the eastern part of the city but also the west, which
has been continually under fire from fighters from the
eastern side. In September alone, according to United
Nations data, more than 80 civilians were killed and
170 wounded. Moreover, the concept of banning all
military flights has not been thought through at all. To
the question of whether that also meant a ban on the
reconnaissance drones tracking fighters’ movements,
there was no answer. To the question of why it also
applies to the western part of the city, which the
Government controls, the anwer was that it was more
convenient. Is that what you call a serious discussion?
Another main point is that there has never been an
instance in the entire history of the Security Council
when a permanent member was allowed to adopt a
resolution that directly or indirectly predetermined
its course of action without prior discussion of the
matter. I do not think we will see any such cases in
future — unless France, having renounced the right
of veto, is then controlled by a majority of Security
Council members. Whatever the restrictions, they can
be considered only in the context of compliance with
the ceasefire, which terrorists and other illegal armed
groups are routinely violating. Another basic flaw in
the French-Spanish draft resolution is that instead of the
International Syria Support Group (ISSG) monitoring
mechanism provided for in resolution 2268 (2016), it
proposes a duplicative plan pulled out of thin air. We
regard this as an attempt to do away with the existing
collaborative architecture.
In the circumstances, yesterday afternoon we
took the unusual step of drafting a resolution intended
to demonstrate that a reasonable course of collective
action does exist whereby we can build on all the
positive things that we previously worked out so
painstakingly. Our draft includes a provision relating to
the still-relevant parameters of the Russian-American
agreement of 9 September, emphasizing the importance
of ensuring immediate and unhindered humanitarian
access, specifically via weekly 48-hour humanitarian
pauses. The text of the document is annexed to the
draft resolution.

S/PV.7785

The draft resolution includes a provision on the
importance of ensuring that the ceasefire is adhered
to by every side in Aleppo and affirms the existing
monitoring arrangement involving the ISSG ceasefire
task force. It establishes the fundamental priority of
distinguishing the moderate opposition from Jabhat
Al-Nusra and urges ISSG members to require all
parties to cease conducting joint combat operations
with terrorists and to separate from them and officially
adhere to the cessation of hostilities. It points out that
in order to make progress with humanitarian efforts,
the fighters should stop blocking traffic on the Castello
road, in accordance with the 9 September agreement.
The draft resolution welcomes Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura’s initiative of 6 October aimed at normalizing
the situation in Aleppo. It requests that the SecretaryGeneral submit a detailed plan for its implementation
for the Security Council’s approval. Incidentally, in
another of its major shortcomings, the French-Spanish
draft resolution completely ignores Mr. de Mistura’s
initiative. Our draft resolution emphasizes how crucial
it is to achieve full, unconditional compliance with
resolution 2254 (2015) on every front — political,
humanitarian and counter-terrorism. We continue to
believe that we should work to make progress in all
those directions simultaneously, with no attempts at
mutual coordination or preconditions. The inter-Syrian
political process, which the radical opposition, with
the direct connivance of its foreign sponsors, has
been blocking since May, must be relaunched as soon
as possible.
We realize that our draft resolution will not
get enough votes today. Some will be guided by
anti-Russian sentiments, others by false notions of
prestige, and some will simply not have the courage.
Russia will nonetheless continue to work to achieve a
settlement in Syria with all interested international and
regional stakeholders. The amount of fighting overall
in eastern Aleppo has been falling. Yesterday, for
example, almost no combat missions were flown. We
hope that trend will continue.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I shall first put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2016/846, submitted by
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,

16-315235/21

S/PV.7785

The situation in the Middle East

Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Romania, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, Ukraine,
the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Senegal, Spain, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America and Uruguay
Against:
Russian Federation and Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)
Abstaining:
Angola and China
The President (spoke in Russian): There were 11
votes in favour, 2 votes against and 2 abstentions. The
draft resolution has not been adopted, owing to the
negative vote of a permanent member of the Council.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make a statement after the voting.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I normally begin
my statements in the Council with the words “Thank
you, Mr. President”. I cannot do that today, because
today we have seen the fifth veto of a vote on Syria
in five years from you, Mr. President — a veto that
has once again stopped the Council from creating the
unity needed to give the people of Syria any hope of
respite from their suffering; a veto that has once again
denigrated the credibility of the Security Council and
respect for it in the eyes of the world; a veto that is a
cynical abuse of the privileges and responsibilities of
permanent membership. I simply cannot thank you for
it. Nor can the thousands on thousands of innocent men,
women and children trapped in Aleppo. Tonight they
will endure another night of fear and pain, and another
night of wondering whether they will live to see the
morning. One hundred thousand of them are children.
The current tactics being used in Aleppo under
the alibi of countering terrorism are turning a
humanitarian crisis into a catastrophe, and your veto
today, Mr. President, has only confirmed what we
6/21

08/10/2016

have known for a long time. Russia’s actions in recent
weeks have exposed just how hollow its commitment
to the political process is. Today we have seen that
commitment for what it really is — a sham. Instead of
investing energy in peace and diplomacy, Russia has
supported, facilitated and cooperated with the Syrian
regime in order to retake and destroy areas standing
against Al-Assad, literally killing off those who
want a moderate, peaceful and pluralistic future, free
from both the barbarism of Al-Assad and the horrors
inflicted by Da’esh and other terrorists in Syria. And
it is Syrian civilians who continue to bear the brunt of
that cruelty and Russia’s complicity. Civilians, medics,
White Helmets are under direct attack from barrel
bombs, cluster munitions and incendiary weapons, and
that is even before we mention the continued barbaric
use of chemical weapons by the regime.
I echo the words of the Archbishop of Canterbury,
who described the destruction of Aleppo as the absolute
contempt for the human spirit and for the dignity of
the human being. The Security Council cannot stand by
while such misery is meted out on the people of Aleppo,
and yet, thanks to you, Mr. President, that is exactly
what we are doing.
This text that you vetoed, Sir, was not unreasonable.
It called for sensible, overdue steps that would have
saved lives, starting with the complete end of the
bombardment of Aleppo. There can be no military
justification for aerial attacks that indiscriminately hit
civilians and their homes and their hospitals. The text
called for full and unhindered humanitarian access. It
is despicable that the regime continues to refuse access
to besieged and hard-to-reach areas. It is despicable
that the violence is so extreme that the safety even
of humanitarian convoys cannot be assured, as seen
through the strike on a United Nations aid convoy last
month, for which the evidence is clear that Russia was
responsible.
Further, this text called for the full implementation
of resolution 2268 (2016) and the resumption of the
cessation of hostilities. We see every day in Aleppo that
there simply can be no military victory in this conflict.
There can only be losers. We also see every day that
obligation after obligation, set by resolution after
resolution of the Security Council, are being flouted.
We need Council unity to end this war, and that unity
will only come when Russia changes its policy and
stops the aerial bombardment.
16-31523

08/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

This has been a strong week for Council unity,
and yet we have ended on sadly familiar ground. We,
the whole Council, stood with you, Mr. President, on
Wednesday, as you announced the next SecretaryGeneral. Thanks to your actions today, Sir, António
Guterres’ job will be even harder. And worse still,
thanks to your actions today, Syrians will continue to
lose their lives in Aleppo and beyond to Russian and
Syrian bombing. Please stop now.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I wish first to
acknowledge the presence of His Excellency Mr. JeanMarc Ayrault, Minister for Foreign Affairs of France,
and thank him for introducing the draft resolution
contained in document S/2016/846, co-authored by
France and Spain. We also note the draft resolution
contained in document S/2016/847, submitted by the
Russian Federation, on which the Council will take
action later.
Malaysia has repeatedly called for the Security
Council to act more decisively on Syria. We view this
latest effort by France and Spain as an attempt to assert
the Council’s authority and discharge its responsibility
to effectively address the deteriorating situation in
Syria. We believe that the main objective of the draft
resolution contained in document S/2016/846 was to
prevent further escalation of violence and hostilities,
including by calling for a halt to aerial bombardment,
is key to reducing the death and destruction that
have disproportionately affected thousands of Syrian
civilians, particularly women and children, for far too
long.
Cessation of aerial bombardment would have
been a very welcome and necessary step in elevating
the despicable suffering of those civilians in eastern
Aleppo who have borne the brunt of such bombardment
in recent weeks. Of utmost importance to my delegation
is the understanding that, had this draft resolution been
adopted, all parties to the conflict with the capacity to
carry out air strikes would have to heed the provisions of
paragraph 3 of the Franco-Spanish text. Given its clarity
of purpose and the compelling reasons behind it, my
delegation voted in favour of the Franco-Spanish draft.
We are gravely disappointed that the draft resolution
was voted down. It is shameful and a betrayal of all the
hopes pinned upon the Security Council to alleviate the
dreadful suffering caused by a brutal conflict.
Briefly, on the draft resolution contained in
document S/2016/847, there is no question that the draft

S/PV.7785

has some merit and contains elements that also speak to
alleviating the humanitarian situation, on restarting the
political process in Syria and on combating terrorism.
That notwithstanding, Malaysia and other members of
the Council are not privy to the 9 September bilateral
agreement between Russia and the United States. Since
the United States has publicly repudiated the agreement
on account of lack of implementation, we do not believe
that the Council is in a position to endorse such an
agreement. We are therefore not in a position to support
this draft.
We are fearful of the consequences of the Council’s
actions, particular on the message of Council disunity
that we have displayed today. The Security Council
cannot afford to continue in this state of paralysis,
with total disregard for the abysmal situations faced by
innocent civilians in Syria. With such deep disunity,
how much hope and prayers can those besieged Syrians
in such appalling situations pin on us?
In our view, these initiatives today do not represent
the Council’s best efforts. The responsibility of
addressing the conflict in Syria remains squarely on
our shoulders. In this regard, a number of us could
perhaps coalesce around a middle ground with the
hope of finding a way out of the current stalemate and
move closer to a common understanding on ending
hostilities and conflict. We will certainly work to this
end alongside interested Council members and other
partners. We must never give up hope. We must not let
eastern Aleppo end tragically.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America):
Yesterday we met in the consultations room and
listened to United Nations Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura describe the daily deadly indiscriminate
bombings raining down on eastern Aleppo. We heard
Special Envoy de Mistura implore the Security Council
to take urgent action to avert a large-scale massacre,
noting that failure on our part would be a tragedy and
a stain on the Security Council that lingers like others
in recent history.
The draft resolution contained in document
S/2016/846, vetoed by Russia today, had a simple
demand and one goal: stop the bombing in Aleppo
City. Over the last two weeks, Russia and the Al-Assad
regime have launched a terrifying military offensive
in eastern Aleppo that has laid waste to an area of the
city with 275,000 civilians trapped inside of it. Air
strikes from this Russian and Syrian regime offensive

16-315237/21

S/PV.7785

The situation in the Middle East

have systematically eliminated whatever infrastructure
was left to support the people of eastern Aleppo.
Hospitals have been bombed. Pumps for drinking
water have been bombed. Ambulances and fire trucks
for first responders have been bombed. Families have
been trapped under the rubble. Hundreds of civilians
are dead, and hundreds of thousands of civilians are
literally at risk of starving to death if nothing changes.
The Secretary-General has described Aleppo as
worse than a slaughterhouse. The United Nations Special
Envoy has warned the city will be completely destroyed
by the end of the year. And we know the cause — the air
strikes conducted by Russia and the Al-Assad regime
are the cause. Russia and Al-Assad want to seize eastern
Aleppo to further bolster the regime in Damascus.
Russia could not let this draft resolution stand in their
way, so they vetoed it. Russia dropped its veto here in
the Security Council to strengthen Bashar Al-Assad at
the expense of 275,000 Syrians. We have heard so many
warnings in this Chamber, so many words of anguish
offered, so many descriptions of the barbarism that is
unfolding. Simply put, today was time for the Council to
act, to learn the lessons of the recent past. We failed to
do that because one of us — perversely, the President of
the Security Council — is intent on allowing the killing
to continue and, indeed, participating in carrying it out.
It is grotesque.
Russia, as always, will offer a different narrative.
Russia has said that it is fighting terrorism. They will
probably somehow blame the United States of America
for the suffering in Aleppo; they will suggest that we are
the ones not serious about the fight against terrorism;
they will invoke past conflicts in distant lands; and they
will lie. In short, they will do anything and everything
to deny and deflect from the truth.
The truth is that Russia is using counter-terrorism
as an excuse to help the Al-Assad regime re-take
control of Aleppo by brutal force, snuff out whatever
opposition groups dare to resist the Al-Assad regime’s
brutality, and cow civilians who yearn for a different
government into submission. As Secretary of State
John Kerry has said,
“this is a targeted strategy to terrorize civilians and
kill anybody and everybody who is in the way of
their military objectives”.
There is no other plausible explanation. Why else
would the first targets in the Syrian/Russian offensive
be hospitals and the bases for first responders, which
8/21

08/10/2016

should have been protected? Why else would each
hospital in eastern Aleppo have been struck not once, but
at least twice? Why else would a convoy of life-saving
humanitarian aid bound for Aleppo be destroyed?
One does not have to be an international legal
scholar to know that there is a term that may well
describe these actions: war crimes, and they must be
investigated. Russia cannot use the presence of what
the United Nations estimates to be a couple hundred
members of Al-Nusra to justify an indiscriminate aerial
bombing campaign devastating an entire population of
hundreds of thousands of civilians currently trapped by
Russia and the regime.
Russia has the privilege of serving as a permanent
member of the Security Council, with a responsibility
to maintain international peace and security. But
through the campaign it describes as counter-terrorism,
Russia has become one of the chief purveyors of terror
in Aleppo, using tactics more commonly associated
with thugs than Governments. Russia and the Al-Assad
regime think the world will look the other way if they
recite the word “counter-terrorism”. That is wrong, and
each and every one of us must make that clear to Russia.
There are terrorists in Syria — a lot of them. The
United States does not need anyone to explain why
terrorists are serious, deadly and dangerous. That there
are terrorists in Syria is the reason the United States
leads a 67-member coalition in the region to fight them.
It is why the United States remains unambiguous in
our call for opposition groups to separate themselves
from Al-Nusra. It is why this week the United States
conducted an air strike that targeted a senior Al-Nusra
leader in Idlib, Syria.
The United States will be relentless in our fight
against terrorism. We spent months looking for a way
to work with Russia on a campaign that would have
effectively targeted Al-Nusra. We agreed on a way
forward that would have allowed us to focus on terrorist
targets. In return, we asked that Russia show a good faith
commitment by upholding a cessation of hostilities and
allowing for humanitarian aid. When presented with
this opportunity to cooperate on counter-terrorism,
Russia decided to walk away. Russia decided to ignore
the Council’s repeated calls to implement the cessation
of hostilities. Russia decided that it would support the
Al-Assad regime’s military campaign to “re-take every
inch of Syria”, to use Al-Assad’s own words.
16-31523

08/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

Some here today will criticize this draft resolution
for lacking balance, but there is no balance in the
bombardment of eastern Aleppo. It is simple. Russia
and the Al-Assad regime launched the deadliest
campaign of aerial bombardment since 2011. Russia and
the Al-Assad regime are using incendiary weapons and
bunker-buster bombs, which are magnifying human
suffering, hitting even doctors trying to treat patients
in basement emergency rooms because nowhere else
was safe. Russia and the Syrian regime are causing
this bloody chaos. So we must demand that the ones
responsible for this air campaign stop. This is not how
you defeat terrorists; it is how you create them.
In this conflict, violence begets violence. Our effort
today was to stop bombardments over Aleppo, nothing
more. It is a deadly shame that we were unable to do
so. The United States remains committed to finding
ways to de-escalate this violence, put a ceasefire in
place and start a genuine political process. But for
that to happen, there must be an end to the horrific
suffering of the people of eastern Aleppo, caused by the
current President of the Security Council’s and Syrian
aircraft. It is time for Russia to stop starving and killing
Aleppo’s children.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): The situation
in Aleppo is devastating, as Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura made very clear to us yesterday. He warned us
that we are facing a situation not dissimilar to those in
Rwanda and Srebrenica, atrocities the Council signally
failed to prevent. We must learn our lessons; we must
stop the destruction of the entire city of eastern Aleppo.
Terrorism is a scourge to the world, but it is not
acceptable that Russia and Syria use counter-terrorism
as a pretext for a large-scale bombing campaign for
which civilians are paying the greatest price. Whatever
the sins of the hundreds or thousand plus terrorists
in eastern Aleppo, that cannot justify the prolonged
bombardment of 275,000 civilians.
We had hoped that the Council would have been
able to come together on a text that all parties could
accept and that could stand a chance of contributing
to practical and constructive action on the ground.
The failure of today’s draft resolution, contained in
document S/2016/846, contributes to the polarized
dynamic on Syria among the major Powers and
undermines the credibility of the Security Council.
Given the recent breakdown of the cessation of
hostilities and the curtailing of diplomatic efforts

S/PV.7785

by the United States and Russia, it is vital to use all
multilateral channels, particularly the Council, to move
the parties away from the killing and back towards
the negotiating table and, in the meantime, to spare
the Syrian people and allow them the humanitarian
assistance they so desperately need.
The Council has a special responsibility. We will
continue to talk with other Council members to explore
what action might be possible in the coming days.
The President (spoke in Russian): We know that
New Zealand attempted to develop a draft resolution
that would have been a happy medium between the two
approaches before us today, and we regret that some
influential members of the Council did not allow that
draft to go forward.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine co-sponsored
and voted in favour of the draft resolution contained
in document S/2016/846. We commend the hard work
carried out by the French and Spanish delegations in
drafting and negotiating it.
We are extremely dismayed, but not surprised, by
the fact that all these efforts were, in the end, derailed by
the veto power of Russia. This is the fifth veto exercised
by Russia with respect to draft resolutions concerning
Syria over the past years. Had the draft resolution seen
the light and been adopted, it would have been a real
meaningful step by the Council towards exercising
preventive diplomacy. It would have helped to prevent
what is about to become one of the gravest humanitarian
tragedies of our times. History will hold accountable
those who did not let the Council discharge its duties.
Bearing in mind the clear humanitarian character of the
draft resolution aimed at stopping the razing of eastern
Aleppo by the end of the year, we acted fully in line
with the code of conduct regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes, which Ukraine joined last year.
We are extremely disappointed that the political
statement on the suspension of the veto in the case of
mass atrocities, an initiative designed to curb the use
of veto by the permanent members of the Council, has
yet to gain traction. Here again, the Russian Federation
is more interested in safeguarding its privileges than
in fulfilling its responsibilities before the international
community. For Ukraine, that is nothing new; we have
seen Russia exercise its veto quite recently, in March
2014 and July 2015. In those cases, the Council’s action
would have saved thousands of human lives and sent

16-315239/21

S/PV.7785

The situation in the Middle East

a powerful messages to perpetrators of heinous acts
against civilians, and their crimes would not have
gone unpunished.
What we see today has a meaning — Russia’s
policies remain unchanged. If the current dynamics
of the Syrian conflict continue and the logic of war
prevails over the voices of peace, we, as the international
community, face a real risk of a protracted deadly
conflict lasting many more years. The repercussions for
such a scenario are a Pandora’s box that is easy to open
but nearly impossible to close — more refugees flowing
to Europe and other places, more destabilization
in neighbouring countries, a rising death toll and a
deepening humanitarian crisis. If Russia is not waging
hybrid warfare to reassert itself in the world at any
price, then black is white and white is black.
Those who oppose peace and prolong war risk
setting the wider region ablaze in a fire of sectarian war
and radicalization, giving more space for the extremist
to exploit. Finally, I want to echo the words of Special
Envoy for Syria Staffan de Mistura, that we do not want
to live through another Srebrenica or Rwanda. To that,
I would add that we also do not want to live through
another Grozny.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
situation in Syria is intolerable. Against the backdrop
of exploding bombs, meeting after meeting, negotiation
after negotiation, resolution after resolution, human
beings are annihilated. Homes, markets, schools,
health facilities are all reduced to rubble, in violation
of all the rules of international humanitarian law. I
echo the sentiments of my President, Mr. Macky Sall,
who expressed them here on 21 September under the
presidency of New Zealand (see S/PV.7774). By deciding
to vote in favour of the draft resolution submitted by
France and Spain, Senegal echoed the heartfelt appeal
of the Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
for the Council to act urgently to avoid eastern Aleppo
from becoming an unprecedented tragedy.
Senegal had hoped that the time had come for
the Council, as guarantor of international peace and
security, to shoulder its responsibilities to reestablish
a ceasefire, not only in eastern Aleppo, but also across
Syria. Unfortunately the draft resolution proposed by
France and Spain was unsuccessful. Mr. De Mistura had
warned us about the risk of Aleppo being completely
destroyed in two months with thousands dead and
wounded if air strikes were to be deployed.
10/21

08/10/2016

My delegation takes this opportunity to once
again urge the International Syria Support Group, in
particular its two co-chairs, to do whatever it takes to
reach an effective and lasting truce across Syria in order
to allow unfettered and unconditional humanitarian
assistance and the resumption of a credible process,
under the aegis of the United Nations, on the basis
of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523, annex) and
resolution 2254 (2015).
If we do not rally around the objectives of peace and
stability in Syria, we will run the risk of strengthening
terrorist organizations such as the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham, Jabhat Fath al-Sham and the former
Jabhat al-Nusrah, who are our common enemies
that must be fought in the framework of a shared
comprehensive strategy.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan supported the French
and Spanish proposal, because among other things,
it demands that all parties immediately end all aerial
bombardments of Aleppo. Those bombardments are
ruthlessly destroying hospitals and killing civilians.
The situation is devastating. It is deeply regrettable that
the Security Council has failed, thus far, to overcome
its differences. All military activities in eastern
Aleppo must be halted immediately, particularly the
indiscriminate attacks which are violating international
humanitarian law.
Today’s failure to adopt a draft resolution that would
have improved the humanitarian situation in Aleppo
is yet another unfortunate example of the Security
Council not being able to take effective measures on a
matter of great urgency. That should not be an excuse
for inaction in the crisis in Aleppo. There are pressing
humanitarian needs on the ground. We must undertake
measures to enable immediate medical evacuation as
well as the movement of humanitarian supplies from
western Aleppo. The Council has a responsibility to
take concrete actions to bring about actual changes on
the ground. The Syrian people have already suffered
far too long.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): With the firm
commitment to fully respecting international
humanitarian law, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela condemns indiscriminate attacks against
the civilian population and humanitarian personnel
carried out by any party. It also condemns air strikes
carried out against hospitals and health facilities, just
16-31523

08/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

as we have denounced them in the Gaza strip, in the
occupied territories of the State of Palestine, in Iraq,
Libya, Yemen, Afghanistan and Syria. Nevertheless,
our country voted against the draft resolution on the
situation in eastern Aleppo because the it does not
adequately address the humanitarian problem that
is severely impacting the civilian population in that
province, due to the terrorist barbarism of Jabhat
al-Nusrah and its related groups, and the terrible logic
of war in the country.
We are concerned that although the humanitarian
situation calls for concrete responses based on
the principles of impartiality, objectivity and
non-politicization, in this case the noble humanitarian
aim has been distorted in favour of the political interests
of some of the members of the Security Council to
the detriment of the Syrian people. Specifically, the
humanitarian tragedy of the people in eastern Aleppo
is being used in an attempt to blame Syria and Russia
for exacerbating the humanitarian situation in the
zone, where in truth those directly responsible for that
tragedy are the terrorist groups with foreign backing
that have been committing heinous crimes against the
people of Syria for five years now, in their desire and
purpose of overthrowing a legitimate Government.
We cannot ignore the fact that there are
other interested parties to the conflict within the
Security Council. Therefore, in that regard, we
members of the Council have a shared but differentiated
responsibility. Those players have been direct
participants in the armed conflict since its inception,
providing weapons to violent non-State actors who
then became terrorist groups that are no longer under
their control. They now claim not to understand the
consequences of their own actions and employ dramatic
rhetoric while continuing to fuel a war, not only in Syri,
but throughout the Middle East.
We believe that, had there been genuine interest
in producing a consensus document, the Council
would have been in possession of a draft resolution
that reflected its unity. Regrettably, the political
agendas of some of the members of the Council took
precedence, which prevented a positive outcome — to
the detriment of the people in Aleppo. The obstinate
insistence on pushing this draft resolution (S/2016/846)
in the Council while knowing that it was not viable has
deepened divisions within this collegial organ. We now
run the risk of undermining the progress that has been
made, in particular by the co-Chairs of the International

S/PV.7785

Syria Support Group — the Russian Federation and the
United States — as well as the efforts of Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura.
The fight against terrorism being conducted jointly
by the Governments of Syria and Russia cannot be
viewed as an excuse for destroying the Syrian population
in Aleppo, as some are attempting to encourage without
good basis. A genuine threat exists in that region and is
reflected by the thousands of fighters of the Al-Nusra
Front and other terrorist groups that are holding hostage
the thousands of civilians living there and using them
as human shields — all in breach of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
We need only recall that the Government of Syria
opened up humanitarian corridors to evacuate the city
of Aleppo, while the terrorist groups executed those
who attempted to leave the city.
Given the fight against terrorism is a goal shared
by the international community, as stated in various
Security Council resolutions, we do not understand how
the so-called moderate opposition has not disassociated
itself once and for all from the Al-Nusra Front. If its
intentions for peace and stability in Syria are indeed
sincere, the moderate opposition should join in the
efforts to eliminate the scourge of terrorism and take
part fully in the peace talks without any preconditions.
What is urgent is to stop outside support to armed
groups — which evolve into terrorist groups — and to
implement the cessation of hostilities agreed upon on
9 September.
In addition, it is paradoxical that today’s draft
resolution demands that Syria curtail its legitimate
right to exercise full sovereignty over its territory, in
particular its airspace by ceasing all military flights
over Aleppo. That demand stands in contrast to the
flexibility — or the failure — of the Council in other
conflicts, such as in the Gaza Strip, Fallujah, Baghdad,
Yemen or Afghanistan. We insist that issues brought
before the Council should not be addressed with double
standards. We believe that Syria’s full exercise of its
sovereignty, by way of controlling its territory, is a
guarantee for an effective fight against the scourge of
terrorism in that country. We wonder how Syria could
be asked to limit its sovereignty when sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence are all
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations as being
key to international peace and security.

16-3152311/21

S/PV.7785

The situation in the Middle East

The Council does not have the right to violate the
sovereignty of Member States, and it cannot decide
whether or not a Government is legitimate. That is
solely up to peoples. We cannot allow the disastrous
military acts of aggression that occurred in Iraq, Libya
and other places to reoccur. Those events inflicted a
great deal of suffering on the people of those countries
by creating fertile ground for Al-Qaida to expand and
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant to emerge,
following the dismantling of their institutional and
political structures.
In conclusion, we reject the fact that the human
tragedy being experienced the Syrian people is being
manipulated by a war imposed from abroad and
financed and sustained by foreign players and fighters.
In spite of the media pressure and manipulation, in order
to address the issue without double standards, uphold
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
work towards a political, negotiated solution to such a
terrible conflict, we will resolutely continue working
towards peace.
The President (spoke in Russian): Members of the
Council have before them document S/2016/847, which
contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by the
Russian Federation.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
China, Egypt, Russian Federation, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of)
Against:
France, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Senegal,
Spain, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Angola, Uruguay
The President (spoke in Russian): There were 4
votes in favour, 9 against and 2 abstentions. The draft
resolution has not been adopted having failed to obtain
the required number of votes.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
12/21

08/10/2016

Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I find
myself at a loss for words to express our deep sorrow
at the scene we are witnessing today — the military
escalation that compelled the Security Council to
convene before the entire world in order to convey a
message of failure to the Syrian people. Regrettably, the
Council, which was created in the previous century to
peaceably settle disputes, is gradually becoming a mere
media platform. Instead of holding serious political
consultations, in open and closed meetings, to stop the
Syrian bloodletting, consultations have amounted to
no more than a repetition of traditional positions and
dialogue that falls on deaf ears.
We used to prepare our statements and deliver
them in the Chamber to express condemnation and
denunciation, or to share new information to apprise
ourselves of what happened and what is happening
in Syria. We have forgotten that the impact of our
statements hardly goes beyond this building or the mass
media, whereas the tragedy of the bereaved Syrian
people continues, with half of the Syrian population
displaced and hundreds of thousands of its men, women
and children killed. Allow me to express my sorrow
and sympathy to any Syrian citizen who is following
today’s meeting, although I wonder if there is anyone
in Syria who is genuinely interested in following this
meeting.
Egypt voted in favour of the two draft resolutions
(S/2016/846 and S/2016/847) that were put forward
for voting today, which focused on a de-escalation
of the situation in Syria, in particular in Aleppo.
Regrettably, although we had already known that the
two draft resolutions would fail, our voting simply
served to express our position. Egypt can no longer
tolerate the fact that the fate of the region’s people is
being manipulated. Today, we are simply conveying a
message on the part of the biggest Arab population to
the international, regional and internal Powers in Syria
to end the tragedy — and end the political rivalries,
ambitions and disputes, which are claiming Syrian
lives — in that country.
It is not my wish to conclude my statement by
expressing regret, because we still have a window of
opportunity to address the Syrian crisis in earnest. If
all the members of the Council were to express and
confirm their desire to end the bloodshed, we would
seriously consider all the various approaches contained
in the two draft resolutions proposed today. Let us
agree that the two draft resolutions covered key points
16-31523

08/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

that should serve as a foundation for us to build upon in
the coming days. We voted in favour of the following
five points today.
First, it is imperative to stop the targeting of Syrian
civilians and infrastructure and allow unhindered
access to humanitarian aid in conjunction with the
United Nations. Secondly, we must work towards
implementing a cessation of hostilities in Syria that
would pave the way for a full ceasefire, prioritizing
Aleppo in line with resolution 2268 (2016), in tandem
with enhancing the supervision and monitoring
mechanisms. Thirdly, it is very important to confront
certain armed groups that disregard of the will and
volition of the international community, the ambitions
of the Syrian people for a change towards a better future,
and their determination and persistence in cooperating
with terrorist groups, especially Jabhat al-Nusrah
Jabhat Fatih al-Sham. Fourthly, the Security Council
should shoulder its responsibility and the International
Syria Support Group and its co-chairmansip must play
its pivotal role in carrying out the realization of the
aforementioned points. Fifthly, earnest negotiations
must be launched among the Syrian parties with regard
to the transitional phase stipulated in the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254
(2015).
Egypt is fully prepared to work within the framework
of the International Syria Support Group and the
Security Council, — whether it be with the permanent
or non-permanent members of the Council — to carry
out and achieve the efforts to which I referred earlier.
To conclude, let me call upon members of the
Security Council to work towards restoring the
Council’s role and facilitating open and serious
discussion in ending the Syrian tragedy.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The lonely veto
and four votes in favour of your draft resolution, Sir,
were a double humiliation. This text was a cynical
attempt to divert attention from Russia’s exercise of
the veto today that once again denied any hope to the
people of Aleppo. It failed because it failed to demand
an immediate end to the aerial bombardment of Aleppo.
It is a sham, just as Russia’s hollow commitment to a
political process in Syria is a sham. The indiscriminate
bombing of civilians in Aleppo is sickening and
barbaric. Please stop now.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): This
text was a deceptive attempt to get the Security Council

S/PV.7785

to ratify what Russia and the regime are doing in
Aleppo, as they will undoubtedly claim that any and all
of the devastation that they are raining down is directed
at terrorists, not the innocent civilians and civilian
infrastructure that they are very clearly striking. But I
will not belabour this point. What Russia wants is for
there to be more talk while they seek to take the city by
brutal force. What we want is less talk and more action
for them to stop the slaughter.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): Unfortunately, today the Security Council
has effectively shown its inability to achieve consensus
on how to manage and resolve the horrible tragedy
faced by the people of Syria since the beginning of the
war. The fundamental reason for the lack of unity is
based on the fact that certain permanent members of the
Security Council are deeply involved in the conflict and
supported the development of this type of asymmetric
war, a new and absolutely illegal mechanism designed
to overthrow Governments.
We entirely subscribe to the statement made by
the representative of Egypt because, unfortunately,
hundreds of thousands of Syrian people are dying on the
ground and are paying the price for a disastrous policy
in the Middle East. In our view, this is a warning to the
non-permanent member of the Security Council, and
we must thoroughly consider that we are encouraging
conflicts by taking steps that are in flagrant violation
of the Charter of the United Nations and everything
represented by the international legal system.
We are a sovereign country, but we have no military
or geopolitical interests beyond our borders. We see the
need to raise our voice to ensure that the international
community will defend those principles underlying the
United Nations, including respect for sovereignty and
the non-interference in the internal affairs of people
and the concept that sovereignty lies in the people of
any given country. Those are fundamental principles.
No one in the Security Council can decide whether the
Government of Syria is legitimate. No one in the Security
Council has the right to suppress the sovereignty of the
Syrian Government over its own territory.
We have already had painful experiences that need
to be analysed and discussed in depth in assessing the
question of whether the Security Council is fulfilling
the role that it was given when the United Nations was
founded. We see ourselves in the middle of a conflict
between powerful countries, and we need to defend such

16-3152313/21

S/PV.7785

The situation in the Middle East

principles. Much pressure is being generated to ensure
that brotherly countries, particularly non-permanent
members, align themselves with one position or another.
We appeal to everyone to respect the principles as the
only means to come up with a political solution not
only to the Syrian conflict, but also to the conflicts in
Yemen and Palestine, among so many other countries.
The exercise of the right of veto by Russia was
criticized. We believe that the right of veto serves in
many instances to establish balance in situations that
are otherwise totally out of balance. If only they could
have exercised the right of veto in connection with the
intervention in Iraq or the NATO bombings in Libya, we
would not be facing the regrettable situation in which
we find ourselves today. Double standards are often
used in addressing a situation. Some Council members
that are directly involved in the conflict tell dramatic
accounts of human suffering, which are of course
deeply regrettable, yet they remain in inexplicable and
complicit silence when faced, for example, with the
suffering of the Palestinian people during the terrible
Israeli attacks on the Gaza Strip, or remain inexplicably
silent on the matter of other conflicts, such as the
situation in Yemen.
We voted in favour of the second draft resolution
(S/2016/847) proposed by the Russian Federation
because we believe that, like the draft resolution
proposed by New Zealand, it contained elements that
could have led the Council to unite regarding the
need to end civilian suffering in eastern Aleppo and
throughout Syria.
I believe that once the Council has publicly
demonstrated its lack of unity in that regard, it should
work constructively, beyond its members’ own national
agendas, to find a political and negotiated solution to
the tragedy. The massacres in Syria must end. State
interventionism in Syria must end. The delivery of
weapons to groups that are not able to disassociate
themselves from terrorist groups must end. The United
Nations and the Security Council must arrive at a
negotiated solution to the conflict or, as already has
been said, the phenomenon of terrorism will continue
to bring suffering to the people of the Middle East.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine voted against
draft resolution S/2016/847, proposed by the Russian
Federation, for the following reasons. We simply do
not agree with tactics that aim to divert attention from
the solid and meaningful draft resolution S/2016/846,
14/21

08/10/2016

which could have affected the situation on the ground
and help put an end to the massacre in Aleppo. The
draft resolution proposed by Russia barely mentions the
devastating developments in Aleppo, which is cynical,
given the gravity of the situation in that symbolic
Syrian city. We also strongly condemn the attempt to
put a draft resolution to the vote that has never been
discussed in the Council.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China has
followed the escalation of the conflict in several regions
of Syria and is deeply moved by the wartime suffering
of the Syrian people. China strongly condemns all
terrorist activities that harm and kill innocent people.
In that regard, the international community should
continue to work towards and push for a political
solution to the dispute through dialogue between all
parties involved in the conflict, so as to stop the fighting
as soon as possible. Actions taken by the Security
Council concerning the situation in Syria should be
able to concretely improve the situation, help push
for a cessation of hostilities, support and coordinate
United Nations efforts for humanitarian assistance and
facilitate stronger efforts to combat terrorist groups
designated by the Security Council, including the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Such action should
promote the search for a solution that is acceptable to
all parties in a political process owned and led by the
Syrians under the auspices of the United Nations.
The draft resolution submitted by France and
Spain (S/2016/846) contains a number of important
elements, such as the need for a ceasefire, a call for
a political solution, improvement of the humanitarian
situation, and enhanced efforts to combat terrorism.
However, some of the draft resolution’s provisions
do not fully respect the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria. Moreover, the
constructive views of some Security Council members
were not incorporated. For those reasons, China had to
abstain in the voting on the draft resolution.
The draft resolution submitted by the Russian
Federation to the Security Council (S/2016/847)
urges the parties to immediately cease hostilities,
enable access to humanitarian aid, enhance efforts
to combat terrorism, and support the good offices of
Special Envoy Staffan De Mistura, and calls for an
early resumption of peace talks in Geneva. The draft
resolution reflects a four-track strategy comprised of
a ceasefire, humanitarian assistance, joint efforts in
16-31523

08/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

combating terrorism and political negotiations. It also
reflects respect for the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria, with complete,
comprehensive and balanced content. China voted in
favour of the draft resolution and regrets that it was not
adopted.
Syria is an important country in the Middle East.
An immediate restoration of peace and stability is in
the common interests of Syria, other countries of the
region and the international community. China hopes
that the Security Council will maintain the safety of the
Syrian people as its first priority and remain united in
order to reach consensus, pursue its efforts to push for
a political solution to the conflict in Syria, work jointly
to prevent the further breeding and spread of terrorism
and play a positive and constructive role in maintaining
peace and stability in Syria and the region.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
voted against the draft resolution submitted by the
Russian Federation (S/2016/847) due to its partial and
misleading nature and Russia’s destructive role in
the Syrian conflict and because Russia provided no
scope for any negotiation on a text on such a sensitive
issue — an issue to which Russia is a direct party.
Action of this kind only serves to deepen the
divides in the Council that are preventing constructive
action from being taken. As you earlier observed,
Mr. President, New Zealand has been working on some
ideas to try and bring the Council together on this
most difficult issue. That we have not yet put our ideas
forward has been our decision and ours alone, but I
invite Russia and all Council members to work with us
in the coming days to see if we can chart a course in a
more positive direction.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): In this
very Chamber, we have already said that we are pained
by the situations in Syria, Yemen, South Sudan and in
all other parts of the world where the civilian population
is subject to the brutalities of war. We have also said in
this very Chamber that, as we give speeches, we are
pained by the fact that bombs continue to fall on the
civilian population, hospitals and schools. In this very
Chamber, we have also said that what is happening in
Aleppo is, without any doubt, a true massacre.
Today, an end to hostilities, bombings and carnage
are of the utmost importance. Allow me to add that
the babies being pulled from the rubble in Aleppo are
not terrorists; the old people crushed in the debris of

S/PV.7785

their homes are not terrorists; the patients buried in the
rubble of hospitals in Aleppo are not terrorists; and the
children buried in the remains of their schools are not
terrorists.
Regarding the draft resolution in document
S/2016/847, my delegation abstained for reasons of
procedure and of substance. Regarding procedure, the
draft resolution was presented yesterday at 5 p.m. as a
take-it-or-leave-it proposition. There was no possibility
of negotiation. Moreover, after briefly reading through
it, we noted that it included a bilateral agreement on
which the Security Council had no say or any reason
for being aware of it. We all know that there is a strong
discrepancy between those members who would sign
the agreement and those who would not, and it is not up
to the Security Council to mediate in that regard.
Regarding substance, the draft resolution does not
address something that is vital at the present stage,
namely, putting an end to the bombing in Aleppo. My
delegation is committed and will continue to work in the
Security Council to relaunch a process of negotiation
that will contribute to ending the current situation and
channeling Syria towards a better future.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Members of the
Security Council were confronted today with a peculiar
situation. They had to cast two consecutive votes on
two draft resolutions on the same issue — the cessation
of hostilities in Syria.
First and foremost, we would like to state our deep
distress about the current humanitarian situation in
Aleppo, which has left the vast majority of the city’s
population without access to basic necessities and
life-saving assistance, while the horrific bloodshed,
particularly in eastern Aleppo, has caused far too many
deaths and injuries among the civilian population.
In Aleppo, we are witnessing destruction of truly
historical proportions to which we in the Council can
put a stop if we act constructively and decisively. The
bombing of hospitals is unacceptable and we strongly
condemn such actions. However, the regional and
international stakeholders that have directly involved
themselves in the conflict by supplying weapons and
logistic support to belligerents guilty of grave human
rights violations, bear the greatest responsibility for
resolving this grave issue. We expect the permanent
members of the Council, whose special responsibility
lies in the maintenance of peace and security, to set
the example by putting aside strategic interests and

16-3152315/21

S/PV.7785

The situation in the Middle East

mobilizing all possible political action for the sake of
the Syrian civilians whom we are called upon to protect.
Even though the brave and dedicated Members of
the United Nations and other humanitarian agencies
continue to operate in Syria, the reality is that the latest
wave of fighting in Aleppo has caused the destruction
of essential infrastructure, such as schools, hospitals
and ambulances, and depleted the ranks of medical
staff able to provide much-needed care and assistance.
The numbers of casualties, wounded and displaced are
absolutely overwhelming.
We have voted here today on two draft resolutions
that, in our opinion, contain constructive proposals.
We find the inability to make progress on a single
resolution addressing the most pressing concerns — the
protection of civilians, the cessation of hostilities and
the establishment of a political process conducive to
lasting peace in Syria — to be most unfortunate.
Angola abstained in the voting on the two
resolutions. The draft resolution submitted by France
and Spain (S/2016/846), in our view, does not address
the fundamental issue of reviving the process conducive
to a meaningful cessation of hostilities. On the contrary,
it seeks to feed the acrimonious and dangerous debate
among the main players in the conflict, permanent
members of the Security Council and it most probably
will represent the burial of the International Syrian
Support Group (ISSG).
While the Russian proposal (S/2016/847) contains
some positive elements with a view to relaunching
a process conducive to the cessation of hostilities,
Angola decided to abstain in the voting in order to
avoid being dragged into the unfortunate prevailing
acrimony among the members of the Council that bear
the main responsibility for the conflict and the duty to
find solutions to it.
I support Special Envoy De Mistura’s efforts
and his permanent commitment to relaunching an
agreement on the cessation of hostilities, guaranteeing
safe and unrestricted humanitarian access, resuming
the repairs of Aleppo’s damaged water and power
facilities and allowing medical evacuation for urgent
cases in and around the city. Surely that effort depends
on the cooperation between the Russian Federation and
the United States of America. We deeply regret the
suspension of bilateral discussions on the cessation of
hostilities between the co-Chairs of the ISSG Ceasefire
Task Force. We sincerely hope that the respective
16/21

08/10/2016

Governments will be able to agree on the importance
of maintaining open lines of dialogue and renewing
cooperation in the search for peace and the fight against
terrorism, and easing the plight of the Syrian civilians
who bear the heaviest burden of the conflict.
In conclusion, after the show of unity of the
Security Council on the recommendation for the next
Secretary-General, today’s events are a very negative
signal regarding the Council’s ability to contribute
meaningfully to international peace and security, which
we deeply regret. Angola reiterates its determination to
remain engaged in the search for peace and to save lives
in Syria by advancing the political process through
negotiations and dialogue involving, above all, Syrians.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): We voted against the proposal
submitted by the Russian Federation (S/2016/847).
I repeat what I said earlier today. All aerial
bombardments of Aleppo must be ended immediately.
All military activities in eastern Aleppo, particularly
the indiscriminate attacks that violate international
humanitarian law must be halted immediately. Had the
agreement of 9 September between the United States of
America and Russia been in effect, we may have been
able to implement measures based on that. Sadly, that is
not the case. Japan cannot support the Russian proposal.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now say a
few words in my national capacity. I will be very brief
because we are still going to be hearing from another
speaker.
The representatives of the United States of America
and the United Kingdom, as usual, stuck to their
provocative rhetoric. We are used to that free-flowing
discourse and shall not react to it. Attempts to insult us
do not upset or distract us from what is most important.
But I do have two topics I would like to touch on.
The representative of the United Kingdom made an
emotional appeal for putting an end to this immediately.
Indeed, how about it? How about immediately putting
an end to supporting various thugs around the
world — terrorists, extremists and all the other amateurs
exacerbating the situation in one country or another?
How about putting an end to interfering in the affairs
of other sovereign States? Just give up these colonial
customs and leave the world in peace. The situation
would improve in a great many parts of the world.
The argument made by the United States is that
more action is needed. We completely agree. It took
16-31523

08/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

our Minister for Foreign Affairs and the United States
Secretary of State several months to work out an
agreement, but the United States could not implement
it or manage to separate the moderate opposition from
terrorists. It could not even ensure the withdrawal
of opposition groups from the Castello road so as to
provide better conditions to get humanitarian aid to
eastern Aleppo. Yes, more action is needed.
I think the representative of Uruguay made an
important point about the fact that it is the terrorists are
to blame while it is the civilians who are suffering. I
would take that argument further — it is the politicians
who are to blame, as they try to realize their grandiose
plans all over the world while civilians suffer. And they
do not even try to admit to the catastrophic mistakes, if
not crimes, that result from their policies, fanning the
flames of conflict and fomenting chaos in many parts
of the world.
Finally, the representative of Angola expressed
alarm that what is going on could mean the collapse
of the International Syria Support Group. We do not
agree. We believe we will be able to preserve both
the multilateral formats and today’s draft resolution
(S/2016/847), which, as I said, we did not expect
to be adopted and viewed it merely as a political
demonstration. It was aimed at preserving those
multilateral formats and hence what was valuable in
the Russian-American agreements. While they have
not been implemented, we think they can be. I would
like to assure the Council that some very complex work
is continuing, both multilaterally and bilaterally, and
we all hope fervently that the situation in Syria can
be normalized, which would undoubtedly improve the
situation in eastern Aleppo. We hope that will happen
as soon as possible.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Clearly, the truth unnerves the representatives
of colonial Powers in the Chamber. We have seem them
leave when they hear the truth being spoken. By such
actions, they prove that they have malicious colonial
intentions against my country and the people of Syria.
Similarly, they demonstrate that their diplomacy is a
diplomacy of chaos, coercion and the use of force, and
it is not based on the principles of dialogue and peaceful

S/PV.7785

conflict resolution. To those colleagues who walked
out of the Chamber while we were still in session (see
S/PV.7777), I would like to thank them because they
gave me the status of permanent member instead of
them.
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
presiding over the work of the Council this month — at a
time when the whole world, and our region in particular,
are experiencing major, serious challenges. Such
difficult challenges come as a result of the erroneous
policies of some States, including permanent members
of the Security Council. They are seeking to implement
their own interventionist policies, which contravene the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. However, your experience and wisdom, Sir,
serve to provide leadership for the work of the Council
at this critical time.
Allow me to take this opportunity to condemn the
cowardly act of terrorism perpetrated by the Al-Nusra
Front against the Russian Embassy in Damascus a
few days ago. Several Member States voted positively
for the French draft resolution (S/2016/846), but they
opposed releasing even a press statement condemning
that attack. We are also sorry that the Council failed
to adopt the draft resolution (S/2016/847) submitted
with a view to achieving peace and expediting the
political process in Syria by differentiating between
the so-called armed opposition forces and the terrorist
Al-Nusra Front. Blocking the Russian draft resolution
serves to reaffirm, for the hundredth time, the lack of
political will on the part of those who oposed it. They
have no real political will to combat terrorism and
no genuine will to reach an inter-Syrian resolution to
the crisis. Clearly, differentiating between extremist
terrorists and the moderate armed groups is a difficult
process, akin to trying to separate enriched uranium
from unenriched uranium, if there were such a thing as
unenriched uranium.
I have not bothered to reflect on the French draft
resolution, as it was crystal clear that it had its own
objectives — clear not just to me, but to the Syrian
people too. It makes me recall the one-hundredth
anniversary of the infamous Sykes-Picot Agreement,
a colonial agreement between France and Britain that
brought continuous suffering to our people, created
divides in our society and looted our wealth and
resources. We think that the French draft resolution
reflects the nostalgia France feels for its dark colonial
past. It was under the illusion that fuelling the Syrian

16-3152317/21

S/PV.7785

The situation in the Middle East

crisis would create a golden opportunity for it to revive
its former colonial power, which will not return.
Today, the Foreign Minister of France attempted to
be the Syrian people’s guardian when he spoke about
what was good for them and what he, in his capacity as
Foreign Minister, should do to help them — as though
he were still dreaming that he represented a colonial
Power that could hijack the right to speak on behalf
of the Syrian people in the Council. However, French
politicians should be ashamed of what they have done
to Libya and to the Libyan people. And when turning
our attention to the Guernica and Srebrenica massacres,
we see that such massacres were the result of European
competitive barbaric policies to which we, nor anyone
else, bears any relation. Such policies were purely
European barbaric policies.
As for the carnage in Syria today, it has been
caused by mercenary foreign terrorists whoe were born
in France, Britain, Germany, Italy, Norway, Spain and
Belgium. These are terrorists who are manipulated by
the intelligence agencies of Western States, the fatwas
on jihad, financing from Qatar and Saudi Arabia and
Turkish sponsorship for all these acts of aggression.
Before I proceed with my statement, I would like to
remind the French Minister of what his predecessor
once said:
(spoke in French)
“The French jihadists are doing a good job in Syria”.
(spoke in Arabic)
This is the policy of France, as expressed by the Foreign
Minister of France at the time, Laurent Fabius, in 2012.
Elements and provisions of the French draft
resolution prove yet again that they have malicious
intentions towards my country. From the very
beginning, successive French Governments have sought
to undermine the Syrian State in its totality, not simply
targeting a particular Government. The draft resolution
clearly calls for an end to the operations conducted by
the Syrian Army and its allies to defend the Syrian
people and combat terrorism, on behalf of all the
members of the Security Council, from the Al-Nusra
Front, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
and affiliated terrorist groups. It seems that whenever
the Syrian Army and its allies gain ground against the
terrorist groups — namely, the Al-Nusra Front — wellknown members of the Council rush to rescue them
from their inevitable defeat by convening meetings or
18/21

08/10/2016

putting forth draft resolutions that completely disregard
the suffering of the Syrian people. They seek only to
rescue the terrorists, whether in Aleppo or in other
cities and regions of Syria.
We had hoped that this unprecedented and
tireless effort by France to push for the adoption of
its resolution — similarly with the draft resolution by
Russia — would have been geared towards finding a
political solution to the crisis in Syria, led by Syrians
without any foreign intervention or preconditions. We
had hoped that, instead of submitting a draft resolution
to impose a no-fly zone in our own air space, France
and its allies would have imposed a moratorium on the
support provided by their Governments to terrorism,
which they then export to Syria. We had hoped that
the Government of France would be able to answer the
question that the Syrian people continue to ask, that is,
whether the money from the Total oil deal, the Qatari
gas deal and the Saudi Arabia arms deals were worth
the Syrian blood spilled?
For more than six years, the United States, France
and Britain have persistently called for one meeting
after another. They have sponsored draft resolutions,
presidential statements and press statements in the
Council with one purpose, namely, to deceive the
public into believing that they are seeking to resolve the
crisis in my country. Meanwhile, they have launched
media, diplomatic and political campaigns to falsely
promote certain ideas, including that the situation
taking place in Syria is a confrontation between the
so-called moderate armed opposition and Government
forces, which they accuse of committing war crimes.
They completely disregard the fact that their policies
have jeopardized the lives of hundreds of thousands
of innocent civilians in Syria due to their continued
support for the armed terrorist groups that have used
civilians as human shields.
In response to remarks by some colleagues who
talked about targeting hospitals, the fact is that in
eastern Aleppo terrorists have turned the largest and
most important eye hospital in the Middle East into a
base for their military operations.
I would like to remind members that, since the
beginning of the crisis in Syria, the Security Council
has held 75 official formal meetings, 97 consultations
and 8 Arria Formula meetings. It has also adopted
17 resolutions, in addition to releasing a number of
presidential and press statements, on the situation in
16-31523

08/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

Syria. However, those efforts have not prevented the
world terrorist diaspora from destroying my country,
Syria. I would like to remind the Council that the United
States has used its veto 77 times, Britain 33 times and
France 19 times. The representatives of those countries
have no shame. When they block draft resolutions, they
simply call for an end to the Israeli occupation of our
lands and justice for the Palestinian people.
It is self-evident that the support programmes
provided to “moderate armed groups” by the United
States, as well as by some regional and Arab countries
following the paymasters of the region, continue to
reach the hands of ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front. These
groups, along with their affiliates, are terrorist groups.
The Syrian people have rights, and these countries are
claiming that they seek to achieve their interests. They
should consider the logic and the mechanisms that
govern their approach towards Syria. The United States
has estbalished a programme to train fighters that it
has pre-determined as moderate: according to officials,
the United States has spent $500 million to train 49
fighters. Forty-four of them took weapons provided by
the United States and, as soon as they reached Syrian
terrority, joined the terrorist Al-Nusra Front. That
leaves five, and we have no idea where they are now.
The United States, Saudi Arabia and Qatar have
provided arms and money to the Yarmouk Martyrs
Brigade in the southern region of Syria and the
occupied Golan Heights. This Brigade has announced
its allegiance to ISIL. Those countries have insisted that
Harakat Nur al-Din al-Zanki was moderate, despite it
being a terrorist organization supported by Turkey and
its claiming of responsibility for its crimes in Aleppo.
They have in fact now officially joined the Al-Nusra
Front. Therefore, all of those “moderate” armed groups
are now affiliated with ISIL. The most recent incident
involves the Suqour Jabal al-Zawiya Brigade, which,
supported by the United States, has announced its
allegiance to the Fateh al-Sham Army — the new name
of the terrorist group Al-Nusra Front.
I would like here to mention 1,800 electronic
messages that were deleted from the inbox of the former
United States Secretary of State. Those messages
included details on consignments of weapons that were
transferred to armed terrorist groups in Syria from
Libya through Turkey, by decision of the American
Administration.

S/PV.7785

In implementing such destructive policies, these
countries have relied on a misleading political media
campaign to convince global public opinion that they
are fighting terrorism and that the terrorists that they
fund, support, harbour and transfer into Syria from
more than 100 States are either “moderate” opposition
or “first responders”. Recently, the term “White
Helmets” has been used to refer to them, and they have
even been nominated for a Nobel Peace Prize. I have
with me pictures that show these “moderate” members
of the opposition — the White Helmets — with one of
them firing an rocket-propelled grenad at aeroplanes.
By the way, he is a physician. We have dozens of similar
pictures, if any Council members would like to take
a look. I would also like to point out that the founder
of these malicious White Helmets is in fact James Le
Mesurier, an intelligence officer from Britain.
As the United States-based Ron Paul Institute for
Peace and Prosperity recently reported, the Pentagon
paid $540 million to the British public relations firm
Bell Pottinger, which typically renders services to Chile
and Saudi Arabia, to develop an aggressive propaganda
campaign against the Syrian Government. The firm
fabricates YouTube videos, photos, video clips and
so on.
The United States of America formed an
international coalition under the pretext of fighting
ISIL and other terrorist organizations, including
organizations for which they have, since 2003, provided
fertile ground for them to spread. However, the facts on
the ground have proved that, since the establishment of
the so-called coalition, ISIL has expanded and gained
more ground, because that coalition has not been
seriously combating terrorism — to the contrary. The
coalition air forces have been responsible for killing
hundreds of Syrian military personnel and civilians,
destroying infrastructure and economic installations
and providing air drops with weapons and military
supplies to terrorist organizations to spread still more
chaos and wreak havoc in my country. However,
according to the coalition, all that was simply a mistake.
Therefore, the coalition air forces have killed civilians,
destroyed infrastructure, aided and armed terrorists
and then justified those crimes by calling them simply
mistakes that need to be forgiven. Days later they repeat
those same mistakes.
Honestly, one now needs to decipher the actual
strategy of the United States-led coalition based on
a code based of repeated mistakes. Those offences

16-3152319/21

S/PV.7785

The situation in the Middle East

08/10/2016

appear to be governed by a systematic, intentional
policy, as was the case when their aeroplanes targeted
the positions of the Syrian Army in Deir ez-Zor. That
attack actually exposed dozens of civilians to the ISIL
threat. They even had the audacity to request that safe
humanitarian corridors be opened for the terrorists to
maintain their dignity. Did the United States, Britain
and France open safe humanitarian corridors to protect
the “moderate” terrorists of Al-Qaida in Afghanistan,
or for those who committed the massacres at Charlie
Hebdo or the Bataclan Theatre — or in Nice, California,
Boston, Chicago, New York or London? Why have they
failed to open such humanitarian corridors in Europe
and the United States for terrorists to escape?

Russian Federation on 9 September. That agreement
was supposed to differentiate between the moderate
armed groups and the Al-Nusra Front. The Syrian Arab
Government has been committed to the cessation of
hostilities agreement and has taken action to implement
its provisions and to deliver assistance in Aleppo.
However, the fact is that the United States has not been
honouring its obligations. Terrorist groups, supported
by the United States and its allies, continue to violate
the agreement and are regrouping to launch new attacks,
all of which has led to the end the cessation of hostilities
agreement and to the continuing deterioration of the
situation in Aleppo after the terrorists killed 157 Syrian
soldiers and 300 civilians in eastern Aleppo.

The United States representative said, “we must
learn from the lessons of the past”. I would like to tell
him: I hope that the United States can do that. I hope that
the United States could learn from their mistakes in Viet
Nam, Cambodia, Korea, Cuba, Nicaragua, Yugoslavia,
Iraq, Libya and Africa. I hope that he would recall and
apologize for what they did to innocent Iraqis — the
408 civilians they killed on 13 February 1991 in the
Amiriyah shelter in Baghdad.

In conclusion, the blood being spilled in our
country is our blood. We are the victims of a terrorist
war and its pain, anguish and torment. It is ours and no
one else’s. It is the height of hypocrisy and falsification
of evidence that those sponsors of terrorism actually
shed crocodile tears on this humanitarian crisis. We
will continue to fight terrorism, and that continues on a
parallel track with the commitment to reach a political
solution through intra-Syrian dialogue wherein Syrians
and no one else decides on the future of Syria, with no
foreign intervention.

My Government reaffirms that it will continue to
cooperate with the United Nations and its specialized
agencies to implement the monthly humanitarian
response plan. We have approved the October response
plan and wish to note that the failure to fully implement
it is because of the practices of armed terrorist groups
and their allies that continue to obstruct humanitarian
access. Those groups continue to target convoys and
humanitarian workers and to loot the assistance
provisions. The most recent attack targeted the
humanitarian assistance convoy headed to Oram
Al-Kubra, in rural Aleppo, on 19 September, which
led to the deaths of a number of Syrian citizens and
volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent (SARC).
They looted supplies and burned the trucks. The
“moderate” armed groups have denied access to SARC
staff to deliver assistance to a number of areas. Those
are facts of which United Nations agency workers in
Syria are well aware. We have initiated an investigation
into the attack against the United Nations-SARC convoy
in Oram Al-Kubra and will provide the Council with
the results of the investigation when it is concluded.
The fact that we are sitting in the Chamber today at
this meeting to consider the situation in eastern Aleppo
as some shed crocodile tears is a direct result of the
United States shirking its agreement reached with the
20/21

In addition, I wish to call upon those who have shed
crocodile tears for the Syrian people and to advise them
to shed genuine tears for the 250 Yemenis killed today
by Western air forces — with Western aeroplanes used
by the Saudis.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of New Zealand has asked for the floor
to make a further statement.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I am used to the
fantastical reveries of the Syrian representative. Very
little of what he says can be relied upon as accurate.
But when he tells blatant lies about the delivery of
humanitarian aid to the Syrian people, I must speak
up. The record is clear. The delays in the delivery of
humanitarian aid, the removal of medical equipment
and the other obstructions that are put in the way of
United Nations convoys — all the responsibility lies
very much with the Syrian regime.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic has asked
for the floor to make a further statement. I now give
him the floor.
16-31523

08/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I did not want to respond to my colleague,
because I am in constant contact with him and I always
try to explain to him what is going on in my country
regarding the humanitarian crisis we are facing.
However, I did not expect him make the mistake of calling
me the representative of a regime, especially as he is an
experienced diplomat and a member of the Council. He
is supposed to respect international legitimacy and he
should address me as the representative of my country,
the Syrian Arab Republic. That is the first mistake.
The second mistake is that it seems that the
Permanent Representative of New Zealand and other
colleagues do not read what we send to them. We have
addressed a compendium of 500 letters to the Council
on behalf of the Government of Syria concerning
international terrorism sponsored by countries known

S/PV.7785

to all. We have been sending such letters since the
beginning of the crisis. It would seem that my colleague,
the Permanent Representative of New Zealand, has
not read them. We have sent 60 letters, addressed to
the Permanent Representative of New Zealand among
others, on the use of chemical weapons by terrorists
in Syria. It appears that some Council members do not
read what we send them. I would therefore urge my
colleagues to read these letters, which would definitely
help them to see the situation clearly.
We in Syria have fallen victim to the
misunderstandings of some and the misleading lies
of others. We, as diplomats, have the responsibility to
correct such misunderstandings. We should not lie to
one another.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

16-3152321/21
