S/PV.8761

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8761st meeting

Friday, 25 September 2020, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abarry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Niger)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Sautter
Mr. Djani
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. King
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Allen
Ms. Norman-Chalet
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Sudan and the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(S/2020/912)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-24817 (E)
*2024817*

S/PV.8761

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

were appointed in all 18 states, including two women.
These are very welcome developments.

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Sudan and the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (S/2020/912)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, and Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2020/912, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in the Sudan and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan.
I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the situation
in the Sudan and on the planning for our new mission
in the Sudan, the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS).
When I addressed the Council on the Sudan in
April (S/2020/336), I highlighted the fact that the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) was compounding
the political, economic and security difficulties
the country was facing. This broad assessment
remains valid. Nevertheless, there have been positive
developments in recent weeks. There have also been
new challenges. As the Secretary-General highlights in
his report (S/2020/912), the Sudan’s political transition
continues to move in the right direction. In recent
weeks, important legislative reforms were adopted to
improve fundamental rights. Interim civilian governors
2/17

25/09/2020

The most significant political development,
however, was the initialling, on 31 August in Juba,
of the peace agreement between the transitional
Government of the Sudan, the Sudan Revolutionary
Front alliance and the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni
Minawi faction. The parties agreed on a transitional
period of 39 months, effective from the date of signing,
which is scheduled for 3 October. Furthermore, Prime
Minister Hamdok and the Abdelaziz Al-Hilu faction
of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North
signed the agreement on principles in Addis Ababa on
3 September.
All participating parties should be commended
for having persevered with the peace process amid the
range of other pressures brought on by the pandemic.
Those who are absent from the ongoing peace efforts in
the country should be encouraged to engage in dialogue
and negotiations with the transitional authorities. It is
not too late.
As we embrace the recent progress in the peace
process, we are also mindful of the significant work
ahead. The various accords and respective peace
agreements on regional issues must be moulded into a
single, coherent framework. Additionally, the parties
and the Government must form a joint vision on the
way forward and uphold their respective commitments.
At a time when all Governments face major
economic constraints, it will be important to set
realistic expectations of what can be provided to
finance peace dividends. Participants in the High-Level
Sudan Partnership Conference, held in Berlin, were
generous in their support to the Sudan’s transition, but
signalled that the impact of COVID-19 could reduce
donor capacity. The United Nations, in partnership with
the African Union, will offer support, as requested by
the parties and within its capacity and mandate, to the
implementation of these and future agreements.
On 10 September, the transitional Government of
the Sudan declared an economic state of emergency
after a collapse in the Sudanese pound. This
announcement followed months of soaring inflation,
a spiralling exchange rate and continuing shortages
of basic commodities. Frustration with the state of the
economy is growing, as evidenced by the re-emergence
of protests across the country. Meanwhile, outstanding
issues regarding economic management of the crisis
20-24817

25/09/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

leads at times to tensions between different components
of the Government.
Despite these immense challenges, the Government
has been able to make progress in undertaking difficult
economic reforms. These changes, such as the removal
of subsidies on fuel, form part of an agreement with
the International Monetary Fund on a staff-monitored
programme, one of the steps necessary to move the
Sudan closer to debt relief under the Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries Initiative.
Further, some of the financial assistance donors
pledged at the Berlin partnership conference will help
to offset some of the economic hardships Sudanese
households are experiencing. The contributions will
support the implementation of the World Bank-designed,
but nationally led, social impact mitigation initiative,
known as the Sudan Family Support Programme. The
pilot for this initiative was launched with assistance
from the World Food Programme this month.
I call on all donors to make good on their pledges
and release funds into the Family Support Programme
as soon as possible. I also call on international partners
to address impediments that prevent the Sudan’s full
integration into the international economic community.
In that regard, I am encouraged by the recent indications
of progress on delisting the Sudan from the United
States State Sponsors of Terrorism list.
Since the start of the rainy season in July, the Sudan
has faced its worst flooding in decades, with over
800,000 people affected, of whom more 100 perished.
Between June and September, the projected number
of food insecure people rose to 9.6 million, owing in
part to the impact of COVID-19, which has exacerbated
ongoing inflation and price increases for food and other
goods. Humanitarian organizations are working closely
with the Government to respond, but further resources
are required to meet the growing needs.
The planning for the establishment of the new
United Nations mission in the Sudan, UNITAMS, is
progressing. Following the lifting of travel restrictions,
the work of the planning team shifted in July from
Headquarters to the Sudan. I thank the Government of
the Sudan for providing a high level of cooperation and
support to the team.
The proposed structure and geographical
deployment of the Mission are outlined in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. The design of the mission is intended

S/PV. 8761

to enable a new and innovative way of working,
fostering maximum cooperation and integration among
various United Nations entities, and we are working in
partnership with the Government of the Sudan and the
Sudanese people on this effort.
The mission start-up team for UNITAMS will
deploy to the Sudan next month to begin implementing
the four strategic objectives mandated by the Security
Council: assist the political transition; support peace
processes; assist peacebuilding, civilian protection and
rule of law; and support the mobilization of economic,
development and humanitarian assistance. We will
fulfil these objectives with full respect for the principles
of national ownership.
Gender issues are mainstreamed throughout the
mandate of the Mission, which will have dedicated
gender expertise, including at the senior level. We
will implement our commitments to advancing gender
equality and the women and peace and security agenda.
We know of the significant role that women and
civil society have played in the transition in the Sudan,
and their voices must be heard in shaping the Sudan’s
future. During a visit to the Sudan last February, I met
with many representatives of women’s groups and of
civil society, who are eager to play a constructive role.
Our planning team, including Special Adviser Haysom,
have engaged both groups over the past few months as
part of their efforts to design a mission that meets the
needs of the Sudanese.
Regarding the protection of civilians, we recognize
the existing challenges. As requested by the Council,
UNITAMS will support the transitional Government in
implementing its national plan for protecting civilians
in order to establish a secure and stable environment
in the conflict-affected areas. This will include
contributing to the training and capacity-building
of the Sudanese police on the protection of civilians.
The Mission will also work closely with the United
Nations country team and civil society organizations
on protection and monitoring.
We are conscious of the significant challenges
before the Sudan in fully realizing the objectives of
its historic transition. The solutions to these longstanding difficulties remain with the Sudanese, and
UNITAMS is being configured to accompany them in
their efforts. We attach the highest priority to the Sudan
and to the speedy deployment of UNITAMS, including
the appointment of a special representative. We look

20-248173/17

S/PV.8761

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

25/09/2020

forward to working closely with the Security Council
in this important endeavour.

Darfuri communities feel ownership of the agreement
and fully participate in the implementation.

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.

Financing, too, will be a key challenge and managing
expectations of what the international community can
deliver in the current international context will be
critical. The Darfur armed movements have suggested
that implementation will require $13 billion over a 10year period, and the Government has indicated that
it will commit $7.5 billion. As the parties work to
make the vision of the agreement into a reality, we in
the international community have a responsibility to
support them.

I now give the floor to Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: As Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo has just explained, after almost a year of talks
the transitional Government of the Sudan, the Sudan
Revolutionary Front and the Sudan Liberation ArmyMinni Minawi joined their national and regional track
counterparts in Juba for the initialling of a peace
agreement on 31 August. This is obviously a very
important milestone in the often-troubled history
of Darfur, signifying hope for a more peaceful and
prosperous future. I wholeheartedly commend the
parties for their commitment to peace, as well as South
Sudan for its critical role in mediating the agreement.
As we meet here today, we are only just over a
week away from the scheduled signing ceremony and
the start of a new era for Darfur. Nonetheless, much
work remains to be done to ensure that the goodwill
shown in the negotiating process is translated into
lasting and sustainable change on the ground. Key
players, including the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul
Wahid (SLA/AW), are yet to join the process. The
agreements, still a patchwork of documents negotiated
on different tracks, are yet to be woven together into a
single, unfractured vision of the future of the Sudan.
With continued armed clashes and protests in Darfur
signalling the anxiety of Darfuri constituencies on
the decisions being made in Khartoum and Juba, we
must, now more than ever, work together to bring all
stakeholders on board and work towards preventing a
relapse into conflict, especially in the hot-spot areas
that require continuous attention beyond the lifespan of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).
Furthermore, the implementation phase, which is
now beginning, will be just as crucial as the drafting
of the agreement itself. This includes, as one of the key
provisions of the security arrangements for Darfur,
the creation of a 12,000-person joint security force
within 90 days of the agreement’s signing, made up
of 6,000 members from the Sudanese security forces
and 6,000 from the signatory armed groups. As forces
are deployed and resources are mobilized in support of
the implementation, it is essential to ensure that local
4/17

In the agreement, the parties have called for
guarantors and witnesses from the international
community and the United Nations to support the
implementation of the protocol on security, including
through the provision of resources, expertise and
advisers. It is foreseen, specifically, that the United
Nations will chair the permanent ceasefire committee
and have a representative in the joint supreme military
committee, in the integration technical committee and
in the Darfur regional disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration commission. The security protocol
stipulates that the permanent ceasefire committee
and a third international party will take charge of the
logistics of disarmament and demobilization efforts,
including the establishment of gathering sites.
UNAMID and the United Nations as a whole stand
ready to help. As we await further indications from
the parties with regard to specific actions to support
implementation, UNAMID remains, for now, fully
engaged with the Government, particularly in support
of its national protection of civilians plan. Discussions
to date have identified as priorities enhancing the
capacity of rule-of-law institutions in implementing
the national plan, as well as the training of trainers for
the Sudanese joint forces on protection of civilians,
international human rights and humanitarian law, child
protection and women’s protection. In some locations,
UNAMID police have already started joint patrols with
the Sudan Police Force, including in Kutum, Saraf
Umra and Kabkabiya in North Darfur.
The situation concerning the coronavirus disease
continues to impact UNAMID’s operations and
movement, with the Mission placing focus on the
provision of critical life support and core programmatic
activities. Simultaneously, UNAMID has been
collaborating with the Sudanese authorities to combat
20-24817

25/09/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the spread of the virus and mitigate its impact, including
prevention support to internally displaced person
camps, prisons and justice institutions across Darfur.
At the same time as it has been providing technical,
advisory and logistics support to the peace process,
UNAMID has remained focused on the protection of
civilians as its strategic priority. Continued intermittent
clashes between Government forces and the SLA/AW,
concentrated in parts of the Jebel Marra area, remain a
challenge in this regard. Equally concerning, as talks in
Juba have proceeded, has been the continued infighting
between SLA/AW factions reportedly over disagreement
on whether the group should join the negotiations,
causing civilian deaths and significant displacement,
mainly in parts of Central and South Darfur.
The final steps towards the peace agreement
have also been accompanied by a notable increase
in intercommunal violence in Darfur in 2020, with
major incidents in West, North and South Darfur.
This violence has coincided with a rise in protests
demanding increased security by Darfuri communities,
particularly internally displaced persons and others,
who fear that they may fail to benefit from the final
agreement and its implementation. The Government
has responded to intercommunal clashes by deploying
troops to quell the violence and by sending mediators to
support the peaceful resolution of conflicts.
However, while the Government has vowed to meet
the legitimate security demands of the Darfuri people,
it continues to face significant challenges, including
limited capacity and a trust deficit, particularly in
conflict-affected areas and IDP camps, where protection
is most needed. UNAMID has worked closely with
the Government to reinforce that capacity, engage the
communities and calm tensions where they occur. It
must be noted that with its uniformed presence focused
on the greater Jebel Marra area, UNAMID is limited
in its ability to respond to protection needs that arise
elsewhere in Darfur, such as in the areas of significant
intercommunal violence in West Darfur in July.
The protection of civilians is also at the centre
of the ongoing work to prepare the special report of
the Chairperson of the African Union (AU) and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, as requested
by the Council, by the end of October. Taking into
consideration the security situation, the impact of the
peace process and the opportunities and challenges
pertaining to the Government’s protection plan in

S/PV. 8761

Darfur, a joint AU-United Nations working group is
developing options that may be presented to the Council
to address protection-of-civilians needs and challenges
subsequent to the expiry of UNAMID’s current
mandate, in December 2020. Each option is being
calibrated vis-à-vis the role of UNITAMS in order to
ensure coordination and complementarity. To that end,
we intend to ensure full consultation with the Sudanese
Government, including by organizing experts-level and
principals-level meetings of the tripartite mechanism.
As we stand on the cusp of the historic peace
agreement in Juba, we are heartened by the progress
that has been made but also reminded of the
significant challenges that remain. With the start
of the implementation phase, it is essential that our
support help to achieve improvements that can be felt
by the people on the ground in Darfur, especially in
strengthening the safety and security of Darfuris.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members
wishing to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo and Lacroix for
their briefings. Let me also thank all those United
Nations colleagues who are working very hard to get
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) stood up and to deal
with the ongoing issues there.
Despite competing priorities and, indeed, the
complications and death toll from the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19), we have continued to see the
civilian-led Government of the Sudan take forward the
implementation of the key transitional benchmarks, as
set out in their Constitutional Document. In particular,
we welcome the recent progress made on legal reforms
that strengthen human rights across the Sudan, as
well as the appointment of civilian governors. On
the latter, we welcome very much the inclusion of a
number of women in those appointments. So that is all
very positive.
But the Sudan still faces a multitude of challenges.
In the last year alone, the people of the Sudan have had
to contend with unprecedented flooding, desert locusts
and the first polio outbreak in more than a decade.
Inflation exceeds 160 per cent, and humanitarian

20-248175/17

S/PV.8761

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

need, unfortunately, is increasing. COVID-19 has only
exacerbated those challenges.
It is clear that the Sudanese people cannot face those
challenges alone, and it would be unreasonable for any
of us to believe that. The international community must
step up. The United Kingdom is playing its part. We
have contributed more than $100 million towards the
Family Support Programme, which will help mitigate
the negative impact of some of the necessary economic
reforms being pursued by the Government of the
Sudan. And in 2020, the United Kingdom is donating
an additional $76 million of humanitarian aid to United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations
to meet the most urgent needs of those affected by food
insecurity, conflict and economic crisis in the Sudan.
But we must do more. Echoing the SecretaryGeneral, I ask Member States to consider not whether
we can afford to support the Sudan, but whether we can
afford not to.
Once established, UNITAMS will be at the core
of international support, working to ensure that it is
coordinated and effective. We urge the United Nations
to work with the Government of the Sudan to facilitate
the swift deployment of the Mission and, crucially,
to ensure that UNITAMS has adequate resources and
geographical presence to enable it to respond to the
needs on the ground and to fulfil its mandate.
We need to see the rapid appointment of a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We have
waited for too long, and that delay is undermining the
ability of the United Nations to support the people of
the Sudan.
Turning to the peace process, I want very much
to commend the efforts and achievements of the
Government of the Sudan, under the leadership of Prime
Minister Hamdok, and a number of armed movements
to take forward negotiations despite the challenges of
COVID-19. I want particularly to welcome the initialling
of a peace agreement on 31 August by the Government
of the Sudan and the Sudanese Revolutionary Front. It
is a very welcome step towards a comprehensive peace
deal for the Sudan, and it is an opportunity that we
urge all parties to take advantage of through the swift
and full implementation of the agreement. We also
reiterate our call on all of those who remain outside the
peace process to engage constructively, immediately
and without preconditions and to conclude swiftly
negotiations on a comprehensive peace agreement.
6/17

25/09/2020

Although we have seen progress towards efforts to
secure peace, the security situation in Darfur remains
concerning. The recent increase in intercommunal
violence and civilian displacement and the ongoing
conflict in Jebel Marra demonstrates the complexity of
the drivers and root causes of conflict, which will need
to be comprehensively resolved if we are to see a stable
and secure Darfur.
I want to commend the work of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) during these unprecedented times, not only
in its assistance of the national response to COVID-19
in Darfur, but also in its work with the Government
of the Sudan to support and bolster the protection
of civilians.
In that regard, I want to welcome the Government
of the Sudan’s national protection-of-civilians strategy,
which demonstrates its firm commitment to fulfilling
its responsibility to protect. However, it will take time
to build the required capacity. In doing so, we urge the
Government of the Sudan to build on its cooperation
with UNAMID to ensure that protection needs continue
to be met.
Mr. Sautter (Germany): Today we are discussing
the situation in the Sudan, and for the first time
we are discussing the work of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS). I wish to underline that the notion of
assistance stands for the spirit of a new chapter in the
relationship between the Council and the Sudan, a
chapter based on genuine cooperation and partnership.
This support is crucial. I am confident that I speak on
behalf of all of us when I say that we want the Sudanese
Government to succeed. We want the Sudanese
people, as has been said, to cash in on the peace and
democracy dividend.
That is why we hosted, together with the United
Nations, the European Union and the Sudan, the HighLevel Sudan Partnership Conference in Berlin in June,
mobilizing $1.8 billion in assistance to the Sudan and
marking the beginning of a new political partnership
between the Sudan and the international community.
We welcome the agreements reached with parts
of the armed groups in Juba and look forward to the
signing of the agreements next week. It is crucial
that the implementation of the agreed provisions start
swiftly. We welcome the ongoing talks with parties that
have not yet joined the process, and at the same time we
20-24817

25/09/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

urge those who continue to stand outside of this process
to become part of the solution.
Partnership also means being frank about the
challenges ahead. As noted in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2020/912), an unstable economic
situation, the need to ensure justice for past crimes and
violence, including the massacre of 3 June 2019, and
increasing humanitarian needs are all aggravated by
the impact of the coronavirus disease.
I am not suggesting that UNITAMS can overcome
those immense challenges immediately, but we are
convinced that UNITAMS can make a significant
difference on the ground. For that to happen,
UNITAMS needs to be fit for purpose. The purpose of
the Mission is clearly defined in resolution 2524 (2020)
and entails four strategic priorities. We hope and expect
UNITAMS to be able to work on all of those, including
adequate resources for civilian protection and human
rights. In that context, we feel it is very important
that the position of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General be filled soon.
While we appreciate the update by the Secretariat
on the planning process, we would like to mention
that the Council had also requested information about
the geographical deployment of the Mission. I heard
important remarks on that from Rosemary DiCarlo.
In particular, we are looking into the footprint in
Darfur and the components that will be represented
in the specific offices. We expect that United Nations
police will be represented in all Mission offices. We
would also like to reiterate that the Council has asked
the Secretariat that UNITAMS make use of lessons
learned from the State liaison functions concept, and
that a mechanism based on them should be established
in Darfur, including in Jebel Marra and the Two Areas.
I would like to call on the Secretariat to be both
realistic and ambitious in its planning. We welcome
what we have seen so far. Germany will continue to
support the build-up of UNITAMS, including by
making available additional voluntary contributions
and personnel. We encourage other Member States to
also consider doing so.
Let me make a remark on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The
Council will soon have to make a decision on the future
of UNAMID. We note with concern that the report
in front of us points at a deterioration of the security

S/PV. 8761

situation in Darfur. This is an alarming signal. We
are looking forward to more analysis and data in the
special report mandated by the Council. That report
should contain an assessment of the capacity of the
Sudanese Government to protect civilians, as foreseen
by resolution 2525 (2020).
In conclusion, the response of the Security Council
to the historic change and transformation in the Sudan
is a very good example of what the multilateral system
can muster in support of the aspirations of the people.
Around the same time last year, during the high-level
week of the General Assembly, Prime Minister Hamdok
said here in New York that the Sudanese people were
“marching resolutely towards the future as a friend and
partner on equal footing with all peace-loving nations”
(A/74/PV.10, p. 37). I am convinced that the Security
Council will continue its strong partnership with the
new Sudan and its peace-loving people.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish to
thank Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo and Lacroix
for their briefings. I welcome the Secretary-General’s
first report (S/2020/912) on the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan
(UNITAMS). I would also like to take this opportunity
to express my condolences to the victims of the floods
in the Sudan.
As we speak, the Sudan is going through a
critical period of political transition, in which positive
developments are obvious to everyone. That transition
would not have been possible without the mediation
efforts of the African Union, South Sudan and the
regional partners. It is also an important practice of
African countries implementing the Silencing Guns
in Africa initiative. At the same time, the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, floods and a fragile
economic system still constitute challenges for its
transitional process. The international community
should increase its assistance and help the Sudan get
through this difficult moment. In that regard, I would
like to emphasize the following four points.
First, China welcomes the recent positive
developments in the political process in the Sudan,
not least of which was the initialling of the peace
agreement on 31 August. We appreciate South Sudan’s
important role in that regard. China calls on all parties
in the Sudan to remain united, proceed to sign the peace
agreement as scheduled and earnestly implement it.
Those who are not yet party to the Juba process should

20-248177/17

S/PV.8761

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

also sign the peace agreement as soon as possible. The
peace agreement is a new starting point for peace and
development in the Sudan. We encourage all Sudanese
parties to continue with the dialogue in a bid to jointly
promote the Sudan’s transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding and expeditiously achieve long-term
peace and stability.
Secondly, with the fragile economic and health
system in the country, the COVID-19 pandemic and the
floods have worsened living conditions and increased
the humanitarian challenges facing the Sudanese
people. The international community should provide
targeted assistance to help the Sudanese Government
realize economic reforms and strengthen its health
system. International financial institutions should also
take debt relief action to help the Sudan. China actively
supports Sudan in its efforts to develop its economy
and fight the pandemic, and has provided the country
significant material and technical assistance. We will
continue to do our best to help the Sudan achieve
sustainable development.
Thirdly, China appreciates the important role
played by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to promote the peace
process in the Sudan, and welcomes the efforts of the
Secretariat and peacekeeping personnel to that end.
We expect UNAMID to implement its exit strategy
in an orderly manner, as planned. I wish to thank the
UNITAMS planning team for its advance work and
welcome the strong support the Mission received
from the Sudanese Government. We highlight that
the core task of UNITAMS is to support the political
transition process in the Sudan. It has a mandate that
should not go beyond the provisions of our resolution,
let alone intervene in the internal affairs of the
Sudan. A smooth handover is needed from UNAMID
to UNITAMS. We should save resources and avoid
duplicating responsibilities. UNITAMS should also
step up its efforts to help the Sudanese Government
promote sustainable development, while coordinating
international humanitarian assistance efforts. The
Sudanese Government bears the primary responsibility
for protecting civilians. China supports the Sudanese
Government in formulating and implementing, in
earnest, a national strategy to protect civilians.
UNITAMS should provide technical support to that
end and strengthen coordination with other United
Nations agencies on the ground, which should perform
their duties strictly in accordance with their respective
8/17

25/09/2020

mandates and avoid stepping on each other’s toes in
carrying out their functions, as that would affect the
expected results.
Fourthly, in view of the positive developments in
the Sudanese political process, the Security Council
should, according to the latest developments, carry out
a timely review of the sanctions imposed on the Sudan
and establish a road map for lifting them, thereby
sending a positive message. China calls on the countries
concerned to remove the Sudan from the sanctions list
of sponsors of terrorism as soon as possible and lift the
unilateral sanctions against the Sudan in order to create
favourable conditions for the Sudanese Government
and its people to fight the pandemic.
The hard-won peace process in the Sudan is an
opportunity for the international community to help
the Sudan move towards peace and development. China
will join the international community to contribute to
promoting the Sudanese political transition, long-term
stability, development and prosperity in the Sudan.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the three African
States members of the Security Council, namely,
the Niger, Tunisia and South Africa, as well as Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1).
At the outset, on behalf of the A3+1, allow me
to express our gratitude to you, Mr. President, on
convening this meeting. Additionally, the A3+1 would
like to thank our briefers today, Under-SecretariesGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo and Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
for their enlightening briefing on the developments
pertaining to the Sudan and the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS).
The A3+1 would also like to express our appreciation
to the UNITAMS planning team for its efforts and
consistent consultations in order to bring life to the
envisioned special political mission. We are confident
that it will successfully navigate the mammoth task
ahead of it.
The A3+1 also welcome our colleague, the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan, to today’s
Security Council meeting, and we are looking forward
to his statement on the latest developments from home.
As the international community, we have been
steadfast in our commitment to assisting in bringing
about peace, stability and prosperity in Darfur for over
20-24817

25/09/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

a decade. Although it has been a turbulent journey,
significant strides have been made in the process. It is
in this context that, as we start a new chapter with the
new special political mission, we wish to ensure that we
will work to preserve the gains and continue to assist in
bringing forth the peace for which ordinary Sudanese
have yearned and for which they still urgently yearn.
In this regard, the Niger, Tunisia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines and South Africa welcome the
efforts of the Sudanese transitional Government as it
continues to pursue political reforms, make progress in
the peace process and tackle the rapidly deteriorating
economic situation. Furthermore, the A3+1 is also
encouraged by the signing of the 29 August agreement
with the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawi and the
Sudanese Revolutionary Front and of the 3 September
agreement on principles, which mark significant steps
forward on a trajectory towards achieving lasting peace
in the Sudan.
The A3+1 recognizes that the transitional
Government is operating amid conditions characterized
by a dire economic situation, the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and a tense political climate. The
report of the Secretary-General clearly highlights that
“[s]piralling inflation, continuing shortages of key
commodities, a growing public deficit and dropping
revenues have placed the country’s economy in a
critical state” (S/2020/912, para. 41).
Consequently, the A3+1 call for the lifting of all
sanctions against the Sudan, as they have outrun their
course. In fact, they are further hindering prospects for
progress in the country.
The Niger, Tunisia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines and South Africa welcome the pledges
made during the High-Level Sudan Partnership
Conference to assist with the socioeconomic situation
in the country. We trust that this support will aide in
alleviating a number of the hardships with which the
Sudan is currently grappling.
On the security front, we welcome the transitional
Government’s efforts aimed at working with the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) to tackle the increased levels
of intercommunal violence in the country. We also
welcome the steps the transitional Government has
made towards the national plan for protecting civilians.
As UNAMID draws down, the A3+1 encourage it to

S/PV. 8761

continue working with national- and local-authority
stakeholders, as well as the United Nations country team
and other partners, in protecting civilians, facilitating
mediation and addressing underlying issues of access
to land and resources.
The A3+1 look forward to the urgent appointment
of a Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to assume overall authority, provide strategic direction
for all activities of UNITAMS, fulfil an advisory and
advocacy role at the political level and coordinate the
efforts of the international community in support of the
strategic objectives of the UNITAMS mandate.
As it shares borders with key countries in its region
of Africa that are pivotal to unlocking the peace and
security of the region and the whole African continent,
the Sudan is of geostrategic importance. It is therefore
imperative that the Security Council continue to ensure
stability in the Sudan. As Chair of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the Sudan is critical in
building cohesion in the Horn of Africa.
It is the considered view of the Niger, Tunisia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines and South Africa that the
global environment remains difficult and uncertain.
Thirty-two million people have been infected by
COVID-19, and a million have perished. All of our
economies have been battered, with no exceptions.
None of us in this Chamber — the permanent five
and the elected ten alike — could have predicted in
September 2019 that in September 2020 we would be
living through the turbulent times occasioned by the
pandemic — no one. The Sudan is part of this world that
we are talking about, as are Africa and the Caribbean,
and all our countries and regions.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank Under-SecretariesGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo and Jean-Pierre Lacroix for
their briefings.
I will focus on three aspects: the protection of the
most vulnerable, the progress of the peace process and
the transition.
The establishment of a new mission is a significant
moment. It is a matter of translating on the ground
the decision taken by the Security Council, in order
to concretize the objectives of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) to support the political transition and help

20-248179/17

S/PV.8761

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the Sudan regain peace and security, with a particular
focus on Darfur and the Two Areas.
Without going back over the entirety of the tasks
expected of the Mission, Belgium wishes to reiterate
the importance of supporting the protection of civilians
and strengthening respect for human rights. We are
appalled by the persistence of serious violations against
children in the Sudan, in particular the frequency of
sexual attacks, mutilations and murder. These violations
are committed by all parties to the conflict.
The Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, chaired by Belgium, is currently discussing
that reality. We welcome the efforts of the Sudanese
Government to integrate the issue of children into
its national plan for the protection of civilians. The
amendments to the penal code adopted in July are
also an encouraging sign; they improve the protection
of vulnerable population groups, including children.
These concerns should be addressed in a balanced
way in planning for UNITAMS, including providing
sufficient capacity dedicated to child protection.
The peace process in the Sudan has made significant
progress in recent weeks, with agreements in Juba and
Addis Ababa. Belgium calls on the parties to maintain
their commitment through constructive dialogue and
to rapidly implement the agreements once they have
been concluded. We encourage the groups that have
remained absent to return to the negotiating table. This
is essential for sustaining peace.
Belgium welcomes the fact that the talks do not
sidestep such difficult issues as the return of displaced
persons, land ownership and transitional justice.
These elements are essential to laying the foundations
for reconciliation among communities; the current
persistence of conflicts among these communities
demonstrates their necessity.
Supporting reconciliation is one of the strategic
priorities of UNITAMS, and we will closely monitor
activities in that area. Since we are talking about
justice, we have noted the intention of the Sudanese
authorities to cooperate with the International Criminal
Court, whose work we support. We also commend
efforts in cooperation with the authorities and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur to defuse tensions in Darfur. Civilians
remain vulnerable to attacks, and we are concerned
about the recent increase in violence in the region.
In addition to the peace process and restoring security in
10/17

25/09/2020

Darfur and in the Two Areas, the Sudan currently faces
many other challenges. The socioeconomic situation
is fragile and has been exacerbated by the effects of
the pandemic and major floods, disproportionately
affecting women, children and displaced persons. Such
a situation may also lead to political instability; it is
a test of the maturity of the political leaders. We note
with satisfaction the ambitious programme of political
reforms undertaken by the transitional Government
and its willingness to address the economic situation.
UNITAMS, in collaboration with the country team,
will be the Sudan’s key partner for the transition period.
The Sudan can already count on the support of the
international community, as demonstrated by the highlevel conference held in June. Belgium, together with
the European Union, stands with the Sudanese people.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Ms. DiCarlo and Mr. Lacroix for
their very comprehensive briefings. France’s priority
is to support the transition that began more than a
year ago. The progress made in recent months is
encouraging, particularly with regard to the momentum
of the peace negotiations, which the Government has
prioritized. We will be highly vigilant with regard to
the implementation of those agreements. We also call
on the parties that remain outside that process to assume
responsibility by returning to the peace talks and draw
lessons from the new political situation in the Sudan.
We remain concerned about the ongoing violence
in Darfur, both between communities and within
armed groups, which continues to result in numerous
civilian casualties, including among displaced
persons, in violation of international humanitarian
law. The deployment of 1,500 troops of the Sudanese
Armed Forces, announced at the end of July, is very
encouraging and demonstrates a clear willingness to
address such challenges. That must be translated into
the effective protection of, and the reduction of threats
to, the civilian population. That is critical to creating
the conditions for the withdrawal of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), which is anticipated by the Sudanese
Government by the end of December. It will be up to
the Council to take a decision by that date based on an
assessment of the situation on the ground drawn up by
the Secretary-General. In that context, the structure of
UNITAMS proposed by the Secretary-General provides
an adequate framework. The Mission must be provided
with the necessary human and financial resources
20-24817

25/09/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

in order to take shape. That is especially important
with regard to the mandate to protect civilians, in
particular women, children and humanitarian and
medical workers.
In that regard, let me underline the primary
responsibility of the Sudanese authorities, which goes
without saying. The Mission has a broad mandate in
that area in order to support their efforts, particularly
in terms of human rights and police capacity-building.
In that respect, I welcome the cooperation between
the Sudanese Armed Forces and UNAMID forces to
deal with the clashes last July, which is a step in the
right direction. In the coming months, it is also crucial
to fully leverage the synergies between UNAMID and
UNITAMS without exception. There is no doubt that
mobilizing UNAMID’s capacities and footprint can
help to expedite the transition to UNITAMS.
In that context, France will continue to fully
support the Sudanese Government on several fronts. In
addition to security issues, the Sudanese authorities are
facing significant economic challenges, with necessary
structural reforms, as well as health reforms given the
impact of the coronavirus disease and humanitarian
challenges due to the floods that have affected more
than 800,000 people in the Nile basin, from the north
to the south. France expresses its condolences to
the victims of the floods. We will continue to work
alongside the Sudanese people through our emergency
relief. Finally, we welcome the agreement reached with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights to open a local office in Khartoum
and regional offices, including in Darfur.

S/PV. 8761

and south of the country must be addressed effectively.
Indonesia firmly believes in the virtue of sustained and
owned dialogue towards a lasting reconciliation. We
call on the Government of the Sudan, in coordination
with the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), to intensify dialogue
and community engagement in response to the clashes.
Indonesia joins the Secretary-General in commending
the Government of the Sudan’s prompt response to the
clashes, particularly through the national committee
for the protection of civilians and the facilitation of
reconciliatory dialogue among the communities.
My second point is on enhancing humanitarian
assistance. As reported by the Secretary-General (see
S/2020/912), intercommunal clashes, the economic
crisis and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
have exacerbated the humanitarian situation in the
Sudan. We strongly believe that the improvement in the
general well-being of all the Sudanese is inseparable
from the country’s political transition. Political progress
should be experienced by all Sudanese people in their
daily lives.
The presence of UNAMID remains crucial to
ensuring the provision of humanitarian assistance and
basic services to the Sudanese. We call on UNAMID to
enhance its cooperation with the Government to ensure
the delivery of humanitarian and medical assistance,
including to bolster the Sudan’s efforts to deal with the
COVID-19 pandemic.

Indonesia is encouraged by the achievements of
the Government of the Sudan, especially the historic
comprehensive peace agreements with armed groups
in Darfur and the Two Areas. We commend the Sudan
on reaching yet another important milestone on its
journey towards peace, stability and prosperity. We
therefore need to remain vigilant in order to ensure
that those achievements can be sustained and further
enhanced. In that regard, I would like to underline three
important points.

My third point concerns ensuring a smooth
transition to the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS). Indonesia
welcomes the establishment of the Executive
Committee for Coordination with UNITAMS. We
believe that the smooth transition to UNITAMS can be
achieved only through close coordination between the
United Nations and the Government of the Sudan, as
well as the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, in the UNITAMS planning
process. Indonesia emphasizes the need for close
cooperation and collaboration among all relevant
parties in the UNITAMS planning process, especially
on the transfer of assets. As an inseparable part of the
Sudan’s transition, the success of UNITAMS should be
the priority of all parties.

My first point concerns strengthening intercommunal
dialogue. The intercommunal tensions in the east, west

Let me conclude by reiterating Indonesia’s deep
commitment to supporting the Sudan in this new

Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Like other speakers, let
me begin by thanking the briefers, Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
for their comprehensive presentations.

20-2481711/17

S/PV.8761

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

chapter of its journey towards an enduring peace,
security and prosperity.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): We join other
Council members in thanking the briefers for their
insightful overviews.
Last year, during the high-level week of the
General Assembly, Prime Minister Hamdok introduced
his Government’s ambitious goals to bring peace to
the country, lead a successful transition to democracy
and restore the economy. Despite the multiple
challenges, such as the coronavirus disease, the Sudan
has made great efforts to achieve those goals. While
a great deal of work still lies ahead, we recognize
the progress already achieved. In that regard, allow
me to congratulate the Sudan on reaching the peace
agreement. We further encourage the parties that have
not yet joined the peace agreement to do so urgently. We
hope that this agreement will pave the way for lasting
peace in the Sudan. For this to happen, addressing the
root causes of conflict is imperative.
As with any peace agreement, implementation is
key. While the Sudan will be clearly in the lead, we hope
that it can feel the full and unwavering support of the
international community through the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) in the endeavour of implementation.
We also welcome the progress the Sudan has made
in the political transition to democracy. For instance, the
appointment of civilian governors was a key milestone.
Equally significant was the adoption of legal reforms
that strengthen human rights. We encourage the Sudan
to continue on this path of institution-building, as
strong democratic institutions form the backbone of
democracy. Again, we hope that UNITAMS can be a
solid partner in the endeavour of helping the Sudan to
achieve full democracy.
The Sudan continues to face immense economic
challenges. Estonia was proud to contribute to the HighLevel Sudan Partnership Conference held in June, but
it recognizes that more needs to be done. The Sudan
needs continued support to heal its crippled economy.
We hope that sustained support will be provided by
UNITAMS, among other actors.
UNITAMS was established with the sole purpose
of supporting the Sudan during its historic transition.
Given the immense challenges the Sudan is facing, it
is crucial that UNITAMS have sufficient capacity and
12/17

25/09/2020

adequate resources and be fit for purpose to offer support
in all areas where the Sudan needs help. This also applies
to the security situation. We welcome the willingness
of the Sudan to address civilian protection head-on, but
also recognize some of the capacity constraints, where
the United Nations can be helpful. On that note, we
would also like to commend the cooperation between
the Sudan and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in addressing
the recent outbreak of violence in Darfur. It serves as
a true example of how much more can be achieved if
actors work together for a common goal. Therefore, it
is our hope that UNITAMS, as well as UNAMID, are
embraced by the Sudan as true partners that will help
the Sudan to rise to the challenges it is currently facing.
We also join other colleagues in highlighting the
importance of appointing the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General as soon as possible.
In conclusion, Estonia wants to see the Sudan
succeed. We hope that, with the support of the United
Nations, including UNITAMS, the Sudan is able to
reach all of its goals of achieving peace, democracy
and prosperity.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Under-SecretariesGeneral DiCarlo and Lacroix for their briefings.
The United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS) represents
a genuine and valuable opportunity to help the Sudan
achieve lasting peace. The fact that the Mission has the
unanimous support of the Security Council should not
be taken for granted. However, the Mission is facing
many challenges in achieving its objectives. The Sudan
is in the midst of political reform and faces intense
pressure from the Sudanese people to meet their needs.
That is in addition to the outbreak of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the effects of climate
change and an increase in humanitarian needs, driven
primarily by an increase in intercommunal violence.
According to the most recent reports, 2.8 million
people currently face a food crisis or levels of emergency
food insecurity in Darfur, and almost 400,000 people
have been affected by heavy rains and flooding.
Insecurity and human rights violations are also
increasing, affecting vulnerable populations, especially
women, who continue to be affected by high levels of
sexual and gender-based violence in some areas during
the COVID-19 lockdown. In that regard, we welcome
20-24817

25/09/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the recent legal amendments for the protection of the
most vulnerable populations, including the eradication
of cultural practices against women and girls through
the prohibition of female genital mutilation and the
abolition of the death penalty for persons under 18.
We add our voice to calls for the allocation of
adequate resources to continue child protection efforts
and to enable UNITAMS to fully implement its child
protection mandate. It is essential that child protection
advisers be provided and that they have adequate
funding and sufficient seniority, as well as a monitoring
and reporting mechanism.
We recognize the Sudan’s efforts to advance the
transition and welcome the decision of the parties to
maintain their commitment to the Juba process and
the decision of the Sudanese Government and the
Sudanese Revolutionary Front to sign a comprehensive
peace agreement in Juba on 3 October. All the parties
in the Sudan, including armed groups, must remain
committed to addressing the root causes of the conflict
in order to establish a safe environment for all Sudanese,
especially the most vulnerable.
In that regard, the focus of UNITAMS in supporting
the Government in the protection of civilians is vital.
All efforts to protect civilians must be a priority and
a shared responsibility. The transitional Government’s
initiative of a national plan for the protection of civilians
is a positive step in that direction. It is our hope that
the support of UNITAMS in this area will provide new
opportunities to ensure that the unarmed protection of
civilians is a more widely implemented approach.
While we acknowledge the improvements in the
protection of women’s rights and gender equality in the
comprehensive peace agreement, we remain concerned
that women’s formal participation in peace talks
has been marginal in most cases. We also encourage
the Government to continue its efforts to improve
humanitarian access and call on non-State armed
groups to allow the safe and unhindered delivery of
humanitarian assistance to civilians in need.
Finally, the political transition of the Sudan remains
fragile. The recent increase in intercommunal violence
is of great concern and calls for a comprehensive
response that addresses the urgent need for peace of the
Sudanese people. As the Sudanese transition evolves,
tangible progress on human rights, justice and inclusive
governance will ultimately determine whether the
aspirations of the Sudanese become a reality. It also

S/PV. 8761

represents a crucial opportunity for the United Nations
and the Council to support the search for peace in
the Sudan, and we believe that UNITAMS is a useful
means to that end.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America): I
want to thank Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo and
Lacroix for their remarks and the updates regarding the
latest developments in the Sudan.
I would also like to welcome the progress made
on the ground since the Security Council met in June
(see S/2020/496) to authorize the creation of the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan (UNITAMS).
The United States commends the efforts of the
civilian-led transitional Government, the Sudanese
Revolutionary Front and the Sudan Liberation ArmyMinni Minawi faction to reach an agreement that, if
upheld an earnest and in a spirit of peace, reconciliation
and development, could usher in a new era throughout
the Sudan. It is now up to the parties to implement
the agreement transparently and in a timely manner.
We strongly believe the agreement can bring longterm peace, justice and stability to those who have
endured cycles of widespread violence and been
victims of atrocities committed with impunity. The
next steps will not be easy but the United States is
committed to supporting this agreement because we
believe it can serve as a foundation for a new just and
democratic Sudan.
Similarly, the United States welcomes the
declaration of principles recently agreed to by the
civilian-led transitional Government and the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement-North. We urge
the parties to begin discussions based on those
principles soon.
The Juba peace agreement and the Addis Ababa
declaration of principles build upon the tremendous
momentum in the Sudan that began in late 2018 and
early 2019 to achieve peace, freedom and justice, as
well as equal rights and opportunities for all Sudanese.
We call on the Sudanese Liberation Movement, led by
Abdul Wahid, to without delay engage the civilian-led
transitional Government to further the cause of peace.
Comprehensive peace will need an inclusive
and harmonized peace process. Now more than ever,
UNITAMS is needed to support the Sudanese people,
and we commend the efforts of the United Nations to

20-2481713/17

S/PV.8761

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

lay the groundwork for an effective United Nations
presence in the Sudan. We hope that, despite the delays
in identifying a Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, the United Nations will move quickly to hire
and deploy UNITAMS personnel.
The United States strongly believes that UNITAMS
will be able to fulfil its mandate to support the political
transition and peace process, assist peacebuilding,
development and humanitarian assistance efforts
and provide critical assistance for security sector
reform, police training, the rule of law and inclusive
civilian governance.
At the same time, we are deeply concerned with
the lack of accountability for recent violence in
Darfur and other conflict-affected areas. We note the
Sudan’s steps to respond to this violence, including
through developing its protection of civilians plan, the
appointment of civilian governors and the deployment
of a joint force.
However, local authorities and the civilian-led
transitional Government must do more to prevent
further militia attacks on civilians, including internally
displaced persons, and to hold those responsible
for the horrific violence at Masteri and elsewhere.
We urge the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and other United
Nations agencies to continue to coordinate to protect
civilians. The violence, which left hundreds dead and
thousands displaced, is a reminder to us all that the
protection of civilians must always be at the forefront
of our deliberations and decisions with respect to the
Sudan, including during our upcoming discussions on
the future of UNAMID.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to thank
Under-Secretaries-Generals Rosemary Di Carlo and
Jean-Pierre Lacroix for their comprehensive updates. I
welcome the presence of my dear friend the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of the Sudan at
this meeting.
Viet Nam warmly welcomes a number of positive
developments in the Sudan, in general, and Darfur, in
particular, over the past few months. We commend the
efforts of the transitional Government in promoting
peace, stability and development in the country, as well
as in responding to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. It is our sincere hope that the historic
peace agreement initialled on 31 August between the
Government and the Sudanese Revolutionary Front and
14/17

25/09/2020

the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi faction will
open a new chapter of peace in the country. We applaud
the efforts of the parties in conducting negotiations
largely through remote means, as well as neighbouring
South Sudan’s efforts in relentlessly mediating the
peace process. It shows that COVID-19 cannot prevent
genuine will to make peace.
We would also like to reiterate our support for the
work of the United Nations, the African Union and other
relevant partners in contributing to the peace process in
the Sudan. At the same time, we acknowledge that the
Sudan continues to face many challenges. It is crucial
that all the relevant parties in the Sudan continue to
fully uphold their agreements, thereby contributing to
long-term peace and stability in the country. Allow me
to highlight the following points.
First, the full implementation of the Constitutional
Declaration and the peace agreement remain the most
important tasks to achieve long-term peace and stability
in the Sudan. We welcome the appointment of the interim
governors in 18 states and call on the Government to
make further progress on the transitional process.
Furthermore, we urge the remaining armed groups
in Darfur to engage in peace negotiations as soon as
possible. We believe that more confidence-building
measures should be supported in that regard. The
support of the United Nations and the African Union,
as well as the mediation role of South Sudan, can be
further strengthened. In the light of the challenges of
COVID-19, it is important to support the Government
in maintaining dialogue with the relevant parties in
Darfur, including via remote means.
Secondly, we take positive note that the security
situation in Sudan, in general, and Darfur, in particular,
has become more stable. We urge the armed groups in
Darfur to continue to exercise restraint. At the same
time, inter-communal violence in Darfur remains an
issue of particular concern. We note the efforts of the
Government in addressing the recent incidents and
call on the Government to find comprehensive and
sustainable solutions to address the root causes of
intercommunal violence in Darfur, including measures
to promote dialogue and reconciliation among different
tribes and communities. We also commend the efforts
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) in contributing to peace
and stability in the region. As the mission is in the
drawdown process, we encourage UNAMID to further
20-24817

25/09/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8761

engage in capacity-building activities for Government
security forces.

a peace agreement and the start of implementation by
the parties of their obligations.

Thirdly, it is important to address the critical
economic and humanitarian challenges in the Sudan.
Viet Nam welcomes the commitment of relevant donors
at the Sudan Partnership Conference on 25 June in
support of the country. The international community
should continue to support the Sudanese Government
in addressing the COVID-19 pandemic as well as the
current socioeconomic challenges, including food
insecurity, natural disasters and climate change.
As noted in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2020/912), the transition needs both financial and
political support. The Sudan’s access to international
financial assistance, investment and debt relief in
the short and medium term needs to be facilitated,
not prevented.

In that connection, we must note the mediation
efforts made by the South Sudanese people and
personally by President Salva Kiir. This is yet further
proof of the effectiveness of the formula “African
solutions to African problems”.

Fourthly, we commend the efforts and cooperation
by the United Nations and the Sudan since June and
look forward to the timely deployment of the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in
Sudan (UNITAMS) to support the Sudan’s transition
and development. We also strongly support the active
role and participation of women in all stages of the
transitional process, and therefore appreciate the efforts
of UNITAMS to support the engagement of women in
that regard.
In conclusion, we fully share the view of the
Secretary-General in his report: the question is whether
the international community can afford not to support
the Sudan as it strives to meet its formidable challenges.
The Security Council simply cannot.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Under-SecretariesGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo and Jean-Pierre Lacroix
for their briefings on the situation in the Sudan and for
the report on the activities of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and
progress in the deployment of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) (S/2020/912).
We would like to begin by sincerely congratulating
the people and the Government of the Sudan. I think
that we can say without exaggeration that a historic
event was achieved. On 31 August, in Juba, agreements
in principle were reached on peace in and the future of
the country. We look forward to the official signing of

We agree with the conclusions contained in the
report of the Secretary-General that the Sudan faces
complex tasks in terms of restoring the country’s
economy and implementing peacebuilding projects.
That is precisely why we believe that the new United
Nations special political mission should reach its
planned capacity as soon as possible. Khartoum has a
right to expect that the international community will
be able to quickly provide the necessary assistance,
and the Security Council should not disappoint the
Sudanese people.
We took note of the proposal by SecretaryGeneral Guterres on the need for rapid agreement on
the modalities for the transfer of assets and support
capacities from UNAMID, which is finalizing its
mandate, to UNITAMS. We deem this initiative very
timely and urge the Secretariat to get to work on
the issue.
We reiterate our position in favour of the final
withdrawal of UNAMID, which has successfully
completed the tasks entrusted to it. The challenges
facing Darfur today are of a peacebuilding rather than
a peacekeeping character. The time has come to focus
on the recovery and economic development of Darfur;
this should be the priority. We believe that it is vital
to stay the course towards the gradual drawdown and
withdrawal of UNAMID, in accordance with the time
frame set out in resolution 2525 (2020).
We note that the way in which events are evolving in
Darfur has not shown any significant negative change.
Intercommunal clashes in certain states, which are
provoked, inter alia, by the seasonal transhumance of
cattle, do not change the overall picture. Furthermore,
the immediate and coordinated response of the
authorities to the events, as well as the implementation
of the national strategy to protect civilians, on which
the Sudan reports to Security Council regularly, once
again demonstrate Khartoum’s commitment to a
holistic approach to addressing the root causes of the
conflict. We can only welcome that.

20-2481715/17

S/PV.8761

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In addition, it is worth recalling that the main
spoiler of the peace process and the person responsible
for the hostility of the Sudan Liberation Army in the
Jebel Marra region remains Abdul Wahid Al-Nur, who
has refused, inter alia, to join the peace agreement. We
again call on those countries that have an influence
on that intransigent opponent to bring the necessary
pressure to bear on him.
We note that the Secretary-General has called once
again for the lifting of unilateral economic sanctions,
including such an anachronism as the fact that the
Sudan remains on the American list of countries that
sponsor terrorism. Obviously, we would like to endorse
that appeal. It is impossible to speak of the importance
of the economic recovery of the country and at the
same time continue to hinder the implementation of
initiatives through international financial institutions.
We see that the lifting of unilateral sanctions is subject
to conditions that have no relation to the peace process
in the Sudan but that reflect the agenda of those who
introduced those restrictions. That kind of cynicism
does not surprise us and has not surprised us for a
long time.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Siddig (Sudan): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of September and
to express our deep appreciation to my friend Dian
Triansyah Djani for Indonesia’s successful presidency
last month. Allow me also to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix and Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for their briefings.
I would also like to extend my thanks and gratitude
to all Security Council members for the support they
expressed and offered to my country.
Late in August and after almost one year of candid
and fruitful negotiations in Juba, the transitional
Government of the Sudan and the major armed groups
in Darfur and the Two Areas of South Kordofan and
Blue Nile concluded a historic peace deal. The deal
is comprehensive in scope and addresses the root
causes of the armed conflicts and political instability
in the country. It includes resource-sharing, land
ownership, social justice, governance and equality
at the national level. The deal also includes clauses
to resolve the consequences of conflicts, including
humanitarian relief, the safe and voluntary return of
internally displaced persons and refugees to their areas
16/17

25/09/2020

of origin, the disarmament of combatants and their
integration into the national army or into society, and
the development, rehabilitation and reconstruction of
the conflict-affected areas.
Three elements characterize this peace deal and
make it different from previous agreements.
First, there is strong political will and commitment
from the transitional Government to deliver peace,
justice and freedom in line with the key objectives of
the Constitutional Document.
Secondly, the agreement was negotiated and
concluded between the Sudanese themselves. As His
Excellency the Prime Minister of the Republic of the
Sudan, Abdalla Hamdok, put it: “This is a Sudanese
peace, made with our own hands and by our own
efforts”. In that regard, the Sudan is deeply thankful to
the Government of South Sudan for its important role in
hosting and facilitating the talks.
Thirdly, the negotiations were conducted between
partners, not between adversaries, in contrast to the
confrontational atmosphere that prevailed during the
previous regime.
Earlier this month, Prime Minister Hamdok
met with the leader of the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-North, Abdelaziz Al-Hilu, in Addis Ababa.
Together they signed a declaration of principles in which
they secured the continuation of the current cessation
of hostilities for the duration of the negotiation process.
They also agreed on six principles that would pave
the way to resolving the few remaining issues. I take
this opportunity to reiterate our call to Abdul Wahid
Mohamed Al-Nur to join the peace process and pursue
a prosperous future of peace and stability in Darfur.
My Government is fully committed to taking on
its responsibility to protect its people in Darfur in
particular and throughout the country in general.
In this regard and following the unfortunate
intercommunal clashes in Darfur at the beginning of
the farming season in July, the Government guaranteed
the non-recurrence of such conflicts by enhancing its
security capabilities in Darfur by sending 15,000 army
and police forces. Additionally, a regionwide arms
collection campaign is under way. Furthermore, peaceful
intercommunal coexistence is being encouraged and
criminal justice mechanisms have been improved and
strengthened. More importantly, the appointment of
civilian governors across the country, most especially
20-24817

25/09/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

in Darfur, would have a profound effect in preserving
security and stability in the region.
In May, the Sudan shared with the Security Council
its national plan to protect civilians in Darfur and the
war-affected areas. The plan is guided by best practices,
as well as successful policies and standards. Ten days
ago, a periodic progress report on the implementation
of the plan was also shared with the Council. On top
of that, the signing of the peace deal would inevitably
clear the way not only for lasting peace but also for a
better civilian protection in the affected areas.
Right after the adoption of resolution 2524 (2020),
by which the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) was
established, the Prime Minister made a decision to
form a national mechanism for coordination with
UNITAMS, and appoint a veteran diplomat as national
coordinator. This interdepartmental coordination
body includes all relevant national authorities and is
tasked with synergizing between the Government and
UNITAMS at the federal and state levels, as well as
with identifying the areas in which the Sudan needs
support. When the Secretariat planning team visited
the Sudan in August, the national mechanism played
a key role in making the visit a success. We will
spare no effort to facilitate the establishment of the
new Mission and ensure a smooth transition from the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur to UNITAMS in December. While thanking the
Security Council and the Secretariat for responding to
the Sudan’s request for creating this special political
mission, we expect further close consultation with the
Government during the planning for the Mission and

S/PV. 8761

the setting of its structure, policies and priorities. It is
also our hope that the Security Council will soon agree
on the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to lead UNITAMS.
All members of the Council know that the
transitional Government of the Sudan is tirelessly
tackling huge challenges. As a result of the economic
mismanagement of the previous regime, the economic
situation is dire. That is coupled with the coronavirus
disease pandemic and the unprecedented level of heavy
rains and devastating floods. This situation requires
the sustained and generous support of the regional and
international partners, including the Sudan’s urgent
removal from the United States State Sponsors of
Terrorism list, which is preventing debt relief, access to
concessionary loans and large-scale foreign investment.
We would like, in this connection, to thank the countries
that participated and pledged in the High-Level Sudan
Partnership Conference, which was held virtually and
co-hosted by Germany, the European Union, the United
Nations and the Government of the Sudan in June, as
well as the follow-up meeting hosted by Saudi Arabia
in August.
The transitional Government of the Sudan will
continue its efforts to make fundamental changes in the
political, social and security landscape in order to build
a prosperous and peaceful country.
The President (spoke in French): I will now
adjourn the meeting so that the Council can continue
its discussion on the subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

20-2481717/17
