UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/38
14 July 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3801st meeting of the Security Council, held on 14 July 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "Civilian
Police in peacekeeping operations", the President of the Security Council made
the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has established or authorized a growing number
of peacekeeping operations which contain both civilian and military
components. It takes particular note of the increasing role and special
functions of civilian police in such operations.
"The Security Council notes the efforts by the General Assembly and
its Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations in carrying out their task
to review all aspects of peacekeeping operations, including, inter alia,
enhancing the capacity of the United Nations system to accommodate the
growing demand for civilian police in peacekeeping operations. It
furthermore commends the efforts of the Secretary-General in this regard.
The Council encourages States to look for further means to enhance the ways
in which civilian police components of peacekeeping operations are set up
and supported.
"The Security Council considers that in operations mandated by the
Security Council or the General Assembly the civilian police perform
indispensable functions in monitoring and training national police forces
and can play a major role, through assistance to local police forces, in
restoring civil order, supporting the rule of law and fostering civil
reconciliation. It sees an increasingly important role for civilian
police, among others, in contributing to the building of confidence and
security between parties and among local populations, in order to prevent
conflict, to contain conflict or to build peace in the aftermath of
conflict.
"The Security Council encourages States to make available to the
United Nations at short notice appropriately trained civilian police, if
possible through the United Nations standby arrangements. It welcomes the
role of United Nations selection assistance teams in this regard.

97-19510 (E)

140797

/...

S/PRST/1997/38
English
Page 2

"The Security Council underlines the importance of the recruitment of
qualified civilian police from the widest possible geographic range to
serve in United Nations operations. It also expresses the importance of
the recruitment of female police officers to United Nations operations.
"The Security Council encourages States individually or collectively
to provide appropriate training of civilian police for international
service. It encourages the Secretary-General to provide assistance and
guidance to Member States in order to promote a standardized approach to
the training and recruitment of civilian police.
"The Security Council underlines the necessity for United Nations
civilian police, in accordance with their mandates, to be trained as
required, inter alia, to render assistance and support in the
reorganization, training and monitoring of national police and to help
defuse tension on the ground through negotiations. The Council furthermore
considers it essential that United Nations civilian police contingents
contain adequate legal expertise.
"The Security Council underlines the need for close coordination
between civilian police and the military, humanitarian and other civilian
components of United Nations operations. It encourages efforts by Member
States to organize joint training between civilian and military components
designated for United Nations operations in order to improve coordination
and security for personnel in the field.
"The Security Council expresses its gratitude to those countries which
have contributed civilian police to the peacekeeping operations of the
United Nations."

-----
