United Nations

S/PV.3505

Security Council

Provisional

Fiftieth Year

3505th Meeting
Tuesday, 28 February 1995, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Legwaila . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Botswana)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Czech Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Honduras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Oman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Cárdenas
Mr. Li Zhaoxing
Mr. Kovanda
Mr. Mérimée
Mr. Graf zu Rantzau
Mr. Martínez Blanco
Mr. Wisnumurti
Mr. Fulci
Mr. Ayewah
Mr. Al-Khussaiby
Mr. Sidorov
Mr. Ubalijoro
Sir David Hannay
Mr. Gnehm

Agenda
The situation in the occupied Arab territories
Letter dated 22 February 1995 from the Permanent Representative of Djibouti to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/1995/151)

95-85180 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Section,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fiftieth year
The meeting was called to order at 11.45 a.m.

3505th meeting
28 February 1995
the illegal Israeli settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory.”

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the occupied Arab territories
Letter dated 22 February 1995 from the
Permanent Representative of Djibouti to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1995/151)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Algeria, Brunei Darussalam, Djibouti, Egypt, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Malaysia, Morocco,
Pakistan, Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey
and the United Arab Emirates, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Yaacobi (Israel)
took a place at the Council table; Mr. Lamamra
(Algeria), Mr. Abdul Momin (Brunei Darussalam), Mr.
Olhaye (Djibouti), Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. Kharrazi
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Owada (Japan), Mr.
Abu Odeh (Jordan), Mr. Razali (Malaysia), Mr.
Snoussi (Morocco), Mr. Marker (Pakistan), Mr.
Eltinay (Sudan), Mr. Awad (Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia), Mr. Batu (Turkey) and Mr.
Samhan (United Arab Emirates) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to participate in the
current debate in accordance with the rules of procedure
and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a place at the Council table.
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 28 February 1995 from
the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, which reads
as follows:
“In my capacity as Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, I have the honour to request that
I be invited to participate in the meeting of the
Security Council to consider the question of the
establishment of Israeli settlements in the territories
occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, and the
dangerous consequences of these activities on the
Palestinian people and the Middle East peace
process, under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council.”
On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice in
this matter, I propose that the Council extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 28 February 1995 from
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as document S/1995/166 and which
reads as follows:

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 28 February 1995 from the
Permanent Representative of Morocco to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:

“I have the honour to request that, in accordance
with its previous practice, the Security Council invite
Dr. Nasser Al-Kidwa, Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, to participate in the
current debate of the Security Council with regard to

“I have the honour to request that the Security
Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Ambassador Engin A. Ansay, Permanent Observer
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference to the

2

Security Council
Fiftieth year
United Nations, during the Council’s discussion of the
item entitled The situation in the occupied Arab
territories'.”
That letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/1995/165.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to His
Excellency Mr. Ansay.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in response to the
request dated 22 February 1995 from the Permanent
Representative of Djibouti to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, document
S/1995/151.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/1995/11,
letter dated 6 January 1995 from the Permanent
Representative of Algeria to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General; S/1995/14 and S/1995/95, letters
dated 9 and 31 January 1995 respectively from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General; and S/1995/50, letter
dated 17 January 1995 from the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People addressed to the Secretary-General.
The first speaker is the Permanent Observer of
Palestine, on whom I now call.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (interpretation from
Arabic): Mr. President, it is our pleasure to participate in
the deliberations in the Security Council during the few
remaining hours before the end of this month under your
wise presidency. Allow me, Sir, to seize this opportunity to
express my congratulations to you on a very successful
presidency of the Security Council during the month of
February, and also to express to the friendly country of
Botswana our congratulations on its being a member of the
Security Council.
Allow me also to commend the presidency of the
Permanent Representative of Argentina, Ambassador Emilio
Cárdenas, with whom we were proud to cooperate on this
issue when it was submitted for consideration by the
Council in January.

3505th meeting
28 February 1995
Throughout their recent history the Palestinian
people have been subjected to grave injustices, including
the uprooting of a large proportion of them from their
land and homes and the subjugation of those who
remained to occupation, repression and the denial of their
right to self-determination, a right due to all the peoples
of the Earth. For many years, the international
community, including with the United Nations, has been
dealing with the question of Palestine in all its aspects in
an attempt to put an end to the injustice done to the
Palestinian people and to allow for the achievement of a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East.
Unfortunately, no great successes have been achieved in
this respect, despite the significant steps that have been
taken and despite some accomplishments towards the
achievement of the goals for which we strive.
One of the harshest things endured by our people,
which is also a grave violation of their inalienable rights,
is the campaign of settler colonialism waged on
Palestinian lands occupied by Israel, the occupying
Power, since 1967, including Jerusalem. This campaign
was carried out in the past, and continues to be waged,
before the very eyes of the international community, and
despite the will and the stated positions of the United
Nations as set forth in various relevant resolutions. The
fact is that Israel, since the early days of the occupation,
under both Likud and Labour-led Governments, has
confiscated Palestinian land and State-owned land for the
purpose of constructing many settlements, and has
transferred large numbers of Israeli settlers to those
settlements in an obvious campaign to colonize the land
it occupies and to change the land’s demographic
structure, thus paving the way to the total or partial
annexation of this land.
All this has been done using different methods and
at different rates throughout time, in accordance with the
prevailing domestic, as well as international, situation at
any given period. Nevertheless, it has always been
carried out in a way in which each step complemented the
preceding one, amounting to a calculated policy with very
clear objectives. This has always constituted a clear
violation of international humanitarian law, particularly
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, as well as of the
resolutions of the various bodies of the United Nations.
The General Assembly has adopted scores of resolutions
reaffirming the applicability of the Fourth Geneva
Convention to all the territories occupied since 1967 and
calling upon Israel to abide by the provisions of the
Convention. These resolutions also consider the Israeli
settlements in the occupied territories to be illegal, and

3

Security Council
Fiftieth year
demand that Israel, the occupying Power, immediately
cease its policy and practice of settlement-building.
Further, the Security Council has adopted a large
number of resolutions with similar content with regard to
the applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention, and the
Council has adopted more than five resolutions dealing
primarily with the settlements and the confiscation of land.
Some of these resolutions, in addition to those provisions,
have called for the dismantlement of the settlements. The
Council also formed a commission of three of its members
to examine the matter and present reports to the Council,
and this has been done.
We are witnessing a rare case in the history of the
United Nations, as well as in contemporary international
relations, in that a Member State has for over 25 years
continued a specific policy and action, thereby creating
facts on the ground, despite the consistent and clear
positions taken by the Security Council and General
Assembly. The failure of the Council to impose its will in
this case, compared with some other cases, has allowed
Israel to continue pursuing its policy up until the present
date, resulting in the existence of approximately 140
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory, inhabited
by approximately 300,000 settlers, including those settlers
brought to East Jerusalem.
The settlers are a major source of repression and
injustice against the Palestinian people, ranging from
stealing their lands and their water, to interfering in and
even destroying their daily lives — as in the case of the
city of Hebron, where the presence of about 400 settlers has
led to the destruction of normal life for some 80,000
Palestinians — and to repression and outright harassment
by armed settlers, who in reality constitute an armed militia
in the occupied Palestinian territory.
Is there any comparable situation elsewhere in the
world? Has anything like this ever happened in the history
of the twentieth century? The Council has a fundamental
responsibility in this regard, including the preservation of
the integrity of international law and international
humanitarian law, and of the integrity of previous Security
Council resolutions. It has a responsibility to ensure that
justice is achieved and that hope is restored to the
Palestinian people by bringing a final and comprehensive
end to any and all settlement activity in the occupied
territories.
Then came the peace process and the historic
handshake at the White House upon the signing of the

4

3505th meeting
28 February 1995
Declaration of Principles, which was followed by many
agreements, the most important of which was the first
agreement on the implementation of the Declaration of
Principles, relating to the Gaza Strip and the Jericho area.
No one, at least no one on the Palestinian side, imagined
that the Israeli Government would actually continue
carrying out its settlement policy while seeking to move
forward in the peace process: the two things simply
cannot be reconciled.
The Declaration of Principles led to the
postponement of negotiations on a number of important
issues, including settlements. This, of course, does not
and should not mean any change in our position or in the
position of the international community in this regard, or
for that matter any change in the status of the settlements,
which are illegal and constitute a real obstacle to the
achievement of a comprehensive peace. The same logic
must be applied also to the issue of Jerusalem and to
other issues on which negotiations have been postponed.
The minimum required for negotiations in good faith
is that the negotiating parties desist from creating facts on
the ground that affect the negotiating process and preempt
the results of that process. Unfortunately, however, the
Israeli Government is doing exactly the opposite with
regard to the settlements, particularly around Jerusalem,
with regard to Jerusalem in general and in respect of
certain other areas, such as Hebron. This situation
requires the full and scrupulous implementation of all
relevant Security Council resolutions, the most recent
among them being resolution 904 (1994).
The present Government of Israel claimed that its
settlements policy would be different from that of
previous Governments, but the facts do not bear this out.
Some sources have estimated that there has been a 10per-cent increase in the number of units built under the
current Government, and other sources estimate the
increase in the number of settlers as 15 per cent.
Moreover, it is a fact that the Israeli Cabinet committee
overseeing the matter has recently taken specific decisions
to continue settlement activities, as we indicated in our
letter dated 31 January 1995 addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/1995/95).
We firmly believe that any settlement activity in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem,
constitutes a flagrant violation of the letter and the spirit
of the Declaration of Principles, the Fourth Geneva
Convention and relevant Security Council resolutions.
What is needed now is the immediate and total cessation

Security Council
Fiftieth year
of all settlement activity, whatever its nature or volume —
full stop. The alternative could seriously undermine the
peace process. Clearly, the Palestinian situation has reached
the point where the average person can no longer accept
any other position or practice.
The Council therefore has a basic responsibility here,
in addition to the responsibilities to which I referred earlier:
guaranteeing the continuation and integrity of the peace
process, as the Council has done in the past with the
adoption of resolution 904 (1994), which helped salvage the
peace process and set it back on the right path.
We cannot continue to talk about our main subject
without referring to other Israeli practices that violate the
human rights of the Palestinian people or that are not
compatible with, and actually endanger, the peace process.
These include the repeated closures of the occupied
territory, the isolation of Jerusalem and the delays in the
implementation of agreements between the two sides.
Some quarters in the media are presenting the closure
issue just as the Israelis do, as though it were only a way
to prevent Palestinians, including Palestinian labourers,
from entering Israel and to prevent traffic in the other
direction as well. If that were all it was, we would have
accepted it on the basis of our national pride and dignity,
despite Israel’s full responsibility for the situation that has
resulted from its policies, which destroyed the Palestinian
economy during the prolonged occupation. But the matter
is much worse than that. The closure also divides the
Palestinian land by isolating some parts from others —
Gaza from the West Bank, the West Bank from Jerusalem
and even parts of the West Bank from each other — and by
isolating the entire Palestinian territory from the outside
world.
How can this be connected in any way to Israeli
security concerns? Further, how can Israel, unilaterally and
without warning, close the border crossings agreed upon in
the Declaration of Principles? The closure is a matter
completely different from that of separation. It constitutes
an act of revenge and punishment against the Palestinian
people and it violates many provisions of the agreement
reached between the two sides. This could be said also
about the isolation of East Jerusalem from the Palestinian
people and from the rest of the West Bank, in spite of the
clear fact that it is the religious, cultural and economic
centre of the Palestinian people.
The other outstanding issue is that of Israeli delays in
completing implementation of all the provisions of the

3505th meeting
28 February 1995
Agreement on the Gaza Strip and the Jericho Area,
including that providing for safe passage and those
relating to commercial activities and Palestinian financial
rights. In addition, there have been delays and
procrastination in the implementation of the second phase
of the Declaration of Principles, which was due to begin
over seven months ago, especially in relation to the
redeployment of the Israeli army away from populated
areas and to convening Palestinian elections.
We are not talking here about mistakes or
shortcomings. Mistakes do happen. Neither are we are
speaking of reactions — for example, reactions to the
attacks perpetrated by radical elements against Israeli
targets. We have firmly condemned these attacks and
have tried, within our limited resources, to deal with such
acts as well as with their underlying causes in order to
put an end to them, thereby maintaining law and order
and achieving peace and security for both sides. We
remain convinced that the fundamental solution to this
phenomenon is a political one and that it is directly linked
to socio-economic and political aspects.
Therefore, we are speaking here about positions and
practices, some of which have been interpreted differently
but that nevertheless represent what we believe is a policy
aimed at delaying the implementation of the agreements
reached. The most striking thing here is that such
positions and practices continue despite several important
meetings, such as the recent Cairo summit and the
Foreign Ministers’ meeting at Blair House in Washington,
and despite all the other efforts made by parties
concerned with the preservation of the peace process.
The peace process is walking a tight rope. It is no
exaggeration to say that it is experiencing a real crisis.
The process must be salvaged, and this can be achieved
only through the complete fulfilment of the parties’
contractual obligations emanating from the agreements we
have reached, including also the time framework, which
is an integral part of the agreements. We also need to put
an end to policies and practices that violate these
agreements and are contrary to their letter and spirit. It is
also necessary to negotiate in good faith in order to
implement them.
For our part, we reaffirm our strategic commitment
to the achievement of peace and to the ongoing peace
process, and we should like to believe that this applies
also to the Israeli side. We are confident that the sponsors
of the peace process will indeed fulfil the duties that they
have shouldered in this regard, and we are also confident

5

Security Council
Fiftieth year
that the other important and active parties and partners,
such as the European Union and Egypt, will spare no effort
in assisting the peace process.
To achieve the ultimate goal of peace, it is imperative
to take the first, important step, one that could open the
way and demonstrate good intentions, namely, the total
cessation of all settlement activities. It is obvious that, in
this respect, we need the backing and support of the
Security Council. We are confident that the Council will
take the necessary actions in this regard.
The President: I thank the Permanent Observer of
Palestine for his kind words addressed to me. The next
speaker is the representative of Djibouti. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): Mr. President, we recognize
the gravity of the issue that the Arab Group is bringing
before the Council at this time, and we are confident that
under your experienced, wise and balanced direction, the
deliberations of the Council are in steady hands. We wish
to express our deep appreciation for the very capable and
skilful manner in which Ambassador Emilio J. Cárdenas
helped to guide the Council to an auspicious beginning this
year. We also wish to extend our best wishes to the new
members of the Council, whose participation bodes well for
what may again be a year of drama for the international
community.
As Chairman of the Arab Group for the month of
February, and on behalf of the members of the Group, I
have the honour to raise for consideration the question of
the establishment of Israeli settlements in the territories it
has occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, and the
dangerous consequences of those activities for the
Palestinian people and the Middle East peace process as a
whole. We believe that the draft resolution before the
Council is moderate and balanced, and is a positive
reflection of the desire of the Arab Group to restart the
negotiations in good faith. We ask the Council to conclude
its present deliberations on this matter by adopting the draft
resolution.
A widespread and pervasive mood of mounting
disenchantment has began to permeate the Arab world, and
it is the direct consequence of the near-total lack of
progress in the negotiations between the Palestinians and
the Israeli authorities following the historic handshake
between Chairman Arafat and Prime Minister Rabin during
the signing of the Declaration of Principles at the White
House in September 1993.

6

3505th meeting
28 February 1995
Those Principles made no attempt to explore or to
resolve the critical differences and issues standing
between the Palestinians and Israel, nor were they
intended to. Rather, they sought to set a tone, to create a
momentum and direction toward the resolution of all
substantive matters separating the two parties. Certainly,
it was implicit in the negotiations that Palestinian
autonomy and self-rule over the West Bank and Gaza
were the immediate goals, and that the Palestinian
Authority was but an interim step in the preparation of
the elections designed to give voice to Palestinian
political preferences and to give them full control over
those areas.
But while the Palestinian leaders were negotiating
with a view to ending the Israeli occupation, the Israeli
Government, by its actions, seemed intent upon making
that occupation endure. The agreement’s stipulations for
Palestinian elections in July of 1994, for the withdrawal
or redeployment of Israeli forces from Arab towns and
cities for a safe travel corridor for Palestinians between
the West Bank and Gaza and for the release of Arab
prisoners were all quick to disappear.
We cannot accept the Israeli position that, failing a
demonstration by the Palestinian Authority of its ability
to control all acts of terrorism, implementation of the
terms of the agreement cannot continue. In fact, in 27
years of stifling occupation, Israel has failed to halt the
violence. Besides, the evidence appears to show that the
Palestinian Authority has maintained the called-for control
over all PLO elements and personnel to ensure their
compliance with the agreement and prevent violations and
discipline violators. If anything, the bulk of any terrorist
acts must be laid at the door of non-PLO elements in
Palestine. To saddle Chairman Arafat and the Palestinian
Authority now with the task of stamping out terrorism
and, until this is achieved, maintaining the border closure,
defeats the basic objectives of the peace process and
makes a mockery of the honest efforts exerted by the
Arabs.
If the issue of terrorism is to be employed as a
device to halt progress, then surely those factors
contributing to it must be emphasized. Few impediments
to progress are more implacable and emotional than that
of Israeli settlers who both remain in and continue to
settle the occupied territories, and that this could be
supported by the Israeli Government in full knowledge of
the ultimate and unavoidable consequences is difficult to
believe when there is plainly a direct correlation between

Security Council
Fiftieth year
the violence in the occupied territories and the continued
expansion of Jewish settlements in the West Bank.
It is virtually axiomatic that for the peace process to
resume in a meaningful manner, settlements in the West
Bank must be immediately frozen and those in Gaza
dismantled. To do otherwise exacerbates the security
situation, continues the unlawful application of the law to
Palestinians, fans the flames of resentment and offers
another pretext for the continued presence of Israeli forces.
This simply delays withdrawal, elections and progress in
the peace process. Should extremist elements gain control
of the Israeli Government, one could expect not simply the
halt of progress towards peace and resolution, but also
retrogression to conditions which spawned the outbreak of
the intifadah.
Contrary to the expectations implicit in the Declaration
of Principles of 1993, that Israeli settlements would cease
during the interim period of negotiations, a mounting area
of Palestinian territory is being confiscated each month. Of
particular concern is the huge acreage seized for highway
construction to ease access for settlers, the real effect of
which is to carve the occupied territories into ghetto
enclaves, which prevents the creation of a cohesive nation.
It will also present the Palestinians with a “geographic
fact”, effectively predetermining negotiations in the future.
Such acts obviously pre-empt the negotiations and
deliberately complicate issues dealing with settlers,
settlements, the status of Jerusalem, Israeli intentions and
good faith, the wider overall Middle East peace process and
the prospects for near-term peace and regional economic
development.
Israel cannot have it both ways: peace and settlement.
The policy of continuing to construct and sell housing units,
establishing new settlements and confiscating and
expropriating Arab land in Jerusalem and its environs,
while planning still further construction, is sure to bring the
peace process to a halt at some point. That such a policy
and such activities are contrary to international law, General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions and the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 is well documented.
For the Arab world the key to negotiations and
agreements with Israel begins with Palestine. The crisis
with Israel began with Palestine, and before there can be
sustained peace elsewhere in the Middle East the issue of
self-rule in Palestine needs to be resolved. Surely the
manner in which widespread efforts were made to meet
with Israel and to settle divisive issues of long standing was
a clear indication of the Arab world’s desire to seek peace.

3505th meeting
28 February 1995
But now there is much to question regarding Israel’s good
faith in desiring genuine accord with the Palestinians and,
by extension, the rest of the Arab world. The choice for
Israel is to take those genuine measures which will move
the peace process with all deliberate speed. As
Palestinians see their leaders unable to meet Israel’s ever
growing unreasonable requirements and at the same time
incapable of doing much, under the circumstances, to
improve their lives, their frustration and level of
desperation will surely rise. In the final analysis, sound
judgment will prevail.
In conclusion, we wish to say to Israel “The Arab
commitment to the peace process is irreversible; don’t
give up the ship!”
The President: I thank the representative of Djibouti
for the kind words he addressed to me.
I should like to inform the Council that I have just
received a letter from the representative of Lebanon in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mahmoud
(Lebanon) took the place reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: The next speaker
representative of Israel, on whom I now call.

is

the

Mr. Yaacobi (Israel): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on the able manner in
which you have conducted the affairs of the Security
Council this month. I would also like to congratulate your
predecessor, Mr. Emilio Cárdenas, on his skilled conduct
of the Council’s affairs.
I would like to begin with some comments regarding
the issue of settlements. Here I wish to emphasize that the
PLO’s initiative to debate this issue in the Security
Council is incompatible with its signed commitments
vis-à-vis Israel. In the first place, the PLO has committed
itself repeatedly in its agreements with Israel to resolve
all outstanding permanent-status issues, such as

7

Security Council
Fiftieth year
settlements and Jerusalem, in direct and bilateral
negotiations. Secondly, in these same agreements the PLO
committed itself to settling these issues at a specific
time — namely, in the negotiations on permanent status, at
the final stage of the process. It was agreed not to address
these issues at the present time.
These commitments were made numerous times
throughout the agreements. I will spare the Council a
detailed account of every specific instance. However, I wish
to call its attention to article V, paragraph 3, of the
Declaration of Principles, whereby Israel and the PLO
agreed that the issue of settlements would be dealt with in
the permanent-status negotiations, not at the present time.
I would also draw the Council’s attention to the fourth
paragraph of Chairman Arafat’s letter to Prime Minister
Rabin dated 9 September 1993 and to the preambles to the
Declaration of Principles and the Gaza-Jericho Agreement.
In these documents the PLO committed itself to resolving
outstanding issues through negotiations, not through the
intervention of outside parties.
Furthermore, we find it difficult to understand why the
PLO seeks to address its concerns in the Security Council
rather than through the agreed mechanisms for settling
differences and disputes that were specified in article XV
of the Declaration of Principles, as well as in article XVII
of the Gaza-Jericho Agreement.
For all these reasons, Israel considers it highly
inappropriate for the PLO to have initiated a debate on this
matter in the Security Council, in contradiction of the
agreements it signed with Israel.
For the record, I wish to explain the basic elements of
Israel’s settlement policy. Immediately after the present
Government of Israel was formed in July 1992, it
substantially changed Israel’s settlement policy. This was
not done because of any external pressure or legal claims.
The new policy was adopted long before the agreements
with the PLO. Rather, it stems from our deep conviction
about the kind of Israel we want to have and from our
profound belief that the best alternative is peace based on
security, understanding and cooperation. Therefore, no new
settlements have been established in the territories since
then, nor will they be. The Government stopped allocating
public resources to support the extension of existing
settlements. No land has been or will be confiscated to
establish new settlements.

8

3505th meeting
28 February 1995
Yes, we continue to build in Jerusalem, as the Arabs
do. They have not stopped building, and this is their right.
We have not stopped building, and this is our right.
The peace process has faced challenges and
difficulties ever since Israel and PLO signed the
Declaration of Principles in September 1993. But the
significance of this and subsequent agreements must not
be ignored: Israel regards the agreements with the PLO as
a historic breakthrough. We firmly believe that there is no
better alternative than peace, freely and directly negotiated
by the parties themselves. In the past year and a half
alone, more progress has been made towards
comprehensive peace in the region than in the entire half
century preceding it. For the first time in their history, the
Palestinians are taking responsibility for their own affairs.
The Israel Defence Forces have already withdrawn from
the Gaza Strip and the Jericho area, and the Palestinian
Authority has been established there.
Israel and Jordan signed three agreements: one
outlining peace, one ending the state of war and one that
was a full-fledged peace treaty. This is the second peace
treaty between Israel and an Arab State following the
ground-breaking peace with Egypt 16 years ago. In
addition, Israel has established formal relations with
Morocco and Tunisia through the exchange of liaison
offices.
These developments are part of a growing
recognition that direct dialogue is the only way to solve
the issues that divide us. Military conflict and solutions
imposed from the outside have not solved the Arab-Israeli
conflict. As we turn our gazes from the past to the future,
we also find new problems that do not distinguish
between Arab and Israeli: economic, environmental,
humanitarian and so on. We can solve them only by
working together. October’s economic summit, in
Casablanca, Morocco, brought Arab, Israeli and other
businessmen and government leaders together to promote
regional cooperation. Another conference is expected to
take place in Amman, Jordan, next October.
These significant developments — which have all
taken place since the signing of the agreement between
Israel and the PLO — bring us closer to a comprehensive
peace, yet, at the same time, opposition to the peace
process has become more and more violent. Terrorism is
now the major obstacle to peace. Radical fundamentalists
with ties to Iran and leading the campaign. Their goal is
to derail the peace process. Their strategy is to provoke
a cycle of violence and sow anger, hatred and resentment

Security Council
Fiftieth year
towards further progress. Their method is to kill Israeli
men, women and children going about their daily lives.
Israel has already paid a high price: 116 killed since
the signing of the Declaration of Principles and 634 injured.
On 6 April 1994, Hamas terrorists detonated a car bomb
next to a bus in downtown Afula, in the north of Israel.
They killed eight people, including three teenage students
and two teachers. A week later, on 13 April, Hamas
bombed another bus, this time in the coastal town of
Hadera. Five people died in the attack. In October 1994,
Hamas terrorists kidnapped 20-year-old Corporal Nachshon
Waxman. They held him, tortured him and shot him to
death. Hamas also claimed responsibility for the 19 October
bombing of the Number 5 bus on Dizengoff Street, in the
heart of Tel Aviv. Twenty-one Israelis and one Dutch
national were killed. And just last month, on 22 January,
Islamic Jihad exploded two consecutive bombs at the Beit
Lid bus stop near Netanya. Twenty-one Israelis were killed.
After the first bomb was detonated, the terrorists attacked
the people who had rushed to help the first victims. Twenty
of those killed were young men and women ranging in age
from 18 to 24. After the attack, we were shocked to see
thousands celebrating at the terrorists’ homes in the Gaza
Strip.
Israel cannot view these attacks with indifference. We
cannot sit idly by and allow our people to be slaughtered.
Morally and humanly, we are obligated to protect our
people’s lives. We are a democratic country rooted in our
Jewish heritage. Both teach sensitivity to the value of
human life. Our sages teach us: Kol adam hu olam
umlo’o — “In every person is an entire world.” We believe
that the Palestinians understand the value we ascribe to
each life. Certainly, Hamas and Islamic Jihad try to exploit
this. But for the sake of its own people as well as ours, the
Palestinian Authority must fulfil its obligation to combat
terrorism.
As we all know, in Israel, as in all other democracies,
the people ultimately decide. Therefore, the most important
task before all supporters of peace is credibly to address the
growing sense in Israeli public opinion that the Palestinians
are unable to meet their commitments to fighting terrorism.
Israel believes that the Palestinian Authority too does not
want terrorism to hold the peace process hostage. The
Palestinian Authority can and should do more to respect its
commitment, as set out in article XVIII of the Gaza-Jericho
Agreement,

3505th meeting
28 February 1995
The means are there. The Gaza-Jericho Agreement
provides for 9,000 Palestinian police. A recent study by
the donor countries identified 15,000 policemen on the
rolls, and 2,000 more will be added, in accordance with
the agreement between Israel and the PLO in early
February. Clearly, the means are there. We expect the
Palestinian Authority to disarm all those who are
forbidden to possess arms. We expect it to do all in its
power to combat terrorism and to bring to justice all those
involved in murderous activities.
Here, I believe it is appropriate to address the issue
of closing off the territories that was mentioned earlier.
Closure is neither a policy nor an act of collective
punishment. Rather, it is an act of self-defence in the face
of repeated terrorist attacks from the West Bank and Gaza
Strip. The Israeli people expect that they will be
protected. As the elected leadership, it is the
Government’s responsibility to ensure the personal
security of all citizens. Two weeks ago, Prime Minister
Rabin informed Chairman Arafat of certain measures to
ease the closure. These are under way, and we hope that
the security situation will enable us to continue with the
normalization. This is our policy.
Allow me to address our Palestinian partners: let us
not lose sight of our shared hope. We have made great
progress; irreversible progress, I believe. These are not
easy times. They demand wisdom and leadership. The
role of leadership is to pursue the best path for the people
in the long run and not to lose from view for even one
minute the long-term perspective. Yes, we have
differences; but we also have an overriding common
interest that has to come first: to create a better future for
our peoples and for the people of the Middle East. The
opponents of peace want nothing more than to see us fail
in achieving our vision. We must not give up; we have to
pursue our shared goal and our commitment to a
comprehensive peace.
Yes, we have differences. We have to address them.
The place to do it is at the negotiating table, as we agreed
and as we hope to agree now.

“to prevent acts of terrorism, crime and hostilities”.
(A/49/180, p. 19), S/1994/727.

9

Security Council
Fiftieth year
The President: I thank the representative of Israel for
his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Mr. President, I have pleasure at the outset in commending
your wise leadership, which reflects your judgement and
your lengthy diplomatic experience. I am also happy to
extend my thanks to Ambassador Emilio Cárdenas for his
excellent leadership last month.
This is not the first time the Security Council has been
seized of the question of Israeli settlement activity in the
occupied territories. On previous occasions the Council has
taken a decisive stand on this issue, which is of vital
importance to, and has a direct impact on, the peace
process in the Middle East. The importance of the issue is
greater now because the new atmosphere in the Middle
East, which heralded the dawn of a new era in the history
of the region, compels the cessation of anything that could
lead to a return to the practices of the past.
The peace process, which began at the Madrid
Conference three years ago, has seen its fruits effectively
ripen. We were able, in the Declaration of Principles
between the PLO and Israel, to arrive at mutual recognition.
This was followed by many agreements and steps by both
parties to implement the Declaration. The peace process
also led to the conclusion of a Peace Treaty between Jordan
and Israel, which put an end to the state of war between the
two States. Regrettably, similar progress has not so far
been made on the Syrian and Lebanese tracks of the
negotiations.
There is no doubt that these positive developments are
merely limited steps, which do not yet lead to a
comprehensive and just peace in the area. Any observer of
the history of the Middle East conflict will no doubt realize
the magnitude of the historic accomplishment that has been
realized since the convening of the Madrid Peace
Conference. The Middle East has undoubtedly entered a
new phase following the signing of the Declaration of
Principles and the historic meeting in Washington in
September 1993, after which the Middle East and the world
at large had a feeling of optimism that the language of
negotiation and respect for international law and
commitments would replace aggression, violence and
occupation as a basis for relationships in this area, whose
peoples have languished under the burden of wars and

10

3505th meeting
28 February 1995
conflict. We all expected the practices of expanding
Israeli settlements to be abandoned. These practices
certainly run counter to the new atmosphere obtaining in
the region.
The two parties — the Palestinians and the
Israelis — have agreed on specific steps that represent a
transitional period leading to negotiations for a final
settlement. The first step — which has indeed been
taken — is the withdrawal of Israel from Gaza and
Jericho. Both parties also agreed upon the redeployment
of Israeli forces outside the Arab cities in the occupied
Palestinian territories as a prelude to Palestinian elections
in an atmosphere of freedom, including freedom from the
repression of the military occupation authorities, so that
Palestinian authority might be extended to all occupied
territories.
Egypt has assisted and continues to assist the two
parties to arrive at an agreement in this regard.
Regrettably, however, Israel has so far failed to honour its
pledges. Indeed, the problems that confront the peace
process have become more grave. Israel has
responsibilities as the occupying Power. This status places
upon it duties and limitations based on international
humanitarian law — something that is reaffirmed by
previous categorical and decisive resolutions of the
Security Council and, indeed, by the very pledges of
Israel itself.
Suffice it to mention briefly the provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention, resolution 465 (1980) and the
Declaration of Principles, all of which categorically forbid
Israeli settlement activity in the occupied territories as one
of the means of altering the natural political and
demographic situation in those territories.
First, the Fourth Geneva Convention, in article 49,
categorically prohibits the occupying Power from
deporting or transferring any of its civilian population to
the territories under its occupation. Secondly, the Security
Council has adopted a number of resolutions. Here I refer
merely to resolution 465 (1980), which reaffirms
“that Israel’s policy and practice of settling parts of
its population and new immigrants in those
territories constitute a flagrant violation of the
Geneva Convention ... and also constitute a serious
obstruction to achieving a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East”. (resolution 465
(1980), para. 5)

Security Council
Fiftieth year
The resolution
“calls upon ... Israel ... to cease ... the establishment,
construction and planning of settlements in the Arab
territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem”.
(ibid., para. 6)
In the same paragraph the Security Council strongly
condemns “the continuation and persistence of Israel in
pursuing those policies and practices and calls upon the
Government ... of Israel to rescind those measures [and] to
dismantle the existing settlements.”
Thirdly — and this was mentioned a few minutes ago
by the Ambassador of Israel — Israel, in the Declaration of
Principles, agreed to engage in the final-status negotiations
on the questions of settlements, Jerusalem, boundaries and
refugees. This text applies to the existing settlements. The
objective is very clear — to decide the future of these
settlements.
But the scope of the text cannot in any way be
expanded under the pretext that the wording is flexible and
permits the establishment of new settlements in the
occupied territories. Israel is committed to making no
alterations that would affect these negotiations. This
commitment, which is in keeping with Israel’s status as the
occupying Power, will continue so long as the occupation
continues. It cannot be shirked unilaterally by the
occupying Power.
The Israeli Government has declared its policy vis-àvis settlement activity. We have all been waiting to hear
about this new policy and have heard that there are many
restrictions. Regrettably, these turned out to be essentially
illusory ones, with wide loopholes. The exclusion of
Jerusalem, from the restrictions, and now that its boundaries
have been extended to cover approximately a quarter of the
West Bank, allows the expansion of existing settlements
and has in practice led to the construction of thousands of
new units. Therefore, Israeli settlement activity has become
one of the main instruments for demolishing the peace
process and constitutes yet another argument for those who
misdoubt its outcome. Indeed, on the Israeli side, the
enemies of peace are exploiting the question of settlements
in order to ensure that they can foil any chance of success
in the peace negotiations.
In confronting the crisis currently facing the peace
efforts, and in view of the lack of a decisive and
comprehensive Israeli commitment to ending settlement
activities, recourse to the Security Council has become

3505th meeting
28 February 1995
necessary in order to secure respect for the provisions of
the Geneva Conventions. This is a collective international
responsibility: all States parties to the Conventions bear
responsibility for verifying their implementation, as is
stated explicitly in article 1 of the Fourth Convention:
“The High Contracting Parties undertake to
respect and to ensure respect for the present
Convention in all circumstances.”
Hence, the members of the Security Council,
permanent as well as non-permanent members, as parties
to the Geneva Conventions, bear a joint responsibility,
that is clear and specific, to secure respect for the
provisions of the Conventions.
The question of settlements in the occupied
territories is very important politically and legally: on the
one hand, the policy of establishing settlements is that
contradiction to the concept and philosophy of peace
because it constitutes a rejection in practice of the “land
for peace formula” which is the basis of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967). On the legal side, there is a
consensus in the international community that there exist
preemptory norms of international law better known as
jus cogens. These norms cannot be violated, and one of
them is the Fourth Geneva Convention. Under these
comprehensive and binding rules, no party can argue that
any bilateral agreement, of whatever kind, allows it to
deny the right of the international community to discharge
its fundamental responsibility for guaranteeing the
implementation of these basic rules that have become
firmly established within the international community.
The Security Council is called upon to shoulder its
responsibilities and to take the necessary steps to impose
respect for international Conventions and follow up the
implementation of the relevant resolutions. This means
that the Council must send a clear and unambiguous
message to Israel that Israeli settlement activity is a grave
legal violation that will also abort the peace negotiations.
The Israeli Government should respect its
international commitments and immediately put an end to
all construction and establishment of settlements under
whatever guise and under whatever name.
Egypt has exerted great efforts to prevent the current
crisis from leading to a collapse of the ongoing
negotiations, and so convoked the quadripartite Cairo
summit on 2 February and joined the four-Power meeting
of Foreign Ministers in Washington on 12 February last.

11

Security Council
Fiftieth year
Towards the same end and in the same earnest desire to
safeguard the peace process, Egypt supported the appeal to
the Security Council to consider decreeing a halt to Israeli
settlement activity.
The widespread support for the peace process has been
associated in the public mind with increasing hopes for the
restoration of land and rights and for an end to the
shedding of innocent blood, not to mention the initiation of
regional cooperation and arms control and the development
of the economies of the countries of the region with a view
to raising their peoples’ standards of living. There can be
no doubt that, with each day that passes without tangible
progress towards fulfilling these aspirations, support for the
anti-peace camps on both sides will only increase.
Israel is being called upon today, more than at any
time in the past, to respect its obligations as the occupying
Power. Israel’s responsibilities do not end with the respect
for the principles of international law and international
conventions; it goes beyond that: Israel has responsibility
for preventing the collapse of the peace process and saving
it from certain doom.
The widespread optimism that followed the worldfamous handshake on the White House lawn has begun to
dissipate in light of the deadlock in the negotiations. We
are in a vicious circle of frustration, and this is leading to
extremism and violence. We must end this tragic cycle: no
peace effort can be successful so long as the practices of
the past are recrudescing the present.
The Security Council must take a decisive step to
reaffirm the need to respect international commitments and
for all parties to implement their commitments to the last
letter. Pious rhetoric alone will not provide a solution; the
path forwards must be paved with actual deeds, not highflown words. We hope that the Security Council will
succeed in sounding a warning against these dangers and
will find a way to avert them.
The President: I thank the representative of Egypt for
the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Mérimée (France) (interpretation from French):
My country deeply deplores the difficulties currently being
experienced in the peace process, and which have led the
Palestinians, supported by the Arab League, to request the
Security Council to take up the question of the settlements
in the occupied territories. At this meeting, my delegation
will have the opportunity to set out the position of the

12

3505th meeting
28 February 1995
European Union concerning the present situation in the
occupied territories and the conclusions we draw from it.
I should therefore like at this point to stress the need
for the parties involved to avoid any action which might
harm the cause of peace. This is why it is clear to my
Government that continuing the expansion of the Israeli
settlements in the West Bank and Jerusalem — which
ignores article 49 of the Geneva Convention of
12 August 1949 — runs counter to the spirit of the Oslo
Agreements and is therefore contributing to the
difficulties now being encountered in the peace process.
France therefore encourages the Israeli Government,
within the framework of its commitment to peace and of
the decision of principle it took long ago, to find a way
to halt the work on expanding the settlements, which is
being carried out by private interests and with private
financing.
We understand that Israeli public opinion,
understandably traumatized by the resurgence of
terrorism, sometimes doubts the choice made at Oslo.
That is why we call on the Palestinian Authority to do all
it can, within the framework of the responsibilities
entrusted to it, to prevent and to punish such acts.
Experience has shown that the problems of the peace
process cannot be resolved by slowing that process or
calling its validity into question. Rather, it was through
agreement to move forward that Arab and Israeli leaders
began, often in a striking way, to build peace together.
Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): My delegation
welcomed the request for this urgent meeting of the
Security Council by the Group of Arab States in response
to the rapidly worsening situation in the occupied
territories. My delegation is hopeful that our consideration
of the situation in Palestine will lead to the elimination of
the obstacles being faced in the peace process.
The question before the Council today — that of
settlements in the territories occupied by Israel since 1967
and related matters of peace and security in the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank — concerns issues with a
profound bearing on the peace process formally
undertaken by the Israeli and Palestinian authorities
through the peace accord signed in Washington in
September 1993, namely, the historic Declaration of
Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements. My
delegation notes with satisfaction some encouraging
developments that have taken place in the search for a

Security Council
Fiftieth year

3505th meeting
28 February 1995

peaceful settlement to the question of Palestine in the
context of a comprehensive Middle East peace process. The
Cairo Agreement on the Gaza Strip and the Jericho Area,
together with the 1993 Washington accord, also indicates
that the parties concerned have taken up their solemn
responsibilities with a view to achieving positive outcomes.

My delegation therefore calls upon the Government
of Israel to embark upon the speedy dismantlement of
settlements, leading to a mutually supportive and
positively reinforcing approach, such as that which
resulted in important breakthroughs in the past and which
ought to be renewed and sustained.

Despite these developments, the situation in the
occupied territories continues to be fraught with difficulties
and may well jeopardize the peace process, owing primarily
to the continuation of untenable settlement activities. We
are aware that our principal obligation is to try to enable
the Government of Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
cooperate in working out a systematic, tightly-phased
formula and a plan for dealing with Israeli settlements in
the territories occupied since 1967. The Agreement on
Preparatory Transfer of Powers and Responsibility signed
by the Palestine Liberation Organization and Israel on
29 August 1994 might be seen as a precursor to other
future agreements.

Mr. Fulci (Italy): Allow me first to join previous
speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of February.

Meanwhile, we note that both Palestinians and Israelis
have been working to improve the political and security
environment and have repeatedly sought to achieve progress
towards peace. My delegation has been hopeful that both
the parties have the necessary will and determination to
resolve the myriad issues in a way that will not adversely
prejudice the interests of either party.
But we cannot fail to note that certain untenable
policies and practices by the Israeli Government have
impeded further progress towards comprehensive peace.
The continuation of settlement activities is indisputably
among the most important, with its attendant grave security,
economic and social repercussions. Thus, noting the
applicability of the Hague regulations of 1907 and the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, my delegation strongly
urges the Israeli Government to honour the provisions of
those legal instruments scrupulously and to desist from
planning, constructing and establishing settlements
anywhere in the occupied territories.
There can be no doubt that the unending creation of
settlements in the occupied territories has already created
major impediments during the transitional period of
Palestinian self-rule, and could have a negative impact on
the outcome of the agreed-upon final status negotiations
between Israelis and Palestinians concerning the occupied
territories. Thus, these activities in themselves run counter
to the peace accords and other agreements which have
already been reached between the two parties.

Italy shares and endorses the views that will be
expressed by France later on in its capacity as President
of the European Union. My delegation would like to add
a few points and comments to the statement to be made
by France.
Italy was among those that, in the Council’s informal
consultations yesterday, supported the request for today’s
meeting made on behalf of the Arab Group by the
Permanent Representative of Djibouti, Ambassador Roble
Olhaye. In our opinion, that request was justified,
procedurally and substantively. From the legal point of
view, the relevant provisions are contained in Articles 34
and 35 of the Charter and in rules 2 and 3 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure. Those rules
provide for the President’s calling a meeting at the
request of any member of the Security Council.
Moreover, they provide that any member of the United
Nations may bring to the Council’s attention any dispute
or any situation that might lead to international friction or
give rise to a dispute. Moreover, we believe that this
meeting is equally justified from the political point of
view, because the Security Council could certainly not
ignore a request emanating from 21 Member States.
My authorities believe that this debate ought not to
interfere with the ongoing negotiations between Israel and
the PLO. On the contrary, it should provide an
opportunity for a constructive exchange of thoughts.
Three and a half years after it began at the Madrid
conference in October 1991, the Arab-Israeli peace
process has made notable progress on the Palestinian and
Jordanian tracks. However, terrorist attacks by factions on
both sides opposed to the coalition for peace — most
recently the one cited by the representative of Israel, the
22 January suicide bombing by an extremist, in Beit
Lid — have led to a stalemate that we all fervently hope
will end soon.

13

Security Council
Fiftieth year
Italy, along with many other countries, is strongly
convinced that there is no alternative to the diplomatic
approach to the problem taken by the four-party Summit in
Cairo on 2 February. Above all, one must keep in mind the
growing convergence of objective interests on the part of
the four protagonists. Nevertheless, it is still true that the
concrete results of the Israeli-Palestinian negotiations are
now more than ever placed at risk by the new terror
offensive, and this at the very moment when the peace
coalition is trying to consolidate the basis for a resumption
of the talks.
The road to fostering a true return to the peace process
is therefore, in our opinion, the fight against terrorism —
in other words, the fight against the enemy, as terrorism is
the real enemy of the peace process. Extremism on all sides
and of all extractions must be routed. It is not hard, frankly,
to place ourselves in the shoes of the people who are
constantly exposed to the threat of indiscriminate terrorism;
only thus can we possibly understand their concern and
anxiety. And the fight against terrorism is obviously not the
sole responsibility of one or two Members, but of all the
Members of the United Nations, which must resolve to
drive out the enemies of peace, wherever they may lurk.
As concerns the settlement policy, Italy cannot but
support the precise stand unanimously taken by the
European Union on 5 January last: that the settlements are
illegal, since they are against international law and in
particular against existing Conventions. With regard to the
other matters — pulling out troops from the West Bank,
organizing the election of the Palestinian Council and the
free circulation of Palestinian workers — Italy also joins its
European partners in calling upon the parties concerned to
demonstrate political foresight and mutual goodwill so as to
rapidly bring this stage of the negotiations to a successful
end.
It would be truly paradoxical if a discussion in the
Security Council were to make the peace process more
complicated rather than easier. Italy, like almost every other
country, has strongly supported the Washington agreement
and its follow-up. Ever since those agreements were
reached, we have done what we could in order to facilitate
the process, not only politically and by contributing our
share of the necessary financial support, but also, together
with our friends from Norway and Denmark, by sending
units of our police to help ease the tension in Hebron,
within the framework of the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron, which was, as we all know,
successfully concluded.

14

3505th meeting
28 February 1995
We believe that it is our precise duty to continue to
support and facilitate in every possible way the peace
process, which remains the only possible road to ending,
once and for all, this very long and very tragic conflict.
The President: I thank the representative of Italy for
the kind words he addressed to me.
Sir David Hannay (United Kingdom): The
Ambassador of France will be making an intervention
later in this debate on behalf of the members of the
European Union, and my Government fully supports the
statement he will make then, which will set out in detail
the European Union’s views on this important issue.
My Government welcomes this opportunity for the
Security Council to debate the situation in the occupied
territories, since it offers Council members the
opportunity to reiterate their whole-hearted support for the
Middle East peace process, which is based on resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973). The peace process is
currently at a difficult and delicate stage, but we must not
overlook the dramatic successes of the past few years.
My Government regrets the fact that the question of
settlements has had to come before the Council again.
One of the major achievements of the peace process has
been that it has enabled the parties concerned to speak to
each other directly and to resolve problems by direct
negotiations. We want that process to continue.
But we understand the frustration felt by the
Palestinians in relation to Israeli settlement activity. The
British Government’s position on settlements is well
known, and I reiterate it now: they are illegal, they
contravene the Fourth Geneva Convention and they
represent an obstacle to an overall peace.
Moreover, the Declaration of Principles defined
settlements as a final status issue, and the implication of
that is that the status quo would remain in the meantime.
Any expansion of existing settlements thus clearly goes
against the spirit of the Declaration of Principles.
Settlement expansion also undermines the confidence of
one party in the true intentions of the other. It cannot be
in Israel’s interest to sow doubt about its good faith on
this crucial issue, especially when to do so plays straight
into the hands of those hostile to the peace process.
At the same time, my Government cannot and does
not underestimate or seek to belittle Israel’s legitimate
security concerns. We condemned the Beit Lid bombing

Security Council
Fiftieth year
in the strongest possible terms, and we have urged the
Palestinians to do all they can within their area of
responsibility to cooperate in the fight against terrorism.
But Israel’s security concerns, however legitimate, must not
be allowed to hold up progress towards peace.
In the view of my Government, the only viable way
forward is for Israel and the PLO to accelerate their
negotiations with each other with a view to completing the
process initiated on the White House lawn on 13 September
1993 and to implementing the Declaration of Principles and
the subsequent agreements reached at Cairo and Erez. The
international community must continue to offer its full
support to the parties in their efforts, but the international
community cannot become a substitute for direct bilateral
negotiations between the parties.
Mr. Gnehm (United States of America): The United
States believes that the ultimate test for our activities in the
Security Council must be whether our actions serve the
cause of peace. My Government doubts that Council
activity on this subject at this time is likely to pass that test.
The prestige and authority of the Security Council are
important assets. At critical moments, the Council has
exercised its authority to further international peace and
security, with a very lasting influence. Resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) have long provided a basis for
negotiations and, as the foundation of the Madrid process,
are examples of the positive role played by the Security
Council.
The Declaration of Principles signed by the parties in
September 1993 represents an agreed approach to the
negotiating process. My Government believes it would not
be productive or useful for the Council to involve itself
now in a question that the parties have agreed to cover
when they address permanent status issues in their
negotiations. Our conviction on this point is reinforced by
the ability the parties have demonstrated to address difficult
issues and to resolve them, as demonstrated by their
agreements on the Gaza Strip and the Jericho Area, and on
the Preparatory Transfer of Powers and Responsibilities.
Israeli and Palestinian negotiators are currently
engaged in talks on an extensive and difficult list of issues.
A balance must be found that addresses both Israel’s
security concerns and the Palestinians’ political and
economic concerns. The parties are making serious efforts
to find that balance. They remain committed to their
agreements and to the process.

3505th meeting
28 February 1995
Surely at this sensitive time no member of this
Council would propose making it more difficult for the
parties to move forward in those talks. My Government
believes that debate here can only sour the atmosphere
and deflect the parties from the need to work together on
the path they have set for themselves.
The United States remains actively engaged with the
parties to help them work through these concerns.
Secretary of State Christopher will travel to the Middle
East next week to consult with key regional parties. He
will explore ways to consolidate agreements already
reached and to lay the basis for future progress.
Therefore, the United States delegation must oppose any
activity that would only complicate efforts to spur the
negotiating process.
My Government acknowledges and respects the
interest of the United Nations and the Security Council in
the peace process. We support the vital work of the
United Nations agencies and the United Nations Special
Coordinator to improve economic conditions. We must
disapprove, however, of any effort to redirect the
negotiating process agreed to previously by the parties.
The authority of the Security Council should be invoked
only wisely, sparingly and at the proper time.
Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation
from Spanish): My country has been following the
question of Palestine within the context of events in the
Middle East. Over the years the restoration of the
Palestinian people’s rights over the territories occupied
since 1967 has been a matter of constant concern. The
signing by Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) in September 1993 of the historic
Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
Arrangements in the Gaza Strip and the Jericho area was
a great step forward, and it gave rise to great expectations
that a just and wide-ranging solution to the question of
Palestine would be achieved. Similarly, the Agreement on
the Gaza Strip and the Jericho Area, signed between the
Government of Israel and the PLO in Cairo on 4 May
1994, was a significant and positive event in the search
for a peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine.
Those efforts are now clouded, however, by the
settlements in the occupied territories, which constitute an
obstacle to the peace process. My delegation considers it
imperative that during the transitional period the practice
of establishing settlements in the occupied territories be
eliminated. The achievement of a peaceful, just and
lasting settlement of the question of Palestine and the

15

Security Council
Fiftieth year
Arab-Israeli conflict must be based on the principle of
“land for peace” and on the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council calling for a withdrawal from all the
occupied territories in order to guarantee the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people.
Undeniably, the success of the peace process between
Palestine and Israel depends to a great extent on the
fulfilment of the commitments contained in the Agreement
I have mentioned. In addition, the provisions of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 must be respected in the
Palestinian territories. Two reports submitted to the General
Assembly last year — one by the Special Committee to
Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of
the Palestinian People and other Arabs of the Occupied
Territories, and the other by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East —
note that since September 1993 the practices of expanding
settlements and constructing dwellings in the occupied
territories have been stepped up. Two letters recently
addressed to the Secretary-General by the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People and by the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations also confirm the Israeli
practice of establishing settlements and constructing
dwellings in the occupied territory of the West Bank.
My delegation considers that the question of the
settlements is one of the issues that, in accordance with the
Declaration of Principles, should be resolved in the
permanent-status negotiations during the last phase of the
peace process. But at the same time we believe that,
besides the necessity of respecting the provisions of the
Declaration, the parties are obliged to refrain from engaging
in behaviour or practices that jeopardize the

3505th meeting
28 February 1995
objectives of the Declaration, undermine confidence,
create difficulties during the transitional process or impair
the results of the permanent-status negotiations in the
Palestinian-Israeli track of the Middle East peace process.
My delegation considers that recognition of the
rights of the Palestinian people is an essential requirement
for ensuring peace in the Middle East. What is most
important in the peace negotiations is that they move
forward, not slip backwards. This opportunity to provide
a definitive solution to the Middle East question is unique
and historic. The parties participating in the process must
seize this opportunity and avoid taking rigid or negative
attitudes.
We believe that this Organization, which has been
making considerable contribution to the peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine, must play a
fundamental role in the peace process by taking on the
responsibility of overseeing the successful implementation
of the commitments reached between the PLO and Israel.
We hope the peace process in the Middle East will be
further strengthened by the effective implementation of
the Declaration of Principles and all the other agreements
reached between the two parties. The final objective must
be the attainment of a just, comprehensive and definitive
settlement in accordance with the relevant resolutions of
the Council.
My delegation would therefore support any action by
the Council calling upon the parties to show a genuine
desire for peace, by respecting their commitments under
the Declaration of Principles, the Cairo Agreement and all
subsequent agreements by putting an end to the
settlements policy and by continuing to negotiate in good
faith to resolve remaining questions.
The President: There are a number of names
remaining on the list of speakers. In view of the lateness
of the hour, and with the concurrence of the members of
the Council, I intend to suspend the meeting now. The
Security Council will continue consideration of the item
on its agenda later this afternoon at 3.30 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.30 p.m.

16
