UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SIXTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

27 APRIL

1981

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2274)

. . . . . . . . . . , . . , . , . , , . , . , . . . .. .. . . . . . . ,

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . , . , , , , . , . , , . , , . . . . . . . . . . , , . , . . . . , . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent Representative of Uganda
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14434) , , . . . , . * , , . . . . , *. . . . . . *. . . . , . , *. *, , * , , , . . . . . . *. . . . . . . . , . ,

1

Y

SlPV.2274

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supple~ner~rs of the Official Records qf the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council, The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2274th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 27 April 1981, at 11 a.m.
President:

2

Mr. Noel DOkR (Ireland).

(Guinea),
Mr. Rao (India),
Mr. Kuscrmaatmadja
(Indonesia),
Mr. Shearer (Jamaica),
Mr. Kasina
(Kenya),
Mr. Barwin
(Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Monteiro (Mozambique),
Mr. Baba (Nigeria),
Mr. Shahi (Pakistan),
Mr. Marinescrr
(Romania),
Mr. Niasse (Senegal), Mr. Conteh (Sierra Lromz),
Mr. Fourie (South Africa),
Mr. Balasubramaniatn
(Sri Lanka), Mr. Akakpo-Ahianyo
(Togo), Mr. Salim
(United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Vrhovec (Yugoslavia), Mr. Kamanda wa Kamalzda (Zaire), Mr. Goma
(Zambia) and Mr. Mangwende
(Zimbabwe)
took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2274)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981from the Permanent
Representative of Uganda to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/14434)
The meeting

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Guyana in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite that representative to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

was called to order at 11.40 a.m.

Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

At the invitation qf the President,
Mr. Sin&i/
(Guyana) took the place reservedfor
him at the side of
the Council chamber.

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent
Representative of Uganda to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14434)

3. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2267th meeting, I invite the President of the
United Nations Council for Namibia and the delegation
of the Council to take places at the Security Council
table.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with decisions taken at previous meetings [2267th to 2272nd
meetings],
I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Angola, Bangladesh, Benin, Brazil, Burundi, Canada,
Cuba, Democratic Yemen, Ethiopia, the Federal
Republic of Germany, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Jamaica, Kenya, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mozambique, Nigeria, Pakistan, Romania, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Togo, the United
Republic of Tanzania, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia
and Zimbabwe to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote.
4.
:,

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lusaka (President of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and
the other members of the delegation took places at the
Council table.

4. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision taken also at the 2267th meeting, I invite Mr. Peter
Mueshihange to take a place at the Council table.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Benyahia
(Algeria),
Mr. Jorge (Angola),
Mr. Kaiser (Bangladesh), Mr. Ho1111g~~vo14
(Benin), Mr. Co&a da Costa
(Brazil),
Mr. Simbananiye
(Burundi),
Mr. Duprry
(Canada), Mr. Malmierca (Cuba), Mr. Ashtal (Democratic Yemen), Mr, Cedle-Giorgis
(Ethiopia), Mr. Jelonek (Federal Republic of Germany), Mr. Coumbassa

At the invitation of the President,
took a place at the Council table.

Mr. Mueshihange

5. The PRESIDENT: I should like to draw the attention of members of the Council to the following documents: S/14458, containing the text of a note verbale
dated 23 April 1981from the Mission of Algeria to the
1

Secretary-General; and S/14464, containing the text of
a letter dated 24 April from the representative of
Angola to the President of the Security Council,

role for impartial deliberations and settlement of
disputes.
13. Canada remains fully committed to the pursuit of
a negotiated settlement in accordance with the principles of resolution 435 (1978). However, it has become
apparent that progress towards a settlement will be
made only if the transitional process is fair and the
result satisfactory to and respected by all Namibians.
Accordingly, Canada, with its colleagues in the group
of five Western Powers, will be examining possibilities for strengthening the existing plan in order to
give greater confidence to parties in the future of an
independent Namibia.

6. The first speaker is the representative of Canada.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
DUPUY (Canada) (interpwtntion
fh?
Mr. President, my delegation wishes to
thank you and, through you, the Security Council for
permitting Canada to participate in this debate the
outcome of which may be of critical importance to the
lives and future of many people.

7. Mr.
French):

8. At the outset, Mr. President, on behalf of my delegation and on my own behalf, I wish to express our
appreciation for the statesmanlike manner-which
in numerous cases has called forward your excellent
sense of humour-with which you have presided over
these deliberations. The relations between our two
countries have always been warm and friendly, in some
measure because of the close family links of so many of
our two peoples.

14. Active consultations among the five Western
Powers are continuing to determine how a negotiated
settletnent might best be pursued. The complexity of
the situation calls for carefully considered judgements
on the part of every participant. The next steps in the
effort could affect the course of events in southern
Africa for some time to come.
15. Canada believes that the way must be left open for
the pursuit of an internationally acceptable settlement.
It is with that in mind that we contemplate with the
deepest concern the call before the Council for sanctions. Such a course, we believe, would probably put
an end to United Nations efforts and could indefinitely
delay progress towards Namibian independence.

9. As one of the initiators and drafters of the settlement plan for Namibia in 1978 [S/12636], it is with the
deepest regret that three years later we find the Council
still having to consider this issue. Namibia should long
since have become an independent State and Member
of the United Nations.

16. The frustrations of the international community
over the failure to bring the United Nations effort to
a successful conclusion are fully shared by Canada and
our colleagues in the group of five Western Powers.
At this time, when the chances of early progress
seem slight, the negotiation process must be intensified
and every effort made to build on the substantial body
of work which has gone into the issue so far, It is
essential to retain support for a negotiated solution
and to avoid unnecessarily putting obstacles in that
path. My Government urges the Security Council to
reiterate that support and reaffirms its own commitment to the ultimate goal of self-determination for
the Namibian people.

10. Since the inception of the effort to achieve an
internationally accepted settlement, Canada has
worked closely with France, the Federal Republic of
Germany, the United Kingdom and the United States.
The efforts of the Group of Five-as we have become
known-have profited from the support of the Secretary-General and the Secretariat of the Organization
and from close co-operation with the Group of African
States, particularly the front-line States and Nigeria.
11. Canada regrets the failure of the Geneva talks
and is deeply concerned over South Africa’s intransigent attitude, which has blocked implementation
of the United Nations settlement plan and heightened
tensions throughout southern Africa. Without an
internationally accepted settlement in Namibia, the
situation can only deteriorate, leading inevitably to an
intensification of the armed conflict and to growing
regional instability. The South African position is
legally, politically and morally untenable and cannot
be long maintained.

17. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Bangladesh. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
18. Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Council
for giving me an opportunity to address this august
Council on a question in which the people and Government of Bangladesh have been deeply involved.

12. While referring to the question of propriety, however, my delegation feels obliged to express its concern
that the Council chose on the opening day of its deliberations on this issue [2267th mectir7g] not to allow all
parties concerned in the Namibian question to address
the Council under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure. Canada believes strongly in the principle of
universality as an underlying tenet of the Council’s

19. It gives me great pleasure to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the high office
of President pf the Council for this month. You personify the spirit of the Irish people, their courage,
compassion, their unflinching commitment to peace
and justice. We have the highest regard and esteem
2

for you, and my countrymen have a profound sense
of respect and friendship for the people of Ireland.

Namibia has been subjected to the most ruthless form
of exploitation,
both human and material, and the
abhorrent practice of discrimination based on race has
been extended to that Territory. Thousands of people
have been liquidated, incarcerated or exiled for their
opposition to npartheid and their struggle for independence.

20. My congratulations
go also to your predecessor,
Ambassador Florin of the German Democratic Republic, for the admirable manner in which he steered
the work of the Council last month.
21. Today, as I address the Council, I am overwhelmed by the backdrop of these deliberations. They
are attended by Ministers for Foreign Affairs representing the peoples of continents. They have come here
in person and taken time out of their busy life at the
behest of the non-aligned movement to demonstrate
by their presence the sense of outrage and exhaustion
of patience at the continued contempt for international
opinion shown by a tiny segment of humanity that is
obsessed by a sense of racist supremacy. The world
has witnessed the Pretoria white minority rkgime’s
continued defiance of and disregard for the numerous
United Nations decisions aimed at bringing about a
peaceful transition of Namibia from colonial domination to freedom. South Africa has chosen the path
of ruthless suppression of the people of Namibia,
condemning them to all forms of degradation; South
Africa continues ruthlessly to exploit the natural
resources of Namibia which by no stretch of imagination belong to it, and in addition, uses that sacred
Territory with impunity as a springboard for unleashing
acts of terrorism leading to death and destruction and
destabilization
of the whole of the southern African
region.

26. This august body has been seized of this problem
for years, trying one set of useful peaceful solutions
after another. In the course of the last three years of
deliberations, South Africa has, as always, deliberately
placed one obstacle after another in the way of implementation of resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978). It
has raised innumerable objections to every effort of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, and as one
demand has been met it has promptly raised a new one,
each time injecting an extraneous element. The convening of the Geneva pre-implementation
talks rekindled some hope-against
hope-that
the decolonization of Namibia would be achieved through peaceful
means. But it was not to be. The racist regime once
again chose the path of intransigence and missed agreat
opportunity to bring about a peaceful transition of
Namibia to freedom and national independence.
27. We congratulate and admire the far-sighted
leadership of the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), the true and authentic representative
of the people of Namibia, for its enormous patience and
far-sightedness in co-operating with the international
community,
and its readiness to sign a cease-fire
agreement as well as an agreement on a target date for
the deployment of the United Nations Transition
Assistance Group (UNTAG).
But here again, unfortunately but predictably, South Africa chose the path
of intransigence and prevarication and frustrated the
efforts of the international community to bring about
a peaceful and orderly transition of Namibia to freedom
and national independence.

22. As has been explained in great detail in the course
of this debate, South Africa has, in every sense of the
word, violated the terms of the Mandate provided for
in Article 22 of the Covenant of the League of Nations.
The South African record in Namibia is the bleakest
chronicle of human history.
23. The heart of the problem is remarkable in simplicity: a Territory occupied by military brute force and
a people deprived of its right to self-determination
and
national independence.

28. We congratulate the front-line States on their
patience, understanding
and flexibility
and their
acceptance at the same time of enormous sacrifices in
dealing with the difficult situation created by South
Africa. The statesmanship shown by the leaders of
Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Nigeria, the ITnited
Republic of Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe causes
us to feel pride and admiration. This is a time of need
for them, and we shall all stand by them now and until
their ordeal is over.

24. In the year 1966 the General Assembly terminated
South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia
[r.c~solution
2145 (XXZ)] and in the following year established the
United Nations Council for South West Africa, later
renamed the United Nations Council for Namibia, to
administer that Territory until independence [~~solution 2248 (S-V)]. Upon the request of the Security
Council, the International
Court of Justice in an advisory opinion in 1971’ declared that the continued
presence of South Africa in Namibia was illegal. The
decision of the General Assembly and the advisory
opinion of the International
Court of Justice clearly
underline the juridical status of the Territory.

29. I should also like to express the deep appreciation of my country for the remarkable efforts made by
the Secretary-General,
for his valiant and patient
efforts and those of his able advisers to persuade South
Africa to see reason and thus bring about peaceful
independence for the people of Namibia. I wish here to
reiterate to the Secretary-General the unanimous and
continuous support of the Government and people of
Bangladesh for all his efforts in the cause of peace in
the world.

25. But, despite universal condemnation
and rejection, South Africa’s hold over Namibia continues;
indeed, it is more firmly entrenched than ever before.
3

attempts made by various quarters to shore up an
unpopular and unrepresentative puppet could not stem
the tide of the popular upsurge against those attempts.
We all know the latter part of the history of that country, A free people, given the chance to determine their
own future on the basis of sovereign equality and adult
suffrage, not only elected a responsible Government
reflecting the hopes and aspirations of the people of that
country; it also brought about an element of stability in
the whole area, which was possible only because of the
fact that the democratic process was allowed to take
its course. This is Zimbabwe, the history of a people
helped by the world community to stand on its own
feet and to contribute to the maintenance of the peace
and stability not only of that country but of the whole
region.

30. The position of Bangladesh on the question of
Namibia is founded on its constitutional commitment
to support the oppressed people throughout the world
waging a just struggle against imperialism, colonialism
and racism. It is backed by our unflinching adherence
to General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing
the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, according
to the key passage of which “immediate steps shall be
taken . . . to transfer all powers” to the people of this
Territory in order to enable the people “to enjoy complete independence and freedom”. It is demonstrated
in our repeated affirmations of the inalienable rights
of all peoples to self-determination,
freedom and
national independence. The basic question that remains
in the case of Namibia is how expeditiously we can
achieve that end. As President Ziaur Rahman of Bangladesh declared, on the occasion of the day of solidarity
with the people of Namibia and their liberation movement:

33. We cannot put the clock back in spite of the
subterfuges and prevarications being resorted to by
the regime of South Africa. Has the world community
forgotten the resolutions adopted by the Security
Council? Can we ignore the extraordinary display of
determination shown by the peoples of the world? More
recently we have seen the combined decision of the
countries of the non-aligned movement adopted at
the extraordinary
ministerial
meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Countries at
Algiers. Do we not remember resolution 439 (1978),
paragraph 6 of which warns South Africa in no unmistakable terms that its failure to co-operate with the
Council and the Secretary-General in the implementation of resolutions 385 (1976), 431 (1978) and 435
(1978) would compel the Council:

“Bangladesh believes that a just solution of the
problem can only be achieved through implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions and
the Algiers plan of action. We also believe that the
right of self-determination of the Namibian people
can only be exercised through elections under the
supervision and control of the United Nations and
with the active and full participation of SWAPO, the
sole and authentic representative of the people of
Namibia.”
31. Security Council resolutions 385 (1976) and 435
(1978) provide the only practical framework for
ushering in independence for the people of Namibia
through a democratic and peaceful process. The members of the contact group of Western Powers had and
have a special responsibility towards speedy implementation of the plan. All the relevant Security Council
resolutions have been adopted with the full knowledge
and understanding of the members of the contact group.
Their responsibility derives not only from the fact of
their commitment
as per resolution 435 (1978). The
members of the contact group owe it to themselves
as well to bring to successful fruition months and years
of work that have been put into the endeavour to find
a peaceful solution to this problem. It is the firm belief
of my delegation that the intransigence and dilatory
tactics of South Africa will not be allowed to get the
better of the commitment of the members of the contact
group. They should impress upon South Africa that
they, like all others, do not support or acquiesce in its
activities.

“to meet forthwith to initiate appropriate actions
under the Charter of the United Nations, including
Chapter VII thereof, so as to ensure South Africa’s
compliance with the aforementioned resolutions”.
34. We are sitting on volcanic resentment. Frustration is building up not only in Africa but in the whole
world. The time has now come to act, and act we must,
with dispatch. Any further delay in the implementation
of Council resolutions would only bring about more
misery and suffering for the people of Namibia. We
must now give serious consideration to the question
of adopting other means, including comprehensive
mandatory sanctions, to force South Africa to heed
international opinion.
35.

Mr. MUNOZ

LED0

(Mexico)

(interpretalion
practically
everything has been said and practically everything
has been tried. We could pay a tribute to the eloquence,
imagination and perseverance of Member States were
it not for the fact that at this time what prevails is a
feeling of deep frustration. It is the general conviction
that we have already gone beyond what is tolerable and
that the United Nations must without delay take steps
to safeguard its honour and its future.

from Spanish): On the question of Namibia

32. We cannot accept any attempt to seek a solution
outside the framework of the United Nations. We
deplore all attempts by the South African authorities to
impose a so-called internal solution on the people of
Namibia. It is unfortunate and distressing to note that
the white minority regime of South Africa has not yet
learned a lesson from the events that took place in the
not-too-distant
past in a neighbouring country. The

36. This debate, which is honoured by the presence of
many Ministers for Foreign Affairs, has been called
4

historic-and indeed it is. It has been guided by
Mr. Noel Dorr of Ireland, who has dedicated to the task
all his good will and sensitivity as well as his understanding of strupgles for the political independence
and cultural identity of peoples.

Nations and the respect due it by its Member States.
Not only does the policy of South Africa violate the
essential principles which we are committed to uphold,
but it has for many years constituted defiance of international legality.

37. In this task he has succeeded Ambassador Florin
of the German Democratic Republic, who guided our
work with a sure hand and whose constant contribution
to the cause of decolonization is highly appreciated
by delegations which represent developing countries.

45. We shall not undertake an analysis of the problem.
For that we have many decisions by competent bodies:
the International Court of Justice, the General Assembly and the Security Council. This is not the time to
discuss the substance of the problem; the case of Namibia has long since been judged. What is needed now
is compliance with resolutions which have been
adopted, without subterfuge, escapehatches or covert
alliances.

38. These meetings of the Council mark the end of a
long process which has exhausted rhetoric and which
hasgiven world public opinion evidence of the dramatic
impotence of the United Nations. But that process has
also created a universal symbol, Namibia, in the light of
which the foreign policy of States and the commitment
of each to the principles of the Organization become
absolutely clear.

46. Again these days ideological prospects and
political positions have come to light which are well
known to all of us and on which we need not comment.
What is important is to know whether the members of
the Council are determined to ensure compliance with
the international will by promoting the immediate
independence of the people of Namibia and the full
exercise of its national rights.

39. Three decades ago Namibia appeared on the map
as one of the many Territories and peoples subject to
colonial domination, It was one piece in the great
puzzle of decolonization which the international community was called upon to solve.

47. This debate has yielded at least one coincidence:
all the speakers have reiterated a commitment to
achieving the independence of Namibia as soon as
possible and to abiding by the terms of resolution 435
(1978). The differences of opinion arise with regard
to the method by which that objective is to be attained
-and perhaps with the goals of each one of us-that
is to say, with the final meaning attached to the principle of self-determination of peoples.

40. Since then and within the framework of innumerable wars of independence and liberation struggles, the
most profound political transformation of the modern
world has taken place: the achievement of sovereignty
by almost 90 States, which today make up the international majority.
41. The case of Namibia comes before us today as a
regrettable historical remnant of a past reality. It
prolongs in time and concentrates in space all the
abuses and injustices which stem from that radical disdain for the human being and for his fundamental rights,
which we commonly call colonialism.

48. Under the terms of the Charter of the United
Nations and of relevant resolutions, the independence
of a people entails the unrestricted right of that people
to select the form of government which better suits its
interests, to select its own path to development and
freely to dispose of its natural resources. We cannot
accept any limitations to the sovereignty of any nation
and we do not accept conditional independence for
Namibia.

42. During this debate there has been an accumulation
of irrefutable arguments against the illegal occupation
of Namibia and the logic of the Power which supports
it. It is a question of the usurpation of sovereignty,
the objective of which is the economic and strategic
appropriation of a vast area and its natural resources,
by means of the systematic repression of the Namibian
people and acts of aggression and intimidation against
neighbouring States.

49. Thus the choice of method is a matter of substance. What is the meaning of the formulation in the
London communiqu6 that we should adopt “measures
aimed at giving greater confidence to all of the parties
on the future of an independent Namibia” [S/f&.57,
nnnex]?

43. The case of Namibia crystallizes the obstacles
which have been raised to the independence of many
nations as well as the pillage to which they have been
subjected. It explains the militant solidarity with which
representatives of developing countries speak in this
forum, regardless of their geographical origin, regardless of their system of government.

50. Resolution 435 (1978) mentions only two parties
to this conflict: South Africa and SWAPO. The rest of
us act under a mandate of the international community
but we are not interested parties in a legal sense. To
hold otherwise would be to accept the validity of
hegemonies or to endorse the theory of “vital interests”, which contradicts the principle of non-intervention and which we reject outright.

44. However, beyond the tragedy of Namibia and
the solidarity it engenders, the question we are considering places at issue the solvency of the United

51. Is the question then, one of giving guarantees to
the other party: to South Africa, to the aggressive
5

59. It is precisely the opposite path which is appropriate: to show, by means of strong decisions, that the
patience of the front-line States was not indicative of
weakness, and that the tasks entrusted to the Western
Powers imply no sort of complicity.

regime which the international community has condemned? Is it a question of ensuring the future docility
of the Government and the people of Namibia or of
promoting some kind of stability in the region, which
would preserve the correlation of forces favourable
to the occupying country?

60. Every day that passes without our halting the
Pretoria regime, that regime becomes stronger. According to irrefutable testimony, South Africa has made
use of the open and covert support it enjoys to attain
a considerable degree of self-sufficiency in the manufacture of weapons, and still continues to import ever
more sophisticated military material.

52. In that point we find the true meaning of our
recent procedural debate, in which an attempt was
made to present a manipulated faction as a party to the
conflict, thus establishing a perverse confusion between servility and freedom.
53. It was certainly not our intention to bar freedom
of expression. If our intention had been to encourage
that, we could have invited representatives of truly
significant political parties and trends of opinion,
from various States, including members of the Council. What we avoided through our vote was the appearance in this chamber of a caricature of an independent
Namibia.

61. We have repeatedly been asked to be realistic.
We suppose that this does not imply calling on the
Council to bow to a specific policy of power or to admit
its impotence at South Africa’s challenge. We understand being realistic to mean the calm analysis of
problems and the responsible search for solutions, in
accordance with the interests of the whole of the
international community.

54. Good relations between neighbouring
States
must be based on equity and mutual respect. They must
never be imposed by economic domination or political
guardianship. That is all the more true when the balance
which seems to be sought would strengthen the racist
regime which the conscience of the world has repeatedly condemned.

62. South Africa, of course, is not only an enclave of
the past, but an aspect of the present, to the extent that
it is the axis of a vast network of economic, political
and military interests, facts and figures about which
are available to everyone. But it is also true that the
very forces which support South Africa and which feed
on it would not like to see their international prestige
and their relations with other States of Africa and the
developing world compromised in this conflict.

55. In accordance with United Nations resolutions,
what we are seeking is the opposite sort of balance:
we want a fighting Namibia, responsible, proud of its
racial and national identity and strongly supported by
African solidarity, a Namibia destined to become a
bastion against the Pretoria regime; we want to facilitate the achievement of the other task to which we are
committed, and which we seem sometimes to have
forgotten: the elimination of apartheid.

63. Thus, it is essential to eliminate the ambiguity
and duplicitous language which have held up the work
of the Organization. We must clearly show Pretoria
that it is wrong to consider the independence of Zimbabwe only as a tactical retreat which we asked of it,
in exchange for which we would have to tolerate
deferring the liberation of Namibia or allowing it to take
place in such conditions that it would represent no
threat whatever to South Africa’s interests.

56. Social crises within States have almost always
been the price, and the origin, of the process of afftrmation and national transformation. By what authority can
we countries which have been the protagonists in the
great revolutions of the modem era require of a newly
emerging State that, for the sake of an artificial stability, it sacrifice its future and prolong its neo-colonial
condition?

64. We must also show our determination
to continue fighting apartheid and promoting the sound,
peaceful economic and political development of the
peoples of Africa, safeguarding them from aggression.
65. It is time to banish misunderstandings
and to
restore international confidence, not in the future of
Namibia-which
is within the sovereignty of its
people-but in the fair play and good intentions of those
of us who reflect international political will.

57. TWO choices have been presented to the Council
to achieve implementation
of resolution 435 (1978): to
make greater concessions to South Africa or to exert
effective pressure on it.

66. It is also time to guard against certain trends
which could cause this case to be an indication of future
strategies. We must prevent struggles for the decolonization and liberation of peoples from being affected
by rigid bipolar concepts of international
society.
We must prevent our nations from being considered
empty spaces and our peoples pawns in a policy of
blocs.

58. In the context of principles, the option is not
open to debate: the United Nations can scarcely
retreat before those who violate its resolutions and do
harm to its principles. The Geneva meeting clearly
established the limit beyond which any new offer or
concession to the occupying Power would be ineffective and a mockery of the international community.
6

67. My delegation has already expressed its rejection
of theories which aim at dividing the world once again
into spheres of influence. My Government considers
that it is incompatible with the attributes of sovereignty
for many countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America
to seek to be elevated to the undesirable standing of
strategic frontiers or for them to be made into the
battlefield of hegemonic confrontation.

Africa: independence for the ‘African States, elimination of racial discrimination wherever it occurs,
freedom from interference by foreign Powers. We have
therefore returned to this table in the Council chamber
today to stateexplicitly and unequivocally that we shall
continue to abide by the terms of resolution 435 (1978)
and that we shall persist in our efforts to secure its
implementation.

68. Through the years, Mexico has clearly demonstrated the steadfastness of its position with regard to
Namibia. Our attitude is based on a time-honoured
national tradition. We are, in our way, a front-line
country: we border on two civilizations and two levels
of development. We have suffered territorial occupation and colonialism. Our revolutions preceded and
accompany the struggle which today liberates many
peoples for the full exercise of their sovereignty.

75. We have clearly expressed our regret that the
Geneva meeting on Namibia was unable to achieve its
aim owing to the inflexible attitude of South Africa.
Nevertheless, we remain convinced that there is no
sound alternative to a negotiated settlement of the
Namibia question, We appeal again to South Africa
and SWAP0 not to aggravate tension through acts of
aggression and border violation.
76. The meeting of the five Western Powers in
London last week led to agreement among the participants that endeavours to secure a settlement for
Namibia are to remain solidly based on Security
Council resolution 435 (1978). The Five are about to
prepare further steps towards progress on the way to
independence for Namibia. The Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the Five will meet in Rome in a few days’
time to discussthe action to be taken. All participants
in the present debate should recognize the importance of that commitment at this juncture and should
help this eminent body of the United Nations to adopt
a position which will encourage the resumption of
constructive negotiations.

69. For those reasons, my delegation considers that
the matter at hand, more than any other, justifies the
application of the relevant provisions of Chapter VII of
the Charter, and that if that Chapter did not exist it
would have to be written now in the light of South
Africa’s behaviour.
70. The PRESIDBNT: The next speaker is the representative of the Federal Republic of Germany. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
71. Mr. JELONEK (Federal Republic of Germany):
Mr, President, to begin with, I should like to thank you
and all the members of the Security Council for having
given my country an opportunity to participate in this
debate. The debate on the situation in Namibia has
reached a crucial stage. The importance of this problem
for Africa and the international community as a whole
has been underlined by the participation of more than
20 Ministers from all over the world.

77. The success of further endeavours towards a
peaceful settlement of the Namibia problem will
depend on whether a climate of confidence can be
established among all parties concerned. The Geneva
meeting has already provided an opportunity to reduce
prejudices and mutual distrust. Further steps are
needed to create a senseof security and confidence in
the future, without which there will be no independence
for Namibia under conditions of stability.

72. Mr. President, it is with particular pleasure that
we see you, the eminent representative of a country
with which we entertain the most friendly and closest
relations, in the Chair. We are sure that under your able
and imaginative guidance the deliberations of this body
will lead to positive results.

78. In our view, the imposition of sanctions against
South Africa under Chapter VII of the Charter at this
point would escalateconfrontation and would lead to a
deterioration in the negotiating climate without
bringing us closer to the aim we jointly pursue. It
would indeed be South Africa’s neighbours that would
bear the brunt of these sanctions. Southern Africa
would be turned into an area of instability from which
international conflicts of unforeseeable dimensions
could emanate.

73. Let me also pay a warm tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Florin, for the masterly way in
which he steered the work of the Council last month.
74. When the Federal Republic of Germany became
a member of the Security Council in 1977, it was
resolved, together with Canada, France, the United
Kingdom and the United States, to work actively and
constructively towards ensuring that Namibia would
attain its independence in a democratic way. The
settlement plan on which the parties concerned agreed
[S//2636] became the basis of Council resolution 435
(1978). The aim of resolution 435 (1978) is in full accord
with the foremost objective of our policy towards

79. President Nyerere once said that it was in man’s
nature not to rest until he enjoyed freedom and human
dignity, which is an integral part offreedom. If man was
denied theserights, Nyerere continued, he would stand
up sooner or later and fight for his personal freedom
within his society or for the freedom of his society
from alien domination.
7

against the Namibian people but also against the
People’s Republic of Angola, the Republic of Zambia
and other front-line States.

80, The people of Namibia has long been denied its
freedom. Time is running out. Not all bridges have yet
been dismantled. The Federal Republic of Germany
is a friend of Namibia, and we shall leave nothing
undone to help that country solve its problems. We
shall do SO especially after Namibia has gained its
political independence, when it will look for friends
to help it build a nation.

86. Our interest and participation in this debate is
not only motivated by our conviction that the struggle
being waged by the oppressed peoples of Namibia
and South Africa is one and indivisible. It is also a
manifestation of the profound admiration and solidarity
our people feels towards the valiant Namibian people,
which, under the leadership of SWAPO, their sole
and authentic representative, are today spearheading
our common struggle against the common enemy, and
which have in the past two years registered important
political, diplomatic and military victories, which we
share. It is also to declare for the world to know that
we for our part intend to spare no effort towards the
intensification
of the ongoing political and armed
struggle in South Africa and to help hasten the inevitable vindication of General Malan’s panic-motivated
observation that “no nation can simultaneously fight
an insurgency on its borders and fight insurgency at
home”.

81. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is Mr. Johnstone Makatini, to whom the Council extended an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure at the 2272nd meeting, I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
82. Mr. MAKATINI:
Mr. President, I thank you and
all the other members of the Council for affording me
the opportunity to express the views of the African
National Congress of South Africa (ANC) on this
burning issue before the Council.
83. I should like at the outset to join the several
Ministers and representatives who have preceded
me and extend to you, Mr. President, the warmest
felicitations on your assumption of the lofty position
of President of the Council during the month of April.
The able manner in which you are conducting this
important debate convinces us that, under your guidance and given the co-operation of all the other members, the Council can indeed achieve the sacred
objective so ardently expected by the oppressed and
struggling peoples of Namibia and South Africa.
I hasten to add that our hopes are further reinforced by
the Irish people’s well-known traditional support for
the international fight against upurtheid.

87. In the wake of the combined victories registered
by the brotherly peoples of Angola, Mozambique and
Zimbabwe, which drastically changed the balance
of forces in our favour, the impact of the heroic struggle
being waged by the Namibian people has further
heightened the determination of our people to play
and conclude their long-awaited role in the total
liberation of our continent.
88. We consider every procrastination or prevarication aimed at buying time for the apartheid rt5gime in
Namibia as directed against our struggle and as part of
the imperialist global strategy to ensure the bolstering
and spread of the hated rkgime’s hegemonistic tentacles, which are totally inimical not only to the aspirations of our people but also to those of the entire continent and progressive mankind.

84. I should like also to congratulate your eminent
predecessor, Ambassador Florin, Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the German Democratic Republic,
on the able manner in which he conducted the affairs
of the Council last month.
85. The importance attached to this debate by the
peoples of Africa and the world that love freedom,
justice and peace cannot be overemphasized. It is being
clearly shown by the unprecedented participation of
so many Ministers for Foreign Affairs and others of
leading cabinet rank, Africa, Asia, Latin America and
part of Europe have, through spokesmen given a
mandate by the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
and the non-aligned countries, with unparalleled
vigour and unity of purpose articulated the position of
more than two-thirds of humanity on the decolonization
of Namibia. Adopted at New Delhi and reinforced at
Addis Ababa, Luanda and Algiers, that position is an
unequivocal
expression of the grave concern and
indignation of the so-called third world over the continued illegal occupation of Namibia. This criminal
situation which in itself constitutes a threat to international peace and security is further aggravated by
the attendant crimes being perpetrated daily by the
upartheid
rCgime with ferocious brutality not only

89. As stated in the past few days by most of the
speakers, including Mr. Picho Owiny, Minister of
State for Foreign Affairs of Uganda [2267tlz meeting],
the history of Namibia is one of continued betrayal of
trust. Throughout the long history of colonialism, four
forces have combined to thwart in Namibia the outcome long achieved in other former German Territories
like Togo, part of Cameroon and erstwhile Tanganiyka. These have been and continue to be the giant
transnational
corporations
operating in Namibia,
the white minority racists who enjoy paradise and
power in Namibia, the armed forces of the apartheid
regime which occupy Namibia and some Powers of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) which are
bent on the perpetuation of the status quo in Namibia.
90. We do not intend to dwell at length on the historical details which have been so eloquently articulated
by a number of honourable Ministers and representatives. Suffice it to stress that the problem of Namibia
8

1

1
I
1

\

1

stems from South Africa’s expansionist and colonial
ambitions. That has in turn been facilitated by some
permanent members of the Council that have hitherto
impeded the implementation of the Council’s own
pertinent decisions, including resolution 301 (1971),
which upheld the decision of the International Court
of Justice that South Africa’s Mandate was validly
terminated, that continued occupation was illegal and
that South Africa was under obligation to withdraw
immediately from Namibia.’ It is now not only in the
interest of restoring the badly eroded credibility of the
United Nations in general and the Council in particular
that effective collective measures for the prevention
of threats to the peace and for the suppression of
aggression and breaches of the peace must be taken
immediately, but also in order to avert a situation
whose explosion may be too far-reaching for the
survival of mankind. The ANC joins the preponderant
majority in calling for the imposition of comprehensive
mandatory sanctions, including an oil embargo, against
South Africa under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

Muzorewa, the rt5gime created DTA, which it recognized as the representative of the Namibian people’s
aspirations. In April 1977it accepted the alleged DTA
proposals to set up the so-called National Assembly
and announced its own elections for December 1978.
94. Alarmed by the persistent call for mandatory economic sanctions, Canada, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, the United Kingdom and the United
States of America urged the United Nations to allow
them an opportunity of negotiating with South Africa
to accept United Nations supervised and controlled
elections. In April 1978 the r6gime announced its
acceptance of the plan. At the same time, it mounted
the most savage repression against SWAP0 and its
followers. Cassinga in Angola was attacked and more
than 800unarmed men, women and children, refugees,
were killed. That point was most effectively conveyed
last week by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
United Republic of Tanzania [2273rl1meeting].
95. In December 1978 the rbgime forced gun-point
elections in Namibia. Not surprisingly, DTA won the
so-called elections, which flew in the face of Council
resolution 435 (1978). Then came one “reason” after
another for not complying with the United Nations
plan for the implementation of resolution 439 (1978).
What has happened since then convinces us that the
main objective was to provide South Africa with a
breathing period within which to consolidate its
aggressive position in Namibia and launch a murderous
onslaught against the people of Namibia, SWAP0 and
the front-line States, especially Angola and Zambia.

91. From the time when the South African regime
challenged the credentials of the United Nations to deal
with the question of Namibia as the legal successor to
the League of Nations and when it requested-unsuccessfully-that Namibia be incorporated as its fifth
province, right up to its intransigence at the Geneva
pre-implementation meeting, that regime has clearly
demonstrated its irreversible rejection of a negotiated
settlement which would conform to the previous decisions of the Council. It is against that background that
the application to have the Democratic Turnhalle
Alliance (DTA) address the Council and the statement
made by the representative of the Pretoria rCgime
must be examined.

96. Today, the DTA-dominated “National Assembly” has been transformed into the so-called Council of Ministers with full executive powers, thereby
reaching the last stage before the proclamation of a
unilateral declaration of independence. The attempt
to have DTA, that illegal puppet entity created by
the illegal occupant of Namibia, address the Council was therefore a public relations exercise intended
to earn it international recognition, in keeping with the
strategy of unilateral declaration of independence.

92. South Africa’s inability unilaterally to defy
world opinion on the question of Namibia has been
demonstrated by its constantly changing strategies.
When assured of full support by powerful allies; it
adopts an openly defiant attitude; when convinced that
the international pressure is too strong to resist, South
Africa and the same allies opt for a neo-colonialist
solution. The roots of such a current neo-colonialist
strategy designed to impose a fictitious solution in
Namibia can be traced to South Africa’s invasion of
Angola and the subsequent defeat it suffered, Much
that has happened since then-like the recent resounding victory of the patriotic forces in Zimbabwe
under the leadership of Comrade Robert Mugabe and
the SWAPO-ANC heightened level of massand armed
confrontation in Namibia and South Africa itselfhas led to renewed and frantic attempts at imposing a
neo-colonialist situation. In this the imperialist Powers
have played a significant role.

97. A flurry of appeals has been made also to the
Council members and the non-aligned spokesmen not
to allow the so-called understandable frustration to
gain the upper hand. The Council is being exhorted to
abandon the idea envisaged in the Charter for the
solution of such cases.We are being told not to resort
to confrontation but to allow for continued persuasion.
We are of course not told why the contact group’s promised collective leverage over South Africa has not
been used.
98. Theseappeals, which come after so gross a breach
of promise, are tantamount to asking SWAPO, the
OAU and the non-aligned countries to endorse the
rapidly unfolding plot aimed at thwarting the Iiberation of Namibia and facilitating the destabilization
of and aggression against the front-line States, whose

93. In January 1976 the Council adopted resolution
385 (1976), providing for free and fair elections. South
Africa refused to comply and instead announced its
own sham elections in Namibia. In a quest for its own
9

102. But our concern today stems from the fact that
we are now witnessing what I choose to call the unfolding convergence of positions adopted by Pretoria
and Washington, in which the former projects itself as
the guardian of Persian Gulf minerals and an indispensable bulwark in the fight against the alleged Spread
of communism in Africa, while the latter talks of a
strategic consensus against the wars of the “SO-called
liberation movements” or terrorists
Or Soviet proxies.
This growing convergence between Pretoria and
Washington was recently articulated by President
Ronald Reagan when he implied that the United States
could not abandon South Africa, a country that had
fought beside America in all major wars.

legal Governments must be overthrown and replaced
by puppet regimes. They come in the wake of the
arrogant and threat-riddled
statement by the racist
representative [.226&h meeti/rg], whose Claim to support the wishes of the people of Namibia for an early
internationally
recognized independence is as false
as his rejection of the United Nations plan for that
objective is true. As the shameless representative of a
regime that excels in euphemism-that
talks of holding
general elections when in South Africa over 23 million
I of the inhabitants are permanently denied the right to
vote and are being made foreigners in the country Of
their birth, that talks of internationally
recognized
independence in Namibia when it is planning a bantustan-type independence-Mr.
Fourie has fooled no
one.

103. On this question the Johannesburg
Star of 15 April observes that:

99, The Federal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
of Yugoslavia made an extremely important point when
he said:

Week/y

“Without question, Mr. Reagan means to have
better relations with South Africa. He has a nostalgic
view of South Africa as a staunch ally of the past. , ,
and a keen sense of South Africa’s importance as
supplier of defence-related minerals.

“The attempt to portray [the problem of Namibia]
as part of East-West confrontation constitutes a
manoeuvre by South Africa aimed at making use of
current international tensions in order to prolong its
occupation of Namibia and its domination in southern Africa” [2270th meeiing, para. 1311.

“South Africa’s anti-communist
rhetoric also
attracts Mr. Alexander Haig, the Secretary of State,
who tends to see southern Africa through the same
East-West lens as his one-time patron, Dr. Kissinger,
did”.

While it is true that this is not new, that this manoeuvre
is in fact in keeping with the regime’s oppressive legislation, which defines any activity designed to bring
about social, political or economic change in South
Africa as furtherance of communism, there are two
additional elements which are cause for concern.

104. Recalling the notorious secret memorandum
39 drawn up by the National Security Council during
Nixon’s Administration,
which argued that there was
no realistic or supportable alternative for the Americans except to side with the whites in southern Africa,
the New Statesman of 4 April declares:

100. South Africa’s use of this age-old tactic, universally rejected as a vain attempt at isolating the
national liberation movement by projecting the legitimate struggle against apartheid as being engineered
by some external and generally unknown force, has
hitherto posed no serious problem. After all, all oppressive regimes-be they Fascist, colonialist, racist or
imperialist-have,
at different times in isolation and
with equal dismal failure, resorted to it in a vain attempt
to halt the national upsurge of the anti-colonial and antiracist struggle. That was the case in Algeria, Angola,
GuineaBissau,
Mozambique,
Zimbabwe and other
Territories. It has always been the case in Namibia
and South Africa, to the degree that an impression is
created that blacks are considered inherently incapable
of determining on their own that, having been robbed
of their land and denied their inalienable basic human
rights by an alien Power, they must follow in the
footsteps of the American people and scores of others
to fight, gun in hand, for their independence and
liberty.

“Twelve years later, the Reagan Administration
is torn between two impulses. One urges the building
of American power on African territory to reverse
the political and military failures of the past, topple
the Angola and Mozambique regimes, annihilate the
SWAP0 movement in Namibia, and destroy the
African National Congress and other movements
for liberation in South Africa. The second impulse
would avoid open United States moves toward these
objectives, but it differs from the first only in the
willingness to let South Africa pull the trigger.
“Walvis Bay . . . is described by Reagan officials
as ‘unquestionably South African territory’.
“Washington has told both the South Africans and
Dirk Mudge, the leader of the Democratic Turnhalle
Alliance in Namibia, who was in Washington immediately after the intelligence officers, that they
should stall on negotiations for as long as will be !
necessary to build the DTA into a credible election 1
force against SWAPO.”

101. A number of the Ministers participating in this
debate no doubt recall that only yesterday they shared
with SWAP0 and ANC the terrorist and Marxist
label. George Washington would have dismissed such
propaganda with the same attitude as Comrade Robert
Mugabe did only a year ago.

105. The second element which is cause for serious !
concern is the growing Pretoria-Washington
con10

II

vergence of positions in pursuit of the campaign for the
integration of South Africa into the NATO framework General Magnus Malan, the Pretoria regime’s
Defence Minister, former Commander-in-Chief,
and
graduate of the United States Army’s Command
General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
recently made a public statement expressing satisfaction that the United States and some Western Powers
were now taking a realistic position on this matter,
It is most disturbing to note that Malan’s statement
came shortly after the meeting in Europe between Pik
Botha, the Pretoria regime’s Minister
of Foreign
Affairs, and Mr. Luns, the Secretary-General
of
NATO.

regime. While apologizing to those who argue that
resolutions and declarations do not solve problems, we
most humbly suggest that Council resolution 435
(1978), the Declaration on South Africa and the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples ~Gene~al Assembly mohtion
1514 (XV)] will for the overwhelming
majority of
mankind always remain important
instruments
to
govern international relations and impede the reign of
the law of the jungle. The American Declaration of
Independence,
which helped to arouse world-wide
support for the American people’s legitimate war of
independence, falls into this category.

106. But even more disturbing is a report published
by a South African newspaper that usually reflects the
regime’s thinking. That report says:

108. In the light of all that, I must say that we are
very suspicious of the reports that the most colonial of
all colonial problems, the question of Namibia, is to be
the subject of discussion at the forthcoming NATO
meeting in Rome on 4 May.

“NATO
countries are becoming steadily more
alarmed and strategists feel that if NATO itself
cannot move into the critical area because of South
Africa’s position as a pariah State, the individual
countries with interests in this zone must accept
the responsibility”.

109. That is why we call on the Council to prevent
any attempt at taking the problem of Namibia out of the
framework of the United Nations. That is why we call
for affirmation of resolution 435 (1978) without any
strengthening or independent amendment. That is why
we call for the immediate imposition of comprehensive
mandatory sanctions against South Africa under
Chapter VII of the Charter.

107. It is for that reason that we wish to sound the
alarm and warn against the dangers entailed in the
highly orchestrated campaign to project the Namibian
struggle for the decolonization of that illegally occupied
Territory as falling within the East-West conflict. The
same goes for the campaign to characterize the liberation movement of southern Africa, SWAP0 and ANC,
as terrorists or Soviet proxies. The intentions are
particularly sinister when one remembers that only two
years ago the General Assembly unanimously adopted
a Declaration on South Africa [resolution 34/930],
expressing solidarity with the struggling people of
South Africa, in which all the Member States committed themselves against overt or covert military
intervention in support or defence of the apartheid

110. A lsrtu contirzw.

Power to the people!

The meeting rose ut 1.10 pm.

11
