S/PV.8091

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8091st meeting

Wednesday, 8 November 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cardi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Cheng Lie
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Abebe
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Hasebe
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Seck
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni
Mr. Vitrenko
Ms. Dickson
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-37090 (E)
*1737090*

S/PV.8091

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Prosecutor Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on presiding over the
Council for the month of November, and to take this
opportunity to also thank you, Sir, for your continued
support of the work of my Office and the International
Criminal Court (ICC) more broadly, both as Permanent
Representative of Italy to the United Nations here in
New York, as well as Vice-President of the Assembly
of States Parties.
I welcome this opportunity to update the Council
on my Office’s activities in Libya since I last reported
in May (see S/PV.7934).
I observe with regret that the security situation in
Libya remains a matter of great concern. Indeed, as
the Council has stated repeatedly, the volatile situation
in Libya remains a threat to international peace and
security. Libya continues to confront many challenges:
the proliferation of armed groups; the continued, albeit
lessened, activity of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL); the humanitarian crisis created by Libya
being the key transit point for hundreds of thousands of
migrants; and the ongoing struggle for political power
in many parts of the country.
At the same time, and notwithstanding those
challenges, it is important to recognize the efforts of
numerous actors — first and foremost, the Libyans
themselves, as well as Libya’s neighbours, international
partners and regional organizations, who are all
working to achieve peace and stability in Libya through
an inclusive dialogue.
2/18

08/11/2017

As underlined recently by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, the re-establishment of the
rule of law, the protection of human rights and the need
to combat impunity must form part of the process that
will lead to a sustainable political settlement in Libya.
Justice is an important component of sustainable
peace. Courts with competent jurisdiction over crimes
committed in Libya, including the International
Criminal Court, have a crucial role to play.
Accountability for serious crimes and full respect for
the rule of law are key factors that must be encouraged
and supported if Libya is to achieve peace, security and
stability. We are striving to do our part. Since my last
report before the Council six months ago, my Office
has made substantial progress in the investigations of
alleged crimes committed in Libya. In that regard, let
me now turn to the most recent warrant of arrest issued
by the Court in the Libya situation.
Members will recall that in my May statement and
report to the Council, I highlighted reports of serious
crimes allegedly being committed in the context of the
conflict between forces of the Libyan National Army
(LNA) and the Benghazi Revolutionaries Shura Council
in and around Benghazi. Specifically, I noted reports
of serious crimes, including summary executions
allegedly committed following the LNA’s takeover of
the Ganfouda neighbourhood of Benghazi on or around
18 March. I called on all parties to the conflict to
refrain from carrying out serious violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. I reminded
all parties to the conflict of the provisions of the Rome
Statute relating to the responsibility of commanders
and superiors to prevent or repress the commission
of crimes by their forces and to submit any such
crimes for investigation and prosecution. I also noted
that my Office was closely monitoring that situation.
In the following months, my Office continued to
receive credible information of grave crimes allegedly
perpetrated in Libya, including in Benghazi.
Based on the evidence of these alleged crimes
committed in and around Benghazi, on 1 August, I
applied for a warrant of arrest for Major Mahmoud
Mustafa Busayf Al-Werfalli. On 15 August, Pre-Trial
Chamber I of the Court granted the application and issued
a warrant for his arrest. The suspect, Mr. Al-Werfalli,
is a commander in the Al-Saiqa Brigade, a Benghazibased Special Forces unit that has been active in the
17-37090

08/11/2017

The situation in Libya

LNA’s Operation Dignity since May 2014. Based on
the evidence collected, we allege that Mr. Al-Werfalli
is responsible for the war crime of murder in relation
to six unlawful executions that allegedly took place in
or around Benghazi between March and July 2017, as
well as another execution that allegedly took place on
or before June 2016. These executions were filmed and
posted to social media sites. Mr. Al-Werfalli is alleged
to have ordered or personally committed the seven
executions that resulted in the murder of 33 people in
cold blood.
My Office follows the evidence and applies the
law, independently and impartially, as set by the
Rome Statute, irrespective of the affiliation of the
perpetrators or the victims. Since the issuance of the
warrant, there have been public reports of a possible
arrest and an internal investigation by the LNA into
Mr. Al-Werfalli’s actions. The LNA has officially stated
that it is investigating. However, my Office has also
received reports indicating that Mr. Al-Werfalli is at
large, remains a commander with the Al-Saiqa Brigade,
and may have been involved in further killings. I am
investigating these reports.
Let me stress that irrespective of any reported
domestic investigation that may be under way, Libya
remains under a legal obligation arising from resolution
1970 (2011) to immediately arrest and surrender
Mr. Al-Werfalli to the ICC. He must be transferred
to the Court to stand trial. I therefore urge General
Khalifa Haftar, commander of the LNA, which has
publicly expressed gratitude for the work of the Court
in relation to Mr. Al-Werfalli’s case, to demonstrate,
by concrete actions, respect for international justice by
ensuring Mr. Al-Werfalli’s immediate transfer to the
Libyan authorities so that he may be surrendered to the
Court without delay.
The Council will also recall that on 24 April,
the ICC made public a warrant of arrest against
Mr. Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled, former head of the
Libyan Internal Security Agency. Mr. Al-Tuhamy is
alleged to have committed crimes against humanity
and war crimes in relation to the events of 2011. My
Office continues to investigate Mr. Al-Tuhamy and
others associated with the 2011 events. The Office is
also engaged in identifying and, where appropriate,
sharing information relating to both Mr. Al-Tuhamy and
Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi’s current whereabouts.
We continue to devise and implement strategies to

S/PV. 8091

facilitate the execution of the outstanding warrants
of arrest.
In relation to Mr. Al-Qadhafi, I appreciate
the support expressed by members of the Council,
encouraging the Libyan authorities to comply with their
outstanding obligation to surrender him to the Court.
Those who allegedly bear responsibility for crimes
under the Rome Statute must be brought to justice.
My Office continues to request States Parties,
non-States Parties and organizations to assist in
securing the arrest of persons subject to an ICC warrant.
In that context, we have engaged in a spirit of good faith
and demonstrated utmost sensitivity while providing
specific information to enable cooperation. We count
on the support of States we have engaged in that process
to assist the Office with the arrest and surrender of ICC
suspects. In that regard, I wish to recall the wording of
resolution 1970 (2011), and again encourage all States
and regional and international organizations to take
concrete action to support my Office’s efforts so that
Mr. Al-Tuhamy and Mr. Al-Qadhafi can be surrendered
to the Court and face justice in relation to alleged
crimes committed during the 2011 events.
In relation to Mr. Abdullah Al-Senussi, my Office
continues to monitor the Libyan proceedings in relation
to his pending appeal before the Libyan Supreme Court.
My Office’s assessment since our previous
report to the Council (S/PV.7934) indicates that the
situation remains dire in Libya. The security situation
remains unstable with violent clashes occurring
between various factions across Libya. Reports
indicate widespread violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law being perpetrated by
different parties to the conflict. Often, the victims are
civilians. One major cause for concern is the continued
internal displacement of persons in Libya, such as the
Tawerghan. Despite the approval by the Presidency
Council of the Government of National Accord in June
of this year of an agreement between the Tawerghan
and Misratan communities, there has reportedly been
no progress towards fulfilling their return home.
I also note with grave concern reports of unlawful
killings, including the execution of detained persons;
kidnappings and forced disappearances; torture;
prolonged detentions without trial or other legal
process; and arbitrary detention, torture, rape, and
other ill-treatment of migrants in official and unofficial
detention centres. As detailed in my latest report,

17-370903/18

S/PV.8091

The situation in Libya

events of particular concern during the reporting period
include the attack on the LNA-held Brak Al-Shati air
base on 18 May, and recent clashes in the Sabratah
region between the 48th Infantry Brigade — also known
as the Martyr Anas al-Dabashi armed group — and
the Operations Room to Combat the Islamic State.
My Office also notes the continued activity of ISIL,
including its claimed suicide attack on the Misrata
courthouse on 4 October.
My Office has also received information that the
LNA has allegedly intensified restrictions on access to
the city of Derna over recent months, in connection with
fighting during the reporting period between the LNA
and the Derna Mujahideen Shura Council. Restrictions
reportedly include blocking medicine, medical
treatment and petrol from entering the city. The Office
has received reports indicating that hundreds of Derna’s
inhabitants have been arrested attempting to leave the
city. I join Mr. Salamé, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Libya and Head of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, in condemning
recent air strikes in a residential neighbourhood in
Derna that appear to have resulted in the tragic deaths
of civilians, including at least 12 children and women.
Finally, reports have also emerged that 36 male
corpses were found in the town of Al-Abyar, 50
kilometres east of Benghazi. This is also of grave
concern. The bodies were reportedly handcuffed,
showed signs of torture, and displayed bullet wounds to
the head. I remind each and every combatant engaged
in fighting in Libya that my Office remains seized
of the situation in Libya, and if their actions amount
to war crimes or crimes against humanity, they can
be prosecuted.
These recent attacks and the reports of the finding
of 36 corpses bearing signs of torture and execution,
compel me once again to bring the provisions of
the Rome Statute relating to the responsibility of
commanders and other superiors to the attention of
senior commanders and officials across Libya. Persons
acting as military commanders or as superiors can
be criminally responsible for crimes under the Rome
Statute committed by forces or subordinates under their
effective command or control, or effective authority
and control. In addition to their responsibility to protect
civilians, commanders have an obligation to prevent
or repress the commission of crimes by their forces,
and to submit any such crimes for investigation and
prosecution. Let me be clear: if serious crimes under
4/18

08/11/2017

the Rome Statute continue to be committed in Libya, I
will not hesitate to bring new applications for warrants
of arrest. Such crimes must stop. Those taking part in
hostilities must do so within the framework of the law
and with full respect for international humanitarian law.
I wish now to return to the issue of crimes
against migrants, as they represent a serious matter
that continues to preoccupy me and my Office. I
have instructed my Office to continue its inquiries
into the alleged crimes against migrants transiting
through Libya. Depending on the precise facts and
circumstances that might be established in the course
of a full investigation, such crimes may fall within
the jurisdiction of the Court. However, that issue must
be decided through a case-by-case analysis based on
the relevant facts and an assessment of my Office’s
jurisdiction. Such work will be strictly within our
mandate as set by the Rome Statute.
In conformity with goal 9 of my Office’s latest
strategic plan, we will also work with Libya and other
States and organizations on that issue, where appropriate,
and where we think we can be of assistance to address
crimes perpetrated against migrants. Where possible,
our collaborative efforts enhance coordination of
investigative and prosecutorial strategies that are aimed
at closing the impunity gap not only for Rome Statute
crimes, but also for other transnational and organized
criminal activity falling outside of my mandate. Those
other crimes significantly contribute to the continuing
insecurity and violence in Libya today.
I now turn to some of the unfortunately recurring
challenges facing my Office. My Office’s investigations
into alleged crimes under the Rome Statute that have
been committed in Libya are hampered by the ongoing
insecurity in the country, which continues to prevent
my teams from operating within Libya. Insufficient
resources also continue to be a major problem. The
Office receives various forms of support for its work
from members of the Council and States parties.
However, our modest financial resources, which
must be spread across all situations currently under
investigation by my Office, must be increased so as
to ensure that we have adequate means to achieve our
mandated mission.
The failure to execute arrest warrants issued by
the Court also remains a major challenge. Members
of the Security Council, as well as other States and
non-State parties, have the responsibility to ensure
17-37090

08/11/2017

The situation in Libya

S/PV. 8091

the timely arrest and surrender of all Libyan suspects.
Despite those challenges, the announcement of two
arrest warrants in the past eight months — one for
crimes committed during 2011 and the other for crimes
perpetrated more recently — should clearly demonstrate
that my Office continues to be fully engaged in Libya
and is determined to contribute to achieving real
progress towards a culture of accountability for crimes
under the Rome Statute committed in Libya.

those who have already committed crimes and wouldbe perpetrators by signalling that impunity will prevail
and that they are beyond the reach of the law. That we
cannot allow.

The progress that we have made and our
achievements to date are a result of the commitment
and expertise of my staff, as well as the strong and
collaborative relationships that we have developed
with key partners. My Office continues to receive
vital support from a number of States, including the
Netherlands, Tunisia, Italy and the United Kingdom,
as well as international organizations and other actors,
such as the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and INTERPOL. The exemplary efforts of those States
and organizations deserve recognition. More of the
same is required from others joining to contribute.
In addition, the Libyan Prosecutor-General’s Office
remains a strong and valued partner in our investigation
activities, and, as always, I remain grateful to the
citizens of Libya and all individuals and organizations
that are committed to the goals of the ICC.

Ms. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would like
to start by expressing the gratitude of the United
Kingdom to Ms. Fatou Bensouda, the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for being here
today with members of her team and for presenting to
the Security Council her fourteenth report and update
on the activities of her Office with regard to the situation
in Libya. The United Kingdom fully supports the work
of the Office of the Prosecutor, and the ICC as a whole,
to bring to account those responsible for serious crimes
of international concern in Libya and elsewhere.

I am acutely aware that peace and stability in Libya
will require action, support and commitment from
various actors. Ensuring justice for victims of serious
crimes perpetrated in Libya and bringing to account
those who have committed or ordered atrocities remain
critical factors for sustainable peace in a country that
has been plagued by conflict for so long. Libya will
remain a priority for my Office in 2018. Along with
my team, I am determined to fulfil the responsibility
entrusted to my Office by the Rome Statute vis-à-vis
Libya, following the Council’s referral pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011). My Office will continue to do
its part. As we do, we count on the critical support of
the Security Council, States Members of the United
Nations, and States parties to the Rome Statute.
Suspects against whom ICC warrants of arrest have
been issued must be arrested and transferred to the
Court to stand trial. We have a collective responsibility
to cultivate a culture of accountability for Rome Statute
crimes in Libya and to deter the commission of future
crimes. Continued failure to do so is to deny the victims
of the grave crimes committed in Libya the justice that
they so rightly deserve. Inaction will also embolden

The President: I thank Prosecutor Bensouda for
her important briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the Security
Council who wish to make statements.

The situation in Libya remains extremely serious
and a cause for grave concern. It is deeply troubling
that violations and abuses of human rights and
violations of international humanitarian law continue
to happen with impunity on a daily basis across Libya,
including against migrants and refugees. We condemn
the October air strikes in Derna. The United Kingdom,
along with France, Italy and the United States, is closely
monitoring ongoing acts of conflict in Libya. Those
suspected of committing, ordering or failing to prevent
summary executions and torture on all sides must be
fully investigated and, if found guilty, held accountable
for their actions. Reports of incidents of extrajudicial
killings of detained combatants, including at the Brak
Al-Shati air base, and clashes in areas such as Benghazi
and Misrata, resulting in civilian casualties, are also
very disturbing.
While we fully support Libya in its fight against
terrorism, such operations have a detrimental
humanitarian impact on the civilian population, and the
relevant rules of domestic and international law must
be complied with. It is also imperative that, as progress
is made towards a political solution, security structures
are reformed so as to ensure accountable chains of
command and that the judicial system is strengthened
to ensure that it is robust, impartial and independent.
The United Kingdom is grateful for the ICC’s
ongoing efforts to investigate the alleged crimes despite

17-370905/18

S/PV.8091

The situation in Libya

the challenges presented by the ongoing security
situation and political instability in Libya. We note that
the Office of the Prosecutor is determined to resume
investigative activities on the ground in Libya as soon
as possible, and we welcome the steps that it is taking
to achieve that goal. We note the Prosecutor’s update on
the cases against Saif Al-Islam Gaddafi and Al-Tuhamy
Mohamed Khaled. We fully support the Court’s call for
cooperation from members of the Council, Libya and
other States to provide information that could facilitate
the arrest and surrender of those men to the ICC so that
they can be tried for the alleged war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed in Libya in 2011.
Those responsible for war crimes and other
serious crimes in Libya must not escape justice. In
that connection we recall that the United Kingdom,
along with two other members of the Council, publicly
expressed our welcome in August for the fact that
the Libyan National Army was apparently willing to
investigate reports of the unlawful killings in Benghazi
and to recognize the arrest warrant issued by the ICC
for Mahmoud Al-Werfalli, a member of the Libyan
National Army. We hope to see progress in that case in
the very near future.
We note that the Office of the Prosecutor has
continued to collect and analyse information and
evidence related to alleged criminal acts against
migrants in Libya. We encourage all States, including
neighbouring States to Libya, to cooperate with the
Court, and where relevant, to provide it with reliable
information on human trafficking and smuggling
networks. It is important that the alleged perpetrators
of those crimes, like other serious crimes of concern in
Libya, be held accountable for their actions.
The lack of improvement in the situation reinforces
the need for all sides to reach a political solution.
The United Kingdom fully supports the efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, in that regard and urges all parties
in Libya to engage with him constructively. The United
Kingdom would also like to reaffirm its support for the
Government of National Accord.
The United Kingdom commends the continued
engagement of the Libyan Prosecutor-General and the
Libyan representatives to the ICC and encourages States
and relevant international and regional organizations to
assist the Libyan authorities in their efforts to build the
rule of law in Libya.
6/18

08/11/2017

Finally, the United Kingdom believes that the
Court must have the resources necessary to do its
work, but it is important that those resources be used as
efficiently as possible. We welcome the steps that the
Court has taken in that area and encourage the Court to
continue to strive for efficiency. Once again, the United
Kingdom would like to thank the Prosecutor of the ICC
for presenting her report to the Council today.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing
today on the latest report of the Prosecutor of the ICC
to the Security Council in accordance with resolution
1970 (2011).
At the outset, Egypt would like to commend the
efforts of the Court to put an end to impunity and restore
justice in Libya in line with international law. For that
reason, in the case against Mahmoud Mustafa Busayf
Al-Werfalli, we are of the view that it is important to
ensure adherence to article 1 of the Rome Statute of the
ICC. Indeed that article stipulates that the Court is a
complement to national criminal jurisdiction.
It is furthermore essential for the Court to adhere
to the conditions regarding admissibility, pursuant to
the stipulations of article 17 of the Rome Statute. In that
regard, the Court cannot declare that the case against
Mahmoud Mustafa Busayf Al-Werfalli is admissible
or that other individuals are subject to an investigation
in their countries if Libyan judicial authorities are
effectively seized of the matter and if proceedings are
underway, unless it is established that the Libyan State
does not have the will or is unable to genuinely conduct
and carry through investigative proceedings. With
respect to handing Saif Al-Islam Al-Qaddafi over to
the Court, we reiterate that it is necessary to deliver all
requisite assistance to the Libyan Government so that it
can fulfil all of its obligations vis-à-vis the Court.
On the other hand, although Egypt is aware of the
tremendous challenges linked to the security situation
in Libya, which make it difficult to dispatch experts
from the Court to conduct research on the ground and
collect proof from Libyan territory, we favour and
welcome any forms of collaboration with the assistance
delivered by the Libyan Prosecutor-General so as to
enable the Prosecutor of the ICC to fully carry through
that Court’s mission.
In addition to the assistance provided by the
Libyan Prosecutor or other competent authorities
17-37090

08/11/2017

The situation in Libya

from the country, Egypt requests that the Office of the
Prosecutor of the ICC prioritize a verification of all
other information received with respect to the crimes
perpetrated in Libya. That information must stem from
credible sources. The Court cannot focus exclusively on
allegations from one group to the detriment of another.
The Court must remain seized of all cases within its
jurisdiction, including crimes perpetrated by terrorist
organizations. Those organizations receive financial
assistance and weapons from some States, and it is
thanks to the availability of such weapons and financial
flows that the terrorists perpetrate crimes that indeed
fall under the jurisdiction of the Court.
The international community must deliver all
necessary support to the Libyan Government so as to set
up a comprehensive strategy to enable the fight against
the heinous crimes perpetrated in Libya. All required
assistance to Libyan authorities must be delivered so
that those authorities can restore justice and prosecute
terrorists. That requires that the Libyan Government be
provided with the necessary weapons, as well as that all
relevant Security Council resolutions be implemented.
Lastly, we thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda for all of her
efforts, and we thank her Office for the tremendous
efforts it has undertaken to restore justice and end
impunity. My country will continue to cooperate and
collaborate with the Court in that regard.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): We thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda for the update on the work of the
Office of the Prosecutor, pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1970 (2011). Six years ago, the Council
referred the situation in Libya to the International
Criminal Court (ICC), given the context of the appalling
violations of human rights that were perpetrated during
the 2011 revolution.
The ICC has charged Saif Al-Islam Al-Qaddafi
with murder and persecution committed during the 2011
revolution, and we have called on all relevant Libyan
actors to facilitate his transfer to the Court. We also
note the arrest warrant issued by the ICC for Al-Tuhamy
Mohamed Khaled and emphasize the need to bring to
justice those involved in the horrific acts committed by
the Libyan Internal Security Agency against perceived
opponents of the regime of Muammar Al-Qaddafi. All
those responsible for the crimes committed during the
2011 revolution must be held to account.
Today much has changed in Libya. However, the
country is not free from horrific acts of violence. We

S/PV. 8091

continue to call for respect of human rights in Libya.
We note with deep concern the recent air strike in
Derna — a city that remains in need of immediate
and unfettered humanitarian access. We also strongly
condemn the deplorable acts in Al Abyar, where on
26 October the bodies of 36 men who had been shot to
death were discovered.
The insecurity in the country highlights the urgent
need to find a solution to the political crisis in Libya.
National political reconciliation is key to ending the
violent unrest that continues to plague the country. To
that end, we welcome the steps that have been taken
in line with the United Nations action plan that was
announced in September, and we reiterate our full
support for the leadership of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Ghassan Salamé in the ongoing
mediation efforts.
As delegations from the House of Representatives
in the State Council negotiate amendments to the
Libyan Political Agreement, we encourage all Libyan
parties to support the United Nations political
process and work together in the spirit of compromise
towards the common goal of a more peaceful and
prosperous Libya. We also call for those responsible
for human rights violations and abuses or violations of
international humanitarian law to be held accountable;
they cannot act with impunity. To that end, we stressed
that the summary killings in Al-Abyar, as well as other
reports of unlawful killings in Benghazi, must be fully
investigated by the authorities on the ground.
We have also noted the ICC accusations against
Major Al-Werfalli of war crimes in relation to the
killing of 33 people in Benghazi. We are deeply
concerned by allegations that Al-Werfalli has carried
out additional killings in Ajdabiya despite the ongoing
investigation into his activities, as well as by reports
that Al-Werfalli has returned to active duty despite
the charges against him. The United States urges the
relevant Libyan authorities to ensure that Al-Werfalli is
brought to justice in accordance with international law.
Before closing, I would be remiss not to convey
the United States’ position with respect to recent
developments relating to the situation in Afghanistan.
The United States believes that any ICC investigation
or other activity concerning United States personnel is
wholly unwarranted and unjustified. The United States
is deeply committed to complying with international
law and has a robust national system of investigation,

17-370907/18

S/PV.8091

The situation in Libya

accountability and transparency that is among the best
in the world. The United States has a long-standing and
continuing objection in principle to any ICC assertion
of jurisdiction over United States personnel. More
generally, we do not believe that an ICC investigation
would serve the interests of either peace or justice
in Afghanistan.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her fourteenth report and for
her briefing this morning. I would also like to reaffirm
France’s support for the Prosecutor, as well as for the
International Criminal Court (ICC) as a whole, in
the implementation of resolution 1970 (2011), which
referred the situation in Libya to the ICC. Through that
resolution, the Council sought to demonstrate its trust
in the jurisdiction of the ICC by assigning it a mission
of the highest importance, namely, to ensure that those
responsible for the most serious crimes affecting the
international community do not go unpunished, as
stated in the Preamble of the Rome Statute.
We are pleased to note the ongoing efforts of
the Office of the Prosecutor (OTP) to conduct its
investigations in the context of the generally difficult
and insecure situation in Libya. Given the scale of the
challenges facing the Court there, the support of the
Security Council for the Court’s action, as well as the
efforts of the United Nations and of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, are essential. We welcome
the personal mobilization of the Secretary-General
to that effect and the invaluable contribution of his
Special Representative, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, to the
fight against impunity in Libya. We assure them of our
full support in their difficult task.
As we seek to build on the various initiatives and
the meeting at La Celle Saint-Cloud under the auspices
of President Macron last summer, all efforts must
now be geared towards supporting United Nations
mediation with a view to reaching a consensus on
the revision of the Skhirat Agreement. The French
presidency of the Security Council also endorsed the
road map of the Special Representative in a statement
on 10 October (S/PRST/2017/19), and welcomed the
first discussions between the House of Representatives
and the Council of State in late September, under the
auspices of the Special Representative. Held in Tunis,
those negotiations were constructive, and the next steps
of the mediation should enable us to finalize work on
the revision of the agreement.
8/18

08/11/2017

In the context of the mediation efforts led by
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, it is important to provide concrete
support to the Libyan authorities, particularly in the
areas of justice and in restoring the rule of law. Beyond
those general observations on the situation in Libya, I
would like to make three more specific remarks.
First of all, I wish to recall that the ongoing
investigations by the OTP require the full cooperation
of all stakeholders. France is of the view that the
cooperation of Libyan authorities, States parties to
the Rome Statute and non-party States — especially
members of the Council — with the Court is crucial in
order for it to carry out its work in total security and
pursuant to the mandate entrusted to it by the Rome
Statute and by the Council, as seen in paragraph 16 of
the report.
It is essential to strengthen collaboration between
all States involved — whether they are parties to the
Rome Statute or not — in order to rapidly provide
the necessary support to the OTP so that it is able to
discharge its mission. In that regard, the cooperation
of the Tunisian, Dutch, Italian and British authorities
deserves special mention.
With regard to the sections of the report that
address ongoing investigations, France takes note of the
arrest warrant ordered by the Court against Mahmoud
Mustafa Busayf al-Werfalli on 15 August. We urge the
Libyan National Army, as the Prosecutor has done, to
surrender Mr. Al-Werfalli to the Libyan authorities as
soon as possible so that he can be handed over to the
ICC, pursuant to their obligations to cooperate with the
Court under resolution 1970 (2011). That is an important
step in the fight against impunity and towards impartial
justice in Libya. France also wishes to reiterate its call
for cooperation with the ICC in order to ensure that Saif
al-Islam Gaddafi and Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled are
handed over to the Court without further delay.
Finally, with regard to the projections outlined in
the report of the Office of the Prosecutor, we take note
of the OTP’s commitment to continue to make Libya a
priority during 2018 and, if required, to order new arrest
warrants. We also welcome the OTP’s desire to conduct
investigations into the disturbing situation of crimes
linked to smuggling and the trafficking of persons in
Libya, which constitutes a direct threat to stability in
the country, as Mr. Ghassan Salamé highlighted in
the Council in August (see S/PV.2032). France shares
that concern and is committed to act together with our
17-37090

08/11/2017

The situation in Libya

partners to counter smuggling networks and disrupt
their economic model in Libya and throughout the
region within the framework of the joint statement
of 28 August entitled “Addressing the Challenge of
Migration and Asylum”.
The current situation in Libya once again
points to the fact that impunity feeds insecurity and
instability. That reality obliges us therefore to respond
to the challenges facing us in Libya; they can only be
addressed through effective cooperation with the ICC
and the support of the Security Council. France remains
ready to mobilize its efforts to that end.
Mr. Bermúde (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
once again express our appreciation for the presence
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
Ms. Fatouh Bensouda. We welcome the presentation of
the fourteenth report of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) on the situation in Libya pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011). Uruguay reiterates its full support for the
work of the International Criminal Court, as well as for
the role played by Ms. Bensouda in prosecuting those
responsible for the most serious crimes, as defined in
article 5 of the Rome Statute.
Uruguay considers the fight against crimes
against humanity, war crimes, genocide and crimes of
aggression perpetrated against the rights of men, women
and children to be of the utmost importance. The ICC
serves as a landmark in the international community’s
fight against impunity and the commission of the most
serious crimes against human beings, which violate
their integrity as well as their rights.
The development of international awareness of the
need to put an end to atrocities against human beings,
whether individual or mass atrocities, and to maintain
peace and security were the reason for the creation of
the International Criminal Court. The importance of its
establishment and the mission entrusted to it require
us to support every action aimed at improving the
management of the ICC. In that regard, we remind States
Parties to the Rome Statute of the need to cooperate
with the Court so that it can perform its duties.
Moreover, we believe that it is essential to raise
awareness of the importance of the ICC, and States
must therefore accede to and ratify the Rome Statute,
as well as its amendments. The ICC is a Court that
was only recently created and which requires all of the
support that States are able to provide in discharging its
mission. That should be done through cooperation and

S/PV. 8091

by providing information, complying with its requests,
understanding its processes and ensuring that they are
adequately carried out and completed.
In that context, it is important to strengthen the role
of the International Criminal Court as an international
adjudicating body for the prosecution of the crimes
listed in article 5 of the Rome Statute. Accountability
for the perpetration of such serious crimes, regardless of
by whom or where they are committed, must continue to
be a priority objective for States and the Council alike.
We encourage States Members of the United
Nations that are not yet parties to the Rome Statute to
accede to it, with a view to making progress in the fight
against impunity and to defending all inhabitants of the
planet against these heinous crimes, which represent a
serious threat to peace and security.
It is important, in this context, to strengthen the
role of the International Criminal Court as a mechanism
for rendering justice when national courts are incapable
of doing so.
With regard to Libya, regrettably, since the
previous report of the Prosecutor, there have been no
promising signs, except for the fresh momentum given
by the United Nations to the political process and
national reconciliation in the country. The Government
of National Accord continues to see its authority
challenged at the national level, and the blockade
imposed by the House of Representatives in Tobruk
has prevented the provisions of the Libyan Political
Agreement from being fully implemented.
The many challenges facing Libya six years after
its civil war require quick and effective responses from
its new authorities. They are dealing with the threat
of Islamic terrorism, a migratory crisis that affects
hundreds of thousands of people, a humanitarian
emergency and a very difficult economic situation,
among other serious problems. In this context, it
is necessary to work towards the reunification and
reconciliation of the country in order to prevent further
bloodshed among its population and to put an end to
the institutional crisis and military conflict that have
plagued the country since 2011.
We must also make progress towards the objective
of a genuine democratic transition and lasting peace and
stability as a sustainable foundation in order to more
effectively investigate the atrocities committed in the
country, while avoiding further widespread violence

17-370909/18

S/PV.8091

The situation in Libya

and impunity. We trust that the new Libyan authorities,
to the extent that they can consolidate their power and
gradually extend their authority throughout the entire
territory, will fulfil their commitment to render justice
for the victims of these crimes and cooperate with
the Office of the Prosecutor in future to identify the
perpetrators and facilitate their surrender to the Court
for prosecution.
We urge the Government of National Accord to
surrender Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the Court and
ensure a trial with all guarantees for Abdullah Al-Senussi
and other individuals who allegedly committed war
crimes and crimes against humanity before, during
and after the civil war that broke out in 2011, including
Al-Tuhami Khaled and Mustafa Al-Werfalli, for whom
arrest warrants were issued this year.
It bears noting that, in the most recent reports, there
has been a focus on abuses committed against refugees
and migrants in Libya, including acts of sexual violence
and crimes against minors during their detention in
inhuman conditions. We are concerned by the fact that,
after having identified during her previous appearance
investigations in Libya as one of the priorities for 2017,
the Office of the Prosecutor continues to face budget
difficulties in carrying out this objective. We therefore
support her request for the resources necessary for her
to properly fulfil her mandate in a timely manner, and
we also call on those States parties that are able do so
to provide the required funding.
In conclusion, Uruguay reiterates its recognition
of the work of the Prosecutor as reflected in her
statements on the crimes committed in Libya. They
will definitely help to strengthen the rule of law and
bring about a more just and inclusive Libyan society in
which the rights and guarantees of all of its inhabitants
are fully respected.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation welcomes the opportunity
afforded us by the Council’s consideration of the
fourteenth report on the activities of the Office of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
on the situation in Libya. We thank Prosecutor Fatou
Bensouda for the clarity of her presentation.
Mr. President, you are Vice-President of the
Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute, and
you are Italian and therefore from Rome.
10/18

08/11/2017

I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the ongoing efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor
aimed at prosecuting the perpetrators of international
crimes and at delivering justice to the victims. The
Prosecutor may rest assured of Senegal’s unwavering
support, as a State party to the Rome Statute, for the
Court’s mandate of fighting impunity and delivering
justice to the victims. There are, unfortunately, many
innocent victims, and they are clamouring for justice.
In this regard, we welcome the cooperation of the
Libyan Prosecutor-General’s Office thus far within the
framework of this investigation and the determination of
the Libyan Prime Minister to uphold the rule of law and
to cooperate with the Court. We call upon the Security
Council to also resolutely support the Prosecutor and
help her to carry out her investigations effectively
and efficiently, in accordance with the mandate she
has been assigned pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
Indeed, it is incumbent upon us all — collectively
and individually — to fulfil our obligation under that
resolution to cooperate with the ICC and to assist in
the arrest and trial of all individuals indicted of crimes
under the jurisdiction of the Court.
The delegation of Senegal echoes the concern
expressed by the Prosecutor about the cases of alleged
crimes committed against migrants and ongoing
hostilities among the parties to the conflict, as indicated
in the Prosecutor’s report. Although the security
situation is unstable, which has made it necessary to
limit of the scope of the investigation to certain parts
of the Libyan territory, the Office of the Prosecutor is
continuing its work and achieving important results,
such as the execution of the arrest warrant issued during
the proceedings against Mustafa Busayf Al-Werfalli.
On 1 August, the Prosecutor filed a sealed arrest
warrant with the Pre-Trial Chamber. On 15 August,
the Chamber made public the warrant for the arrest
of Mr. Al-Werfalli for his alleged involvement in the
execution of detainees. Similarly, an arrest warrant was
issued earlier this year for Al-Tuhami Khaled, while
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi
remain at large and are still being actively sought by
the Court.
All this testifies to the important progress achieved
by the Office of the Prosecutor in its investigation, as
well as to the determination of the Prosecutor to make
progress as quickly as possible on the task that the
Council has referred to her in the name of justice and
the fight against impunity.
17-37090

08/11/2017

The situation in Libya

The political and security situation in Libya
remains unstable and fragile and requires genuine
political will from both national and international
actors to reach a peaceful and lasting solution, on the
basis of resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011). In
this regard, we commend the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, whom we encourage to maintain
and strengthen the assistance he is providing to the
Office of the Prosecutor in the framework of the
investigation. We extend the same encouragement to
INTERPOL for its valuable contribution to the conduct
of the investigations, in particular in the search for
suspects. These cooperation efforts must be redoubled
if we want to promote dialogue between the parties and
to establish a culture of justice, which is the foundation
for lasting peace in Libya.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to recall that
our common goal of peace and security in Libya goes
hand in hand with the imperative of accountability and
delivering justice to the victims. To achieve this, the
international community, the Security Council and all
stakeholders must work together to create a stable and
secure environment underpinned by the rule of law.
Combating impunity in Libya, and elsewhere, is not up
to the International Criminal Court alone; we must all
fight it. I would like to conclude by quoting Prosecutor
Bensouda herself in her briefing today:
(spoke in English)
“Justice is an important component of sustainable peace.”
I should add that justice is a sine qua non condition for
sustainable peace.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We would like to
thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her comprehensive
briefing. We have taken note of the fourteenth report
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
which provides an update on activities regarding the
situation in Libya and which is not very encouraging,
unfortunately. According to the report, the situation in
Libya continues to be volatile, with clashes occurring
between various factions across the country, as well as
ongoing political instability, a fragile security situation
and a breakdown in the rule of law — all of which have
resulted in widespread abuses of human rights and
violations of international humanitarian law.

S/PV. 8091

We are deeply alarmed by the reports of unlawful
killings of civilians, as well as executions, abductions,
torture and prolonged detentions without trial or other
legal processes. We have learned from information
provided by the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya that in October alone there were 38 civilian
casualties, including 23 killed and 15 injured, as a result
of hostilities across Libya. We are also concerned about
the fact that hundreds of thousands of migrants and
refugees in Libya have suffered abuses and detentions
under inhumane conditions.
Kazakhstan believes that an effective and
credible Government is crucial to reinforcing Libya’s
commitment and capability for restoring order and
promoting the rule of law, in addition to addressing
impunity, protecting basic human rights and ensuring
justice for past violations. Every effort should be
made to overcome the protracted crisis and find a
political solution that sets Libya on the path to peace
and reconciliation. At the same time, to have effective
results, we realize that the Libyans themselves must take
a leading role in those efforts. To that end, the support
of the international community for Libya remains
vital in restoring stability and security throughout the
country. The United Nations has a key role to play in
that process.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The situation in Libya remains difficult and we
deplore the fact that people are being killed, including
civilians. We hope that the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salamé,
will do everything possible within the framework of
the plan he has presented to further develop a broadly
representative intra-Libyan dialogue under the auspices
of the United Nations. The United Nations will require
assistance and consolidated international support,
including from regional stakeholders. That assistance
must be based on respect for Libyan sovereignty, with
no hidden agendas. There is no alternative to achieving
reunification of the country and its State institutions
as quickly as possible, on conditions determined by
Libyans themselves, and the efforts to implement
international justice and prevent impunity must also
promote the achievement of those aims.
We have taken note of the fourteenth report of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC) on
the investigation of the situation in Libya. Going on the
report’s information, there have been no breakthroughs
on the main topics over the past six months. The ICC

17-3709011/18

S/PV.8091

The situation in Libya

continues to act selectively. In the past six years, not a
single case has been initiated dealing with the alleged
crimes committed by insurgents. The Prosecutor has
recused herself from the investigation of the civilian
casualties resulting from NATO strikes.
As before, there is still no information in the report
on the Court’s intentions with regard to the atrocities
perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). For example, the reports of terrorist attacks on
4 October on the court building in Misrata have merely
been noted, despite the fact that the Court should
be well aware of how important the United Nations
considers the work of bringing the ISIL terrorists to
justice. While the Court has expressed its concern
about the army’s actions in recent months in the Derna
area, it has made no attempt to bring charges against the
mujahidin, who for all practical purposes are holding
the local population hostage.
We have noted that the ICC has taken an interest
in the alleged crimes against refugees and migrants in
Libya, claiming that under certain circumstances some
of those crimes may fall within its jurisdiction. It is
clear that Libyan groups operating in the shadows and
the criminal networks in the Mediterranean region are
all involved in the black market of illegal migration. We
await information on the Court’s work in that regard.
With regard to the report’s attempts to once again
portray the Libyan dossier as a burden imposed by
the Security Council on the Court, our position is
unchanged. My delegation’s general conclusions with
respect to the Council’s referral of cases to the ICC,
which we have expressed in previous briefings by the
Prosecutor, remain the same.
Mr. Hasebe (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my appreciation to Prosecutor Bensouda for
her briefing and report. Japan is committed to the fight
against impunity and to supporting the International
Criminal Court (ICC), including the Office of the
Prosecutor, and we commend the accomplishments
the ICC has made so far. As the ICC’s largest financial
contributor, Japan has consistently supported it with
a view to ensuring that it can function effectively
and sustainably in promoting the rule of law, with the
support of the international community.
Japan believes that the ICC has contributed to
steady progress on international justice. However, since
the Court lacks its own enforcement authorities, the
cooperation of States is vital to its success, for it cannot
12/18

08/11/2017

function effectively or deliver justice without that
cooperation. Against that background, we welcome the
continued collaborative relationship between the Office
of the Prosecutor and the Libyan Prosecutor-General’s
Office. Prime Minister Serraj’s reaffirmation of
Libya’s commitment during meetings with Prosecutor
Bensouda to cooperating with the ICC was especially
encouraging. We hope that positive trend will yield
results in the near future.
Japan is closely following the situation in the wake of
the issuance of the arrest warrant for Mahmoud Mustafa
Busayf Al-Werfalli for alleged criminal responsibility
for war crimes under the Rome Statute. Japan stands
ready to fulfil its obligations under the Statute. With
regard to Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, it is regrettable that
he is not yet in the custody of the ICC, despite various
efforts by the Office of the Prosecutor. We encourage
the Libyan authorities and the international community
to cooperate fully with the ICC, pursuant to resolutions
1970 (2011) and 2259 (2015).
Japan is committed to supporting the implementation
of the action plan provided by Mr. Ghassan Salamé,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Libya. At the same time, we remain deeply concerned
about the ongoing violence and insecurity in Libya,
including the human rights violations committed by all
sides. That makes it more difficult for the Prosecutor’s
investigation to progress. In that context, we note
the Office of the Prosecutor’s analysis of possible
investigations of alleged crimes against migrants and
look forward to further updates.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Japan’s
continued support for the activities of the ICC. Japan
strongly believes that if we are to ensure that the
ICC can effectively promote the rule of law around
the world, more countries, including members of the
Council, should join it. At the same time, the ICC and
its States parties should continue to listen to the various
concerns expressed and make efforts to enhance the
Court’s universality, so that it can gain stronger support
for its work.
My delegation stands ready to work alongside the
ICC to that end, and we look forward to further tangible
progress on today’s agenda.
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
begin by joining others in welcoming the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, back to the Chamber today, and by thanking
17-37090

08/11/2017

The situation in Libya

her for her comprehensive briefing. We sincerely
appreciate the valuable work and tireless efforts of the
Court and its officials in all bodies. The work of the
Prosecutor continues to make a significant contribution
to holding the perpetrators of serious crimes of
international concern to account and to providing
justice for their victims. My Government would
particularly like to acknowledge her efforts in applying
an integrated gender perspective throughout her Office
and investigations, as well as in her report.
We continue to be deeply concerned about
the security and humanitarian situation in Libya.
Sadly, since we last met with the Prosecutor in May
(S/PV.7934), the situation of civilians, who are paying
the highest price for the ongoing conflict, has remained
fragile and precarious. A breakdown in the rule of
law has led to widespread human rights violations and
abuses and violations of international humanitarian law
by all parties to the conflict. In those circumstances,
the Office of the Prosecutor plays an important and
essential role. Sweden welcomes the efforts of the Office
to investigate the ongoing cases and to closely monitor
the situation throughout Libya. We also welcome its
efforts to bring new applications for arrest warrants
against those alleged to be responsible for violations or
abuses, should the evidence and relevant information
support such action. That is vital and crucial work in
the light of the continuing volatility and insecurity in
the country. Reports of violations and abuses must be
investigated, and those responsible must be brought to
justice. There should be no impunity.
In order to assist the Office of the Prosecutor in
fulfilling its mandate, the support and cooperation of
the Libyan Prosecutor-General’s office, the Libyan
authorities, States parties, Member States and all
other relevant entities is crucial. In addition, if it is to
successfully carry out its functions, including those
asked of it by the Council, the Office needs our full
political and financial support. It is essential that we
follow through on our decision to refer Libya to the
International Criminal Court, since the situation in the
country continues to constitute a threat to international
peace and security.
Sweden recalls the decision by the Security Council
to refer the Libya situation to the Court in 2011, and
reiterates its full support to the Office of the Prosecutor
to investigate the actions of all parties to the conflict
in Libya. That includes more recent crimes, such as
the case against Mahmoud Al-Werfalli. We support

S/PV. 8091

the Court’s call to the Libyan authorities to cooperate
with it and to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Werfalli
immediately. Regarding the case of Mr. Al-Tuhamy, we
note with concern the continued lack of information on
his whereabouts and reiterate our hope for his speedy
arrest and transfer to the Court. Libya and all Member
States are under an obligation to cooperate with the
ICC in that regard.
We heard from the High Commissioner for Refugees
last week about the grave exploitation and abuse faced by
refugees and migrants along the Central Mediterranean
route to Europe, including in Libya (see S/PV.8083). We
are alarmed by reports of arbitrary detentions, torture
and sexual and gender-based violence in migrant
detention centres, as well as in regular detention
centres. Greater international access is urgently needed
and should be granted. Re-establishing a permanent
United Nations presence in Libya will be important for
responding to those issues, and we welcome Special
Representative Salamé’s efforts in that regard. We share
the view of the Office of the Prosecutor that certain
crimes against refugees and migrants fall within the
jurisdiction of the Court, and we support the initiative
to explore the possibility of investigating crimes related
to human trafficking and smuggling networks.
Ensuring the rule of law, ending impunity and
providing accountability are essential to post-conflict
reconciliation and sustaining peace. The work of the
Prosecutor and the ICC plays an important role in
Libya in that regard. They have the full support of
my Government as they undertake this important but
difficult task.
Mr. Cheng Lie (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. Bensouda for her briefing. China has been closely
following the situation in Libya and its development.
It also supports all efforts conducive to stabilizing the
situation in the country and promoting the political
process. The international community should respect
Libya’s sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity, remain committed to advancing a Libyanled and Libyan-owned political process through the
good offices of the United Nations, and support the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, in his efforts to promote
the United Nations action plan for the resumption of
an inclusive Libyan-owned political process under the
facilitation and leadership of the United Nations.

17-3709013/18

S/PV.8091

The situation in Libya

We hope that all parties in Libya will be able to
settle their differences through inclusive political
dialogue, on the basis of the Libyan Political Agreement,
arrive at a solution that can accommodate the concerns
of all parties, promote national reconciliation,
restore State governance and strive to achieve peace,
stability and development as soon as possible. That
is a major prerequisite and basis for justice in Libya.
The international community should join forces to
provide concrete and effective assistance to the Libyan
peace process.
China’s position on the International Criminal
Court remains unchanged.
Mr. Abebe (Ethiopia): We thank the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court for her report and
briefing to the Security Council, pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011).
The continued violations of human rights committed
by all parties to the conflict in Libya remain a source
of concern. The killing and wounding of civilians,
as well as their abduction, torture, displacement and
arbitrary detention, continue unabated. Due to general
lawlessness and the weakness of judicial institutions,
ordinary crime is widespread, creating a sense of fear
and insecurity in Libya. We condemn all the attacks on
civilians and civilian facilities that continue to cause
civilian casualties and suffering.

08/11/2017

to bring all Libyans together so that they can agree
on a sustainable path to peace, stability and national
reconciliation, according to the United Nations action
plan for the resumption of an inclusive Libyan-owned
political process under the facilitation and leadership
of the United Nations, which has been endorsed by
the Security Council. We encourage all Libyans to
continue to work together in a spirit of compromise
and to engage constructively and meaningfully in the
inclusive political process set out in the action plan, so
as to bring about concrete results that could facilitate
its full implementation. While Libyans themselves
have the primary responsibility to ensure peace and
security, the international community, particularly the
Council, should continue to support their efforts in a
coordinated manner.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Let me also start by
thanking International Criminal Court (ICC) Prosecutor
Bensouda for her valuable update on her Office’s work
regarding the situation in Libya.
At the outset, I want to express once again
my country’s full support of the activities of the
International Criminal Court, which promotes the rule
of law and fights against impunity for perpetrators of
the most serious crimes.

The suffering of all Libyans, including the most
vulnerable groups, such as women, children, migrants
and refugees, must stop. Those responsible must also be
held accountable. It is important to fight the widespread
sense of impunity in Libya. In that regard, Ethiopia
continues to strongly support the position of the
African Union that it is vital to combat impunity while
respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Member States. We also believe that protecting civilians
and civilian infrastructures is critical. In that regard,
the capacity of Libyan State institutions, particularly
its judiciary and law-enforcement bodies, should be
strengthened, with the ultimate objective of ensuring
the rule of law.

During the reporting period, the security and
humanitarian situation in Libya continued to deteriorate.
We all saw numerous reports from various sources on
human rights abuses and violations, such as unlawful
killings, kidnappings and forced disappearance, torture
and others. Like in many other conflict situations,
people in Libya have grown accustomed to constant
clashes among armed groups and to the existence of
parallel institutions. In the past few months, Tripoli
has seen fighting between rival militias, including
shelling of the city’s main airport and surrounding
areas. The increasing use of heavy artillery and rockets
has resulted in high numbers of casualties, including
among civilians. We are especially concerned about
the situation in Derna, where protracted fighting has
reportedly gravely affected civilians.

The lasting solution to the problem of ending
Libyans’ suffering and the violations of their human
rights will be through a comprehensive political
settlement that meets the legitimate demands of all
Libyans. In that regard, we support the continued
diplomatic efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salamé,

We also condemn in the strongest terms the killing
of 36 people, whose bodies have been recently found in
Al-Abyar, some 70 kilometres east of Benghazi. A full,
proper and immediate investigation is needed to uncover
the truth. In this context, we echo the Prosecutor’s call
on all parties to the conflict to ensure respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law in accordance

14/18

17-37090

08/11/2017

The situation in Libya

with the provisions of the Rome Statute relating to the
responsibility of commanders and superiors to prevent
or repress the commission of crimes by their forces.
The next issue I would like to focus on is abuses
against migrants and refugees in official and unofficial
detention centres in Libya. I am referring to arbitrary
detention, torture and rape and other forms of
mistreatment. In our view, the activities of the Office
in the collection of information and evidence relating
to alleged crimes against those vulnerable groups may
help prevents such crimes and the illegal activities of
human trafficking and smuggling networks in Libya.
We strongly believe that difficult security or
political conditions cannot be permanently invoked by
any State to justify its non-cooperation with the ICC,
especially in situations referred to the Court by the
Security Council. It is completely evident to Ukraine,
as a country whose situation is under preliminary
examination in the ICC, that full cooperation with
the Court by all States parties and non-States parties,
including members of the Council, as well as concerned
regional and international organizations, is of the
utmost importance for the successful fulfilment of the
Court’s mandate.
We are also grateful to the Prosecutor for providing
additional information about ongoing cases against
Mr. Al-Werfalli Mr. Al-Tuhamy, Mr. Al-Qadhafi and
Mr. A1-Senussi. Without going into details, all of
these cases are being undermined by one similar and
crucial problem. On the one hand, the Court continues
to demonstrate its dedication to investigating crimes
under the Rome Statute, but on the other hand, those
in Libya with authority and control over the suspects
did not provide assistance to transfer them to the Court.
In that respect, we attach considerable importance to
Libya’s recent reaffirmation of its commitments to
uphold the rule of law and ensure accountability, as
well as to cooperate with the ICC. We look forward to
concrete steps from Libya, in accordance to its legal
obligations, to facilitate the surrender of suspects to
the ICC.
In the light of some recent positive developments
in the political dialogue, we would like to conclude
by emphasizing the necessity of the international
community further supporting the Libyan Government
of National Accord in its efforts to restore law and order
in the country, combat impunity and ensure the right
to justice for all victims. The active role of the Office

S/PV. 8091

in further discharging its mandate independently and
impartially will definitely accelerate that process.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
Bolivia wishes to thank your delegation, Mr. President,
for having convened this meeting. We also thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing. We extend our
support to Ms. Bensouda in the carrying out of her
tasks. We value the efforts the ICC has made since 2011
in the implementation of the review carried out through
resolution 1970 (2011) and we reiterate that its effective
implementation depends on the full collaboration of all
stakeholders within and outside of Libya.
In that regard, we call on the Libyan Government
of National Accord, the stakeholders and the countries
of the region to redouble their collaborative efforts
so that the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC can
conduct its investigative tasks. We also reiterate that
all States, regardless of whether they are States parties
to the Rome Statute, bear the primary responsibility of
taking action to contribute to facilitating of the Court’s
investigative tasks and thus preventing impunity.
We take due notice of the briefing and the activities
carried out by the Office of the Prosecutor during the
reporting period. We express our deep concern over
the news of extrajudicial killings, murder and arbitrary
detention in the current year that beset the affect
parties to the Libyan conflict. We urgently call on
the parties and armed groups to definitively cease all
violent acts. Any action that is contrary to international
criminal law can be investigated in order to identify
and penalize the responsible parties. With regard to the
Al-Werfalli case, we again call on the Government of
National Accord and all stakeholders to collaborate and
contribute to the work of the Office of the Prosecutor
during the investigations of the alleged activities.
We note with concern the repeated reports of the
use of sexual violence and harassment committed
against innocent civilians by the parties as tactics
of war. Moreover, there are reports of violations of
the rights of migrants, who are vulnerable to human
trafficking networks and are subject to slavery and
sexual exploitation. The investigations of the Office
of the Prosecutor can not only determine who is
responsible but, in the case of crimes against humanity,
they can exercise their competence to prosecute the
perpetrators. We hope that for the following report, we

17-3709015/18

S/PV.8091

The situation in Libya

will see significant progress on cases that are currently
being investigated.
The public circulation of reports linking the former
ICC Prosecutor, Luis Moreno Ocampo, and other
people associated with the Office of the Prosecutor
with activities of potential interference with the
ongoing investigation in Libya must be promptly
and thoroughly investigated in Court to determine
the scope of such actions. The integrity of the Court
is key to ensuring its credibility and effectiveness in
the eyes of the international community. We stress
that the ICC is a global endeavour in the interest of all
States, and its mission is critical to the strengthening of
international criminal law, peace and security, respect
for human rights and the assurance of due process. In
that regard, we call on all States that have not yet done
so, to ratify the Rome Statute with a view to achieving
its universalization.
We conclude by saying that absolutely nothing can
justify the commission of crimes against humanity, war
crimes or genocide, but we must recall once again that
what occupies the attention of the Council does so as
a direct consequence of regime change policies, the
result of which affect millions of people, not only in
Libya but worldwide.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.
I would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her important briefing to the Security Council and
for the clear and detailed information provided in the
report, particularly the details on the new cases and
the relevant arrest warrants. As Vice-President of the
Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of
the ICC, I am particularly conscious of the delicate
task that she has to discharge. Under Ms. Bensouda’s
determined guidance, the Office of the Prosecutor of
the ICC has made progress in many different areas, and
I would like to extend to her our strong appreciation
and full support.
The situation in Libya was unanimously referred
to the International Criminal Court by the Council
through resolution 1970 (2011). We are pleased to see
that the Prosecutor has made it one of the priorities
of her Office, with continuous attention to the crimes
that are committed in the country. We believe that the
activity of the Court can bring positive developments,
particularly if the Council remains united and
16/18

08/11/2017

committed to supporting Libya and helps to ensure that
justice is done in a fair and impartial manner. There
must no be impunity for war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed in Libya. Perpetrators must be
brought to justice. All pending arrest warrants issued by
the Court must be executed. It is also in the interest of
those accused of crimes to surrender to the jurisdiction
of the Court and to receive a fair trial.
The principle of complementarity entails that the
Court is a court of last resort. The ICC is ready to leave
cases to domestic authorities, but it is incumbent on
domestic authorities to comply with the provisions of
the Statute of the Court. There must be investigations
and persecutions. There must be a constant flow of
information with the Court. When the Court determines
that a case cannot be tried at the national level, domestic
authorities are under an obligation to comply with the
request of the Court.
In that respect, we welcome the positive and
constructive cooporation of the Libyan authorities
with the Office of the Prosecutor. At the same time,
we encourage all Libyans to cooperate with the Court
in all ongoing investigations. Italy will continue to
support the Office of the Prosecutor in its sensitive
work in all possible ways. There must be no place for
impunity, as accountability is crucial to reconciliation
and stabilization efforts.
We are pleased to learn that the report refers to
the good cooperation that the Office of the Prosecutor
has had with the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya and with the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ghassan Salamé. We also wish
to thank Ms. Bensouda for the information about the
investigation into the allegation of crimes against
migrants. Italy remains concerned about respect for
human rights in Libyan prisons and recalls existing
international obligations, including the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
We deplore the fact that insecurity in Libya has
been hampering the Court in carrying out some
investigations in the field. However, we are hopeful
that improvements can change the state of affairs and
create conditions conducive to allowing the Prosecutor
to visit Libyan territory. In that respect, let me reiterate
the need for a political solution to the crisis in Libya
under the framework of the Libyan Political Agreement.
Italy supports the efforts of the United Nations and the
action plan set out by Ghassan Salamé to that end, and
17-37090

08/11/2017

The situation in Libya

S/PV. 8091

continues to engage with the Presidency Council of the
Government of National Accord, led by Prime Minister
Serraj, to help it to address persistent challenges in
the country.

Some tangible and important measures have also been
adopted to promote cooperation and integration between
national justice and the ICC judges, as highlighted by
the ICC Prosecutor in several of her reports.

We note with extreme concern the increasing
level of violence registered on the ground in the past
few weeks. We condemn in the strongest terms recent
episodes such as the bombing in Derna and the killing
of 36 men in Al-Abyar, near Benghazi. They are
particularly worrisome in a phase in which the efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to give new impetus to the political process are gaining
traction. We therefore call on all Libyans to unite and to
work together in support of the political reconciliation
process, as laid out by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Salamé in his action plan.

We recognize the delay in prosecuting and bringing
the suspects to trial. However, that delay should not be
equated with the national judiciary’s unwillingness to
prosecute the perpetrators of crimes. Rather, it is due
to the security situation in Libya. That same situation
has prevented the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC
from carrying out its investigations within the Libyan
territory. We therefore underscore the fact that in
order for the national judiciary to meet its obligations
to deliver justice and promote the rule of law, the
international community should urgently assist the
Libyan authorities in overcoming the security crisis
in Libya, while at the same time promoting efforts to
ensure the success of the political dialogue. That can
be achieved by supporting efforts to consolidate and
operationalize security institutions and build State
institutions, which will enable Libya to promote security
and stability, control all factors and circumstances that
give rise to such violations, and confiscate the tools used
to commit crimes, in particular weapons. That would
clearly help the Libyan judiciary to hold perpetrators
accountable for the crimes committed and to prevent
the reoccurrence of such crimes and violations in the
light of the proliferation of weapons and terrorist and
outlaw groups. The rise in crime is reflected in the
various reports of the ICC Prosecutor.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that we believe that
the Council should adopt the most structured approach
in dealing with international criminal justice issues. In
that regard, as the Council knows, we shall continue to
consult with Member States to find solutions in favour
of broader discussions on the role of international
criminal justice and accountability for international
crimes in the activities of the Council. Any solution
that would enable such a discussion would be a step
forward. Justice and accountability need to become an
integral part of the strategy and of the preventive action
of the Council.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, it gives me great pleasure to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month. I would also like to to thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her important briefing.
The Libyan authorities are aware of their primary
responsibility to fight impunity and to render justice
throughout Libya. Our resolve to exercise our sovereignty
and national jurisdiction in prosecuting suspects does
not imply disrespect for the decisions of the ICC judges
or any lack of cooperation. Libya considers the Court to
be an important and supportive partner in the context
of complementarity between national and international
jurisdictions, as been demonstrated by a number of
meetings between the Office of the Prosecutor of the
ICC and the political and judicial authorities of Libya.

We recognize and understand the concern of the ICC
Prosecutor over the alleged crimes committed against
migrants. We recognize their rights and are well aware
of the degree of their humanitarian suffering owing to
insecurity and the ongoing proliferation of weapons
and militia. However, we note from the reports of the
Prosecutor and those of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya and other relevant international
organizations that the violations and crimes committed
against migrants in Libya continue to be a focus although
no attention is paid to combating human trafficking.
That in itself is one of the most appalling organized
crimes perpetrated by transnational criminal networks,
and must be addressed by the international community
in accordance with international humanitarian law; the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime; and the relevant

17-3709017/18

S/PV.8091

The situation in Libya

08/11/2017

Security Council resolutions. In that regard, we stress
that any attempt or request to return those migrants to
Libya represents a great violation of their rights, as they
might be exposed to dangerous practices owing to the
chaotic security situation in Libya.

a security and administrative environment that would
enable the judicial authorities to prosecute suspects
and guarantee the non-recurrence of violations. Failure
to ensure such support will only engender greater
violations and more crimes.

Accordingly, we hope that future reports will
include genuine procedural efforts to identify progress
in combatting these criminal networks in the countries
of origin and destination. It is well known that Libya is
a transit country that is suffering from security chaos.
Accordingly, if there were no criminal networks in
the countries of origin and destination, no crimes or
violations would be committed in transit countries.

Council members all surely know that the
investigation and prosecution of crimes allegedly
committed in Libya would promote justice, since
Libya is the scene of these crimes, some of which are
linked to other criminal activities. Its fragmentation
could therefore lead to the damage of evidence and the
obstruction of investigations, particularly given that
justice must be for all and not limited to a particular
case or suspect.

Finally, we know that the international community
seeks to see justice done and fight impunity, but
we cannot fully achieve that end in Libya if the
international community fails to support and reactivate
the professional security apparatus and to promote its
capabilities, since it is the sole guarantor of establishing

18/18

To conclude, one member of the Council referred to
the fact that Libya is suffering from Islamic terrorism.
We categorically object to that, and stress that terrorism
cannot be linked to any religion.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

17-37090
