United Nations

A/RES/56/197

General Assembly

Distr.: General
15 February 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 98 (d)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/56/561/Add.4)]

56/197. Convention on Biological Diversity
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 55/201 of 20 December 2000 on the Convention on
Biological Diversity, 1 in which it, inter alia, decided to proclaim 22 May, the date of
the adoption of the text of the Convention, as the International Day for Biological
Diversity,
Recognizing the importance of the adoption by the Conference of the Parties to
the Convention, in its decision EM-I/3 of 29 January 2000, 2 of the Cartagena
Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity, the subsequent
signature of the Protocol by one hundred and three parties to the Convention by
5 June 2001, and the ratification thereof or accession thereto by nine parties to date,
Expressing its appreciation for the generous offer of the Government of the
Netherlands to host the sixth meeting of the Conference of the Parties, and the third
meeting of the Intergovernmental Committee for the Cartagena Protocol, which will
be held at The Hague from 8 to 26 April 2002,
Urging the parties to the Convention to undertake thorough preparations to
advance progress on all issues that are included in the agenda of the sixth meeting of
the Conference of the Parties,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Executive Secretary of the Convention on
Biological Diversity, as submitted by the Secretary-General to the General
Assembly at its fifty-sixth session; 3
2.
Notes the outcome of the first meeting of the Ad Hoc Open-ended
Working Group on Access and Benefit-sharing, which addresses the appropriate
access to genetic resources and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out
of its utilization, hosted by the Government of Germany from 22 to 26 October
2001;
_______________
1

See United Nations Environment Programme, Convention on Biological Diversity Environmental Law
and Institution Programme Activity Centre), June 1992.
2
See UNEP/CBD/ExCOP/1/3 and Corr.1, part two, annex.
3
See A/56/126.

01 49273

A/RES/56/197

3.
Also notes the outcome of the second meeting of the Intergovernmental
Committee for the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, held at Nairobi from 1 to
5 October 2001;
4.
Welcomes the fact that one hundred and eighty-one States and one
regional economic integration organization have become parties to the Convention
on Biological Diversity, 1 and urges States that have not joined the Convention to
become parties to it, without further delay;
5.
Calls upon parties to the Convention to become parties to the Cartagena
Protocol on Biosafety2 as soon as possible;
6.
Encourages the conferences of the parties to, and the secretariats of, the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 4 the Convention on
Biological Diversity and the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
in those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly
in Africa, 5 and other international instruments related to the environment and
sustainable development, as well as relevant organizations, especially the United
Nations Environment Programme, including, as appropriate, the involvement of the
Environmental Management Group, to continue their work on enhancing mutual
complementarities, with full respect for the status of the secretariats of the
conventions and the autonomous decision-making prerogatives of the conferences of
the parties to the conventions concerned, to strengthen cooperation with a view to
facilitating progress in the implementation of those conventions at the international,
regional and national levels and to report thereon to their respective conferences of
the parties;
7.
Welcomes the decision of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention
on Biological Diversity regarding its programme of work for forest biological
diversity, and encourages the parties to and the secretariat of the Convention to
cooperate with the United Nations Forum on Forests, inter alia, with regard to
respecting, preserving and maintaining the knowledge, innovations and practices of
indigenous and local communities embodying traditional lifestyles, in accordance
with article 8 (j) and related provisions of the Convention;
8.
Takes note of the fact that the provisions of the Agreement on Traderelated Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 6 and the Convention on Biological
Diversity are interrelated, in particular with respect to intellectual property rights
and relevant provisions of the Convention, and invites the World Trade Organization
and the World Intellectual Property Organization, within their respective mandates,
to continue to explore this relationship, taking into account the ongoing work in
other relevant forums and bearing in mind decision V/26 B of the Conference of the
Parties; 7

_______________
4

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
Ibid., vol. 1954, No. 33480.
6
Ibid., vol. 1869, No. 31874.
7
See UNEP/CBD/COP/5/23 and Corr.1, annex III.
5

2

A/RES/56/197

9.
Invites all funding institutions and bilateral and multilateral donors, as
well as regional funding institutions and non-governmental organizations, to
cooperate with the secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity in the
implementation of the programme of work;
10. Requests the conferences of the parties to the multilateral environmental
conventions, when setting the dates of their meetings, to take into consideration the
schedule of meetings of the General Assembly and the Commission on Sustainable
Development so as to ensure the adequate representation of developing countries at
those meetings;
11. Calls upon parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity to settle
urgently any arrears and to pay their contributions in full and in a timely manner so
as to ensure continuity in the cash flows required to finance the ongoing work of the
Conference of the Parties, the subsidiary bodies and the Convention secretariat;
12. Looks forward to the contribution of the Convention on Biological
Diversity to the preparations for the World Summit on Sustainable Development,
bearing in mind the decisions taken by the Commission on Sustainable Development
at its tenth session;
13. Invites the Executive Secretary of the Convention on Biological
Diversity to report to the General Assembly on the ongoing work regarding the
Convention;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-seventh session
the sub-item entitled “Convention on Biological Diversity”.
90th plenary meeting
21 December 2001

3
