S/2014/31

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 January 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic
Summary
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612
(2005) and subsequent resolutions, is the first report on the situation of children and
armed conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic submitted to the Security Council and its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. Covering the period from 1 March
2011 to 15 November 2013, it provides information on grave violations against
children committed by all parties to the conflict in Syria.
The ongoing conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic has an alarming impact on
children. The present report highlights that the use of weaponry and military tactics
that are disproportionate and indiscriminate by Government forces and associated
militias has resulted in countless killings and the maiming of children, and has
obstructed children’s access to education and health services. Government forces
have also been responsible for the arrest, arbitrary detention, ill treatment and torture
of children. Armed opposition groups have been responsible for the recruitment and
use of children both in combat and support roles, as well as for conducting military
operations, including using terror tactics, in civilian-populated areas, leading to
civilian casualties, including children. The report also stresses the disappearance of
many children. All parties to the conflict have seriously hampered the delivery of
humanitarian assistance in areas most affected by the conflict, in particular across
conflict lines, including besieged areas. The report also highlights that children in
Syria have experienced a high level of distress as a result of witnessing the killing
and injuring of members of their families and peers, or of being separated from their
family and/or displaced.
The present report notes that the country task force remains constrained by
serious security and access limitations that present a challenge to the effective
monitoring, verification and reporting of grave violations against children inside the
Syrian Arab Republic. The report also contains a series of recommendations to halt
violations and increase the protection of children affected by the armed conflict in
the Syrian Arab Republic.

13-62707 (E) 290114

*1362707*

S/2014/31

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, which covers the period from 1 March 2011 to 15 November
2013, is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1612 (2005), 1882
(2009), 1998 (2011) and 2068 (2012), and provides information on grave violations
against children committed by parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
Access and security issues in the Syrian Arab Republic posed serious
limitations to the reporting of grave violations against children and high risks for
victims, witnesses and monitors. Consequently, the United Nations country task
force was able to independently monitor and report on a limited number of cases
inside Syria. The information in this report is based to a large extent on interviews
conducted by the United Nations, including numerous accounts from Syrian
refugees. Multiple accounts of victims and witnesses, both adults and children,
corroborated the overall trends documented in grave violations against children. The
information in this report is indicative only of the scale, the scope and the gravity of
grave violations committed against children in Syria.

II. Political and military developments
3.
Amid expressions of popular discontent over political and socioeconomic
rights, civilian protests erupted in Dar’a in March 2011, in response to the alleged
torture of children accused of painting anti-Government graffiti on public buildings.
Following the violent suppression by Government forces, 1 demonstrations spread to
other cities.
4.
Alongside President Bashar al-Assad’s announcement of reforms in April
2011, civilian-populated areas were shelled in military operations. The discovery of
arms in the Umari mosque of Dar’a in March 2011, security forces firing on
demonstrators in the city of Homs, and the assassination of the Syrian army general
Abdu Kidr al-Tallawi, as well as two of his children, in April 2011, further fuelled
the escalation of armed violence. In August 2011, the Free Syrian Army (FSA) was
formed by army deserters in Turkey as an umbrella for various armed factions. In
October 2011, the Syrian National Council, a coalition of opposition groups, which
in November 2012 became part of the National Coalition for Syrian Revolutionary
and Opposition Forces, commonly referred to as the Syrian Opposition Coalition
(SOC).
5.
National, regional and international efforts to broker negotiations to halt the
violence have been unsuccessful so far. On 23 February 2012, the United Nations
and the League of Arab States appointed Kofi Annan as Joint Special Envoy of the
United Nations and the League of Arab States on the Syrian crisis. However, a
ceasefire, agreed to on 12 April 2012, failed to hold. The United Nations
Supervision Mission in Syria (UNSMIS) was forced to suspend its activities by
August 2012. Lakhdar Brahimi was appointed Joint Special Representative of the
United Nations and the League of Arab States for Syria.
__________________
1 Throughout the report the term “Government forces”, unless specified otherwise, includes the

Syrian Armed Forces, the intelligence forces and associated militias, including the Shabiha and
the popular committees/National Defence Forces.

2/18

13-62707

S/2014/31

6.
From mid-2012, the violence escalated across the country. The Syrian Armed
Forces used air strikes, heavy weaponry and cluster munitions on civilian-populated
areas controlled by armed opposition groups. Pro-Government militias, initially
known as the Shabiha, were reportedly armed by the Government and began
operating alongside the Syrian Armed Forces. Community self-defence groups
known as the popular committees were formed by pro-Government communities to
protect neighbourhoods from armed opposition groups. Integrated under a national
structure called the National Defence Forces early in 2013, they remained under the
command of local national security agencies. In 2013, Government forces largely
withdrew from the Kurdish areas. Syrian Kurdish armed groups, including the
military wings of the Democratic Union Party (PYD), 2 took control of several of
these areas in the north-east.
7.
As of mid-2012, armed opposition groups had strengthened their control over
territories in the northern, eastern and southern governorates, with increased access
to weaponry, including through attacking Government installations. Improvised
explosives were used throughout the Syrian Arab Republic against Government
forces, resulting in civilian casualties, including children.
8.
Despite repeated attempts to form a unified military entity, armed opposition
groups increasingly fragmented into various military opposition alliances. FSA itself
remained divided despite efforts by its Supreme Military Command and aligned
brigades retained separate identities, agendas and commands. Radical ideologies
increasingly characterized some of the armed opposition with the presence of
foreign fighters and radical groups such as Jabhat al-Nusra (in early 2012), which
formally announced its allegiance to Al-Qaida in April 2013. By 2013, the landscape
of parties had completely changed, with increased presence of Al-Qaida-affiliated
armed groups, including Islamic State in Iraq and Sham (ISIS) and Jabhat al-Nusra,
and a proliferation of armed groups with varying command structures, political and
military objectives and tactics, combined with fluidity of front lines and hostilities
between armed groups themselves.
9.
The humanitarian situation continued to deteriorate; by early October 2013,
there were 6.5 million people displaced and in need of assistance inside the Syrian
Arab Republic, including approximately 3 million children, and over 2.1 million
Syrian refugees in neighbouring countries, including 1.1 million children. All
Palestine refugee camps in Syria have also been affected by the conflict. At least
50 per cent of Palestine refugees in Syria have been internally displaced and large
numbers have fled Syria.

III. Grave violations against children
10. Although the present report covers a period of almost three years, it describes
incidents of violations in the context of various phases that illustrated the Syrian
conflict. In its early stages, violations were committed largely by the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic, which led to the listing of the Government forces,
__________________
2 PYD is a political party led by Saleh Muslim and Asia Abd Allah. Associated Kurdish militias

are the Popular Protection Units (YPG) for men and (YPJ) for women, and the internal security
forces “Asaysh” (APK). These troops are associated with the Supreme Kurdish Committee
(DBK) and are led by the security committee that reports directly to DBK.

13-62707

3/18

S/2014/31

including the Syrian Armed Forces, the intelligence forces and the Shabiha militia in
the annexes to my annual report on children and armed conflict (A/66/782S/2012/261) for patterns of killing and maiming of children and for recurrent attacks
against schools and hospitals and protected personnel. As the conflict intensified
and the opposition became more organized, an increasing number of violations
committed by FSA-affiliated groups were documented, leading to the listing of FSA
in the annexes to my 2013 annual report on children and armed conflict (A/67/845S/2013/245) for the recruitment and use of children. In the same report, the
Government forces were also listed for grave sexual violence against children. At
the end of the reporting period, the proliferation of armed entities continued to pose
serious challenges to identifying perpetrators of violations and to humanitarian
access to affected populations. Known perpetrators of grave violations against
children include the Syrian Armed Forces; Syrian intelligence forces, such as the
Syrian Military Intelligence, Air Force Intelligence, the National Security Bureau,
the Political Security Directorate and the General Intelligence Directorate;
Government-associated militias such as the Shabiha; the popular committees (later
formalized under the National Defence Forces); Syrian Kurdish armed groups;
FSA-affiliated groups; Jabhat al-Nusra; Ahrar al-Sham; ISIS; and other independent
or unidentified armed groups.

A.

Recruitment and use of children
11. Armed opposition groups recruited and used children, both in support roles
and for combat. While no information was available on the recruitment of children
by Government forces, they were responsible for the arrest, arbitrary detention and
torture of children for their perceived or actual association with the opposition, and
for using children as human shields.
12. Throughout the reporting period, the United Nations received consistent
reports of recruitment and use of children by FSA-affiliated groups. The FSA Code
of Conduct of August 2012 did not mention or prohibit the recruitment and use of
children. However, monitoring and verification activities indicated that it was not
conducted as a policy or systematically. Interviews with children and their parents
indicated that the loss of parents and relatives, political mobilization and peer
pressure from families and communities, contributed to the involvement of children
with FSA-affiliated groups. Many boys stated that they felt it was their duty to join
the opposition. The absence of age-verification procedures or command order
prohibiting these acts also enabled child recruitment. In addition, participation of
children seems to have often been facilitated by an elder male relative. For instance,
in 2011, an FSA member from Homs governorate claimed that there were many
children in his group, including his 15-year-old son. Although children were trained
in using weapons and knives, the decision to arm a child was made on an individual
basis. Various armed opposition groups had different rules on the role of children,
and the age at which boys were given military training and permitted to carry arms
or participate in attacks. A 12-year-old boy from Idlib city, for example, claimed he
had been turned down from joining his brother in FSA in 2012 owing to his age.
13. Boys aged 12 to 17 years were trained, armed and used as combatants or to
man checkpoints. For instance, a 15-year-old boy reported having been recruited in
April 2012 by FSA in Tall Kalakh (Tartus governorate), and having participated in
military operations. After having been caught in a Government ambush, he fled the

4/18

13-62707

S/2014/31

area and left the group. Also indicative was the case of a 16-year-old boy from
Homs, who reportedly joined FSA in 2012 as a combatant. In March 2013, his
family reported to the United Nations that he was still fighting with the group. Two
boys, aged 16 and 17 years, were reportedly treated in a makeshift hospital in
February 2012 in the city of Aleppo after fighting under the command of FSA. FSA
also used children as cooks, porters, cross-border smuggling of arms, lookouts, spies
and messengers, as well as to clean weapons and prepare and load ammunition. For
instance, a 17-year-old boy from Al Qusayr, Homs governorate, was trained, given a
weapon and used to assist civilians trapped or wounded during shelling, and to bury
the dead. Cases were also documented of boys and girls being used by FSA in crossborder and cross-line medical evacuations for the delivery of medical supplies to
field hospitals and to assist emergency and trauma health services, which put them
at high risk.
14. Cases of recruitment and use of children by Syrian Kurdish armed groups were
documented in particular towards the end of the reporting period. Reports of boys
and girls aged 14 to 17 years associated with Syrian Kurdish armed groups in
Al Hassakeh governorate in support and combat functions were documented and
verified. Children have mostly been used to man checkpoints and transfer
information and military supplies, but they have also been trained to participate in
combat. A 17-year-old boy stated that he had joined Syrian Kurdish armed groups in
July 2012 to protect his neighbourhood in the border town of Al Qamashli
(Al Hassakeh governorate). He claimed that he had received training and later had
participated in military operations and guarded checkpoints. Allegations were also
received of children associated with Jabhat al-Nusra and ISIS, but no cases could be
verified at the time of writing the present report.
15. Of particular concern were cases of recruitment or attempted recruitment of
children within refugee populations in neighbouring countries. The majority of
incidents were related to recruitment by FSA-affiliated groups or Syrian Kurdish
armed groups. The lack of education or job opportunities and peer pressure were
identified as key factors leading to the recruitment of refugee children.
16. The United Nations did not receive reports of children having been formally
recruited by Government forces. However, Government forces, including the
Shabiha militia and the popular committees/National Defence Forces, reportedly
intimidated and seized young males, including those under the age of 18, to join
their ranks at checkpoints and during raids in pro-Government and contested areas.
In one instance in July 2012, a man reported to the United Nations that the Syrian
Armed Forces had tried to recruit his 16-year-old son while they were passing a
checkpoint in Deir ez-Zor governorate.
17. The United Nations also gathered reports of the use of children as human
shields during Government forces ground operations, particularly ones that were
carried out in 2011 and 2012. For example, during Ramadan in 2011 in Kafr Nubl
(Idlib governorate), Government forces reportedly used civilians, including at least
eight children, as human shields, threatening to kill the children if the opposition did
not surrender; the fate of the eight children remains unknown. In April 2012, the
Syrian Armed Forces reportedly invaded Deir Balbi (Homs governorate) and forced
women and children into the street. As FSA groups approached the town, civilians,
including children, were reportedly forced to line up and stand between the tanks
and soldiers of the Syrian army to dissuade FSA groups from attacking. In March

13-62707

5/18

S/2014/31

2012, in Homs city, the Syrian Armed Forces reportedly abducted children from
schools and marched them in the streets with loudspeakers announcing their arrival
and informing potential attackers not to fire as they had children with them. In
August 2012, in Kuferzita village, Hama governorate, the Syrian Armed Forces
reportedly arrested a large number of children, both boys and girls, mainly between
the ages of 10 and 12, and used them as human shields. Children were also forced to
face Government tanks, sing pro-Government songs and organize a demonstration in
favour of the President of the Syrian Arab Republic under threat that they would be
arrested or detained. The Syrian Armed Forces reportedly abducted approximately
20 of these children, who were released a week later in a state of shock and with
marks of torture.
Detention of children for alleged association with armed groups
18. Children have been arrested, detained, ill treated and tortured in detention
facilities, including illegal facilities, by Government forces in large-scale arrest
campaigns, particularly in 2011 and 2012. Children have been arrested for their or
their relatives’ actual or perceived participation in demonstrations or support to
armed opposition groups. The United Nations collected reports of children who
were arrested in their homes, schools and hospitals and in the streets, and at
checkpoints in Dar’a, Idlib, Homs, Aleppo, Deir ez-Zor and Damascus governorates.
Children arrested in 2011 and 2012 reportedly transited through multiple detention
facilities, and were often held in intelligence forces detention facilities, sometimes
for months.
19. Some detention facilities, such as schools, hospitals, private homes and
checkpoints, did not meet the international minimum standards on juvenile justice.
Multiple accounts of children and adult witnesses indicate that the majority of
children were held in the same cells as adults, and that children as young as 11 years
old suffered ill treatment and acts tantamount to torture to extract confessions or
humiliate them or to pressure a relative to surrender or confess. Ill treatment and
acts tantamount to torture reportedly included beatings with metal cables, whips and
wooden and metal batons; electric shocks, including to the genitals; the ripping out
of fingernails and toenails; sexual violence, including rape or threats of rape; mock
executions; cigarette burns; sleep deprivation; solitary confinement; and exposure to
the torture of relatives. Reports indicate that children were also suspended from
walls or ceilings by their wrists or other limbs, were forced to put their head, neck
and legs through a tire while being beaten, and were tied to a board and beaten. For
example, a 16-year-old boy reported being arrested by the Syrian Armed Forces in
March 2012 and detained with approximately 20 other children. Children and adults
were beaten with metal bars, their fingernails were pulled out and their fingers were
cut; or they were beaten with a hammer in the back, sometimes until death.
20. Access to children detained was largely denied to the United Nations and
humanitarian actors. In addition, family members of children detained often did not
receive any information on their whereabouts.
21. While there is limited information available, allegations were received that
armed opposition groups also controlled detention facilities in which children
perceived to be pro-Government suffered ill treatment and torture.

6/18

13-62707

S/2014/31

B.

Killing and maiming of children
22. At the time of writing the present report, the United Nations estimated that
more than 100,000 individuals had been killed, including more than 10,000 children,
and many more injured since March 2011. The United Nations gathered reports on
children who were injured during hostilities due to heavy shelling and aerial
bombardments. In some cases the injuries consisted of multiple traumas caused by
burns, shrapnel wounds, the severing of limbs or spinal cord injuries. The limited
treatment options sometimes required amputations, which in turn led to infections,
paralysis and/or permanent disabilities.
23. Throughout 2011 and 2012, children as young as 11 years old were among
anti-Government protestors who were reportedly injured or shot dead by
Government forces in Dar’a, Homs, Idlib, Aleppo, Damascus, Hama and Deir
ez-Zor governorates. In one case, on 12 December 2011, a 16-year-old boy
participating in a demonstration in the Old City of Homs was shot in the back by a
Government sniper and subsequently paralyzed. A witness at a demonstration in
Idlib governorate in June 2012 claimed that he had taken two boys aged 12 and
17 years, who had been shot at by Government forces, to a hospital, where they had
subsequently died.
24. The targeting of and military activities in residential areas led to the killing
and maiming of children. For instance, in July 2011 a 14-year-old boy carrying
bread out of a bakery was reportedly killed by a sniper in Homs governorate. A
father reported that, in August 2011, in the Khaldieh area of Homs, his sevenmonth-old son was shot in the neck by a sniper positioned at a Syrian Air Force
checkpoint opposite his home. The killing and maiming of children by Syrian
Armed Forces and Shabiha elements was also reported in the context of ground
operations, including during house-to-house searches for opposition members.
Government forces also reportedly used indiscriminate weapons with
disproportionate force. From July 2012 on, consistent reports described the use of
cluster munitions and ground-to-ground missiles or “barrel” bombs on civilian
areas. Thermobaric bombs were used in Aleppo city during 2012, which destroyed
entire blocks of residential buildings. In addition, numerous reports of the use of
expanding bullets against children were received.
25. In 2012 and 2013, Government forces blockaded villages and cities and
conducted intensive shelling and air strikes, killing and maiming children in
Al Hassakeh, Aleppo, Damascus, Dar’a, Hama, Homs, Idlib and Latakia
governorates. In one incident on 26 September 2013, a 10-year-old girl was killed
and her four brothers, aged 4 to 10 years, were maimed during the bombing of
Hayya village, Aleppo governorate. In another incident in September 2012, in
Khirbet Al Ghazaleh (Dar’a governorate) heavy shelling by Government forces hit a
group of fleeing women and children, reportedly killing two children and severely
injuring two children. During the battle for Al Qusayr (Homs governorate) in May
2013, witnesses consistently reported indiscriminate, disproportionate shelling and
the use of snipers, against fleeing civilians. Government airstrikes repeatedly
targeted internally displaced persons (IDP) camps near the Turkish border; for
example, on 25 June 2013, Bab al-Salam camp. At the time of writing the present
report, intermittent hostilities, including mortar shelling and airstrikes, continued in
and around the Palestinian camps of Yarmouk, Husseiniyah, Sbeineh, Barzeh, Jobar,
Qaboun, Khan Eshieh and Dar’a.

13-62707

7/18

S/2014/31

26. Children were also the victims of mass killings allegedly committed by
Government forces in Dar’a, Hama, Homs and Tartus governorates, mostly in 2012
and 2013. On 25 May 2012, in Al Houleh district (Homs governorate) over
100 individuals, including at least 49 children, were reportedly killed; most were
shot at close range. The United Nations spoke with an eyewitness who stated that
his wife and three children (two boys aged five and eight years, and one girl aged
three years) were killed in front of him, while his 10-year-old daughter was hit by a
bullet and one son was still missing. Children were also reportedly among the
dozens of victims of mass killings in the towns of Al Bayda and Baniyas (Tartus
governorate) on 2 and 3 May 2013. In several of these instances, children appeared
to have been killed in their homes, shot at close range.
27. During the first two years of the conflict, the majority of incidents of killing
and maiming of children were attributed to Government forces. However, mainly
owing to increased access to heavy weapons and the use of terror tactics, armed
opposition groups increasingly engaged in such acts during 2013.
28. Children were the victims of mass killings in Latakia governorate that were
committed by a coalition of armed opposition groups allegedly including Ahrar
al-Sham, ISIS, Jabhat al-Nusra, Jaish al-Muhajireen wal-Ansar and Suqour al-Izz
during the so-called Barouda offensive against Alawite villages on 4 August 2013.
At least 18 children, including boys and girls under the age of 10, were killed and an
unknown number of children were maimed. Most children were shot in their houses
or while trying to flee with family members. In some instances, civilians reported
that armed opposition groups tried to relocate civilians before launching operations.
In most incidents, however, FSA-affiliated and other armed groups conducted
military operations in densely populated areas, leading to the displacement and
civilian casualties, including children. Armed opposition groups reportedly used
snipers, mortars, rockets and improvised explosive devices in residential areas.
29. Armed opposition groups also engaged in the summary execution of children.
Lack of access, including for security reasons, has prevented the United Nations
from systematic documentation. Trends are believed to be much higher than the
number of recorded cases. For instance, in 2011 in Damascus governorate, FSA
elements reportedly killed a 16-year-old boy, who had allegedly been coerced to
work with the Government when his father was detained by Government forces. The
United Nations also received reports of children killed by Jabhat al-Nusra,
including, a 16-year-old boy who was shot dead in April 2013 in Al Hassakeh
governorate. Also in Al Hassakeh governorate, a 14-year-old boy was reportedly
shot dead by elements of Syrian Kurdish armed groups associated with PYD during
a demonstration of another Kurdish faction.
30. Children were also caught in cross-fire between Government forces and armed
groups, or between armed groups themselves. For instance, in August 2013, in an
attack by Jabhat al-Nusra in Al Hassakeh governorate, three boys, aged 15 to
16 years, who were manning a checkpoint of Syrian Kurdish armed groups
associated with PYD, were severely injured. In May 2013, a 13-year-old girl was
injured in the cross-fire between Government forces and FSA elements while
attempting to flee Al Qusayr.
31. According to credible information, a number of mortar attacks in and around
Damascus killed at least 9 children and injured at least 43 in November 2013. For
example, on 11 November, four children and a bus driver were reportedly killed and
four children and two superintendents were injured after a mortar hit a school bus
outside a school in the Bab Sharqi area of Damascus.

8/18

13-62707

S/2014/31

32. In addition, the Syrian Ministry of the Interior has shared with the United
Nations its records on children who allegedly were killed or injured by armed
opposition groups in various governorates. According to those figures, at least
130 children were killed, including in shelling, and by gunshots and summary
executions, and at least 118 children were injured between 10 November 2011 and
22 December 2013.
33. The United Nations Mission to Investigate Allegations of the Use of Chemical
Weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic, in its report on the alleged use of chemical
weapons in the Ghouta suburb of Damascus on 21 August 2013 (A/67/997S/2013/553), concluded that chemical weapons were used on a large scale, resulting
in numerous casualties, particularly among civilians, including many children. The
report also stated that surface-to-surface rockets containing the nerve agent sarin
were used in Ein Tarma, Mo’adamiyah and Zamalka in Rif Dimashq. In addition,
the United Nations received indications of further use of chemical weapons,
reportedly causing child casualties in Aleppo, Homs, Idlib and Damascus
governorates, but was not in a position to confirm these allegations or to identify
perpetrators.

C.

Sexual violence against children
34. Sexual violence in relation to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic is
believed to be largely underreported owing to fears of reprisals and social
stigmatization, combined with the lack of safe and confidential response services.
Sexual violence against girls and women, or the fear of sexual violence, was
reported as one of the reasons for which families were internally displaced or fled
Syria.
35. The United Nations documented sexual violence against children while
detained by Government forces in formal or informal detention facilities. Sexual
violence was reportedly used to humiliate, harm, force confessions or pressure a
relative to surrender. Incidents of sexual violence or threats of sexual violence were
perpetrated mostly by members of the Syrian intelligence services and the Syrian
Armed Forces against persons perceived to be part of or affiliated with the
opposition. Sexual violence reportedly included electric shocks to, or burning of, the
genitals, and the rape of boys and, in a few instances, of girls. Boys in detention
were also sexually mocked and humiliated, and threatened with the rape of family
members. A 16-year-old boy from Idlib governorate, for example, reported that, in
March 2012, he was arrested with five other boys between the ages of 13 and
15 years at a checkpoint near his school and detained in a centre run by intelligence
forces. The boy reported that he witnessed his 14-year-old male friend being
sexually assaulted and then killed. In another example, the United Nations gathered
information on the medical treatment of two boys, aged 15 and 16 years, who had
been arrested in Douma, Rif Dimashq, in July 2012, and detained for three months
in the Air Force Intelligence Centre in Damascus, where they were allegedly
sexually assaulted.
36. The United Nations also received reports of allegations of rape, including gang
rape, and other forms of sexual violence against women and girls, including in the
presence of relatives, by Government forces, in particular at checkpoints or during
incursions and house searches of families perceived to be pro-opposition.
Individuals in Idlib governorate reported that they or their neighbours had housed or
helped a number of young female rape victims fleeing from Bab Amr district (Homs

13-62707

9/18

S/2014/31

governorate) following ground operations by Government forces in August 2012. In
another documented case, the Syrian Armed Forces were searching a neighbourhood
for civilians involved in anti-Government demonstrations in Homs governorate in
July 2012, but instead they arbitrarily arrested a 14-year-old girl, detained her over a
six-month period and raped her.
37. Allegations of sexual violence by armed opposition groups were also received,
but the United Nations was unable to further investigate them at the time of writing
owing to lack of access.
38. Gender-based sexual violence and exploitation and the general vulnerability of
children displaced within and outside the Syrian Arab Republic to such abuses
remained of grave concern and are among the most worrisome consequences of the
humanitarian crisis resulting from the conflict in Syria.

D.

Attacks on schools and hospitals
39. Schools and hospitals have been seriously affected by the conflict in the Syrian
Arab Republic and disproportionally targeted by all parties. Attacks on schools and
hospitals, their widespread military use and the targeting of teachers and medical
personnel by all parties have severely disrupted children’s right to access to
education and health services. In addition, indiscriminate Government airstrikes and
shelling by armed opposition groups on populated areas damaged or destroyed
education and health facilities.
40. As at October 2013, according to Government statistics, more than 3,000 of
the 22,000 schools in the country had been damaged or destroyed. More than 1,000
schools were being used as IDP shelters. An estimated 2.26 million children in the
Syrian Arab Republic were not attending school or were attending irregularly. More
than 52,500 teaching staff (22 per cent) and 523 school counsellors (18 per cent) did
not report to work. Approximately 1,615 schools in Syria are operating on double
shifts. Access to education for Palestine refugee children has also been
compromised. At the time of reporting, only 39 of the 118 schools of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East were
operating, some on a triple shift system, while 71 schools were closed, with 8 being
used as IDP shelters and another 8 partially functioning, which were also being used
as IDP shelters.
41. In 2011, Government forces reportedly targeted schools where students and
teachers were believed to be participating in anti-Government demonstrations.
Witnesses reported that schools were damaged or destroyed, and many
schoolchildren and teachers were arrested at school. Government forces also
attacked schools with artillery, and positioned snipers in school facilities in
Damascus, Homs, Hama, Aleppo and Dar’a governorates. In one incident in
September 2011 in Al Qusayr, a Shabiha element allegedly shot at a school building
from the playground, killing a 15-year-old girl and injuring several children. On
12 December 2012, according to an 11-year-old boy from Daraya (Damascus
governorate), his schoolmate was shot dead while running away from Government
forces shooting at his school, reportedly killing and injuring more children. At the
end of 2011, and increasingly throughout 2012 and 2013, schools were also hit by
Government air strikes and heavily shelled, mostly in Aleppo, Dar’a, Hama, Homs

10/18

13-62707

S/2014/31

and Idlib governorates. For instance, in December 2012, five children were killed in
an air strike on the public school of Al Houleh (Homs governorate).
42. Schools have also been used as detention centres, mostly by Government
forces. For example, six boys from Kafr Nabl (Idlib governorate) were reportedly
arrested in March 2012 at a checkpoint and detained for 11 days by the Syrian
Armed Forces and Shabiha in a local school.
43. The United Nations also received information on the destruction of schools
during incursions or raids on villages by armed opposition groups. In February
2013, two schools were reportedly used as military bases by Jabhat al-Nusra
combatants in Tall Brak and Al Hol (Al Hassakeh governorate). In May 2013, two
schools were reportedly looted by FSA elements in Hama, resulting in their closure
and the interruption of classes for about 1,500 students. Additional information on
summary executions of teachers, including in front of their students, by radical
armed groups was also received.
44. All parties had used schools as military barracks, operational bases, snipers
postings or detention facilities, including while children were attending classes,
putting them at extreme risk of being attacked. In Aleppo, a primary school
allegedly partially used by an FSA group as a base was targeted by Government
forces in May 2012, injuring 15 children aged 6 to 12 years. Later in 2012, FSA
groups reportedly used two schools as operational bases in Salahuddin area (Aleppo
governorate) and three schools as weapons storage houses and military bases in
Al Qusayr (Homs governorate), interrupting the education of about 2,100 children.
In addition, since mid-2013, ISIS in northern Syria has been attempting to control
the curriculum in schools and has set up Islamic schools in which children are
reportedly indoctrinated to fight for “jihad”.
45. In November 2013, several attacks were reported on schools in Damascus.
Mortar rounds reportedly hit school complexes in the Al Dweila, Bab Sharqi and
Al Qassa areas of Damascus on 3 and 11 November, respectively, killing children
and school personnel. On 13 November, fearing further attacks, the Ministry of
Education suspended teaching in these affected areas for three days.
46. According to information shared with the United Nations by the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic, at least 3,004 schools have been destroyed since the
beginning of the conflict and 1,068 schools, which account for 20 per cent of all
schools in Syria, have been transformed into shelters, reportedly depriving almost
2 million children access to education. The Government also shared records on
28 attacks on schools and school buses, which were allegedly perpetrated by armed
opposition groups between 20 November 2012 and 22 December 2013.
47. Reports indicate that Government forces were the main perpetrators of attacks
against hospitals and other health-care infrastructure, mainly opposition-run
makeshift health facilities and of threats and attacks against medical personnel. In
addition, Government forces used a number of hospitals for military purposes,
erecting checkpoints at their entrance, interfering with the work of medical staff,
arresting patients and health personnel and posting snipers on their rooftops. Snipers
were reportedly posted on the roof of both public and private hospitals in Homs
governorate. Reports also indicate that medical personnel and the provision of
health care were instrumentalized by Government forces to gain military advantage

13-62707

11/18

S/2014/31

over the opposition and deny access to medical care to both combatants and
civilians perceived to be pro-opposition.
48. Due to fear of detention, mistreatment or execution by Government forces,
opposition health networks established temporary field hospitals in private homes
and mosques. Multiple accounts of medical personnel or volunteers working in
those facilities indicate that Government forces repeatedly targeted and shelled
makeshift or regular hospitals in opposition-controlled areas, as well as ambulances,
resulting in patients and medical personnel being killed or injured, but also in damage
to medical infrastructure and supplies. For example, on 13 September 2013, the
“Al-Nur” field hospital in Yabrud (Homs governorate) was shelled by a Syrian
Armed Forces aircraft; at least eight patients were killed.
49. Numerous accounts describe instances where Government forces used health
facilities to identify injured opposition members, supporters or their relatives, or
denied access to medical care to civilians, including children, perceived to be from
opposition-controlled areas. For example, Albir Hospital in Al Rastan, Homs
governorate, was repeatedly attacked by the Syrian Armed Forces. In January 2012,
the hospital was reportedly surrounded by tanks. Soldiers arrested about 25 persons
and allegedly executed them at the hospital entrance. The same hospital was later
partially used as a military base by Government forces. In August 2013, the
continued presence of military personnel reportedly led to a 70 per cent decline of
consultations by patients.
50. Injured opposition fighters and civilians, including children, admitted to
Government hospitals in perceived pro-opposition areas in Aleppo, Dar’a, Homs
and Idlib governorates were reportedly exposed to arrest, detention, ill treatment and
acts tantamount to torture by civilian doctors, and/or elements of Government
forces. Reports also indicate that civilians perceived to be affiliated with the
opposition were in many instances prevented from crossing Government
checkpoints or entering a hospital to seek emergency medical treatment. In
December 2011, for example, the Syrian Armed Forces reportedly erected a barrier
to control access to Ibn Sina Hospital in Rif Dimashq. Medical personnel also felt at
risk of arrest, detention, ill treatment or execution if they did not cooperate with
orders to refrain from treating those perceived as pro-opposition. The United
Nations also gathered information on arrests of medical personnel for treating
civilians perceived to be with the opposition.
51. The United Nations also received reports on instances where armed opposition
groups denied medical treatment to injured pro-Government fighters. Misuse of
ambulances by elements of the armed opposition was also documented. In addition,
it was documented that, on several occasions in 2012, FSA used ambulances in Idlib
governorate to cross Government checkpoints.
52. According to records shared by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
with the United Nations for this report, 63 hospitals, 471 health centres and
412 ambulances have been targeted since the beginning of the conflict. In addition,
240 medical staff members allegedly have been killed. The Government alleges that
armed opposition groups were responsible for these attacks.
53. According to a report of the Syrian Ministry of Health of July 2013, 60 per
cent of public hospitals had been affected by the conflict, including 38 per cent of
which were out of service and 22 per cent damaged. In addition, 38 per cent of all

12/18

13-62707

S/2014/31

public health centres and 92 per cent of public ambulances were either damaged or
destroyed. As at October 2013, ongoing fighting had reportedly forced the closure of
12 of the 23 health clinics providing services to Palestine refugees in the Syrian
Arab Republic. In Homs, for example, 50 per cent of all doctors were believed to
have fled. In the Aleppo area, 36 doctors remained practising, compared to 5,000
before the conflict.

E.

Abduction of children
54. The abduction of civilians, including children, has become a prominent feature
of the Syrian conflict. The United Nations received several reports of abduction of
children by pro-Government militias or armed opposition groups in exchange for
ransom or the release of prisoners, or as pressure on relatives perceived as
supporting the opposing party. In many cases, the whereabouts of these children
remain unknown. For example, a 17-year-old boy was abducted in Homs
governorate by elements of the Shabiha outside his home in February 2013. In
another incident, in July 2013, a 15-year-old girl was abducted by armed elements
while fleeing with her family from Abu Al Zuhur, Idlib governorate. She was
released in exchange for the family’s car and money. Approximately 50 children
were reportedly among the 200 persons taken hostage by several opposition armed
groups during the “Barouda” offensive, which began on 4 August 2013 in Latakia
governorate. At the time of writing this report, their location and the groups holding
the hostages remained unknown.

F.

Denial of humanitarian access
55. Despite the achievements of humanitarian actors and the continued scaling up
of the humanitarian response, access to areas of Rif Dimashq, including
Mo’adamiyah, Yarmouk and Hajar Al Aswad, and Al Hassakeh, Al Raqqa, Aleppo,
Dar’a, Deir ez-Zor, Hama, Homs, Idlib and Quneitra governorates, remained
challenging at the time of writing this report. Constraints were mainly due to
insecurity, fluid frontlines and checkpoints erected by all parties, as well as
administrative impediments. The United Nations has repeatedly called for
unimpeded humanitarian access to populations across the country. As at October
2013, an estimated 6.5 million internally displaced people, including approximately
3 million children, as well as hosting communities and refugees from Iraq and
Palestine, were in need of humanitarian assistance.
56. Both Government forces and armed opposition groups had been keeping areas
under siege for months, thereby impeding humanitarian access to civilians,
including children. Several areas in Rif Dimashq, such as Mo’adamiyah and East
Ghouta, had reportedly been under siege by Government forces since October 2012,
depriving more than 1 million civilians of urgent humanitarian assistance. In
addition, the Yarmouk and Sbeineh camps for Palestine refugees had also been
sealed off, preventing assistance to affected Palestine refugees. The old city of
Homs had reportedly been under siege by both Government forces and armed
opposition groups since the beginning of 2012, and no humanitarian assistance had
been delivered to the besieged population since August 2012. Also, in Nubbul and
Al Zahra’ villages (northern Aleppo governorate), more than 35,000 people had
reportedly been besieged by FSA-affiliated and other armed opposition groups

13-62707

13/18

S/2014/31

including Ahrar al-Sham, Kathaib al-Haq, Nooreldin al-Zenki Brigades, Jabhat
al-Nusra and ISIS, and deprived of access to basic commodities and humanitarian
assistance since the beginning of 2013.
57. The increasing numbers of checkpoints and incidents involving the diversion
of humanitarian supplies by all parties to the conflict hampered the regular supply of
food and other humanitarian items across the country. Medical supplies entering
areas under the control of armed opposition groups had been routinely obstructed by
Government forces. Contents of medical kits, including essential obstetric care, lifesaving and surgical equipment, were removed at checkpoints, on the basis of the
argument that these items could help treat injured opposition fighters. In addition,
the Government imposed lengthy bureaucratic procedures for humanitarian
personnel, logistics and supplies, including in the delay or non-issuance of visas,
permits for armoured vehicles and authorization for travel within the Syrian Arab
Republic.
58. According to information shared by the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, a set of new measures have been taken recently to facilitate humanitarian
access across the country. New mechanisms for granting authorizations have been
put in place, including new procedures for dispatches from United Nations
warehouses, which are however being implemented on an ad hoc basis. In addition,
progress, sometimes modest, has been made in the entry of humanitarian personnel,
mobility and deployment of personnel into the country and the dispatch of
humanitarian supplies and services, including mobile health units, medical supplies
and surgical equipment.
59. The fragmentation of armed opposition groups made it increasingly difficult to
negotiate safe access across conflict lines. Jabhat al-Nusra and other unidentified
armed groups had routinely attacked humanitarian convoys in the reporting period.
For instance, in June 2013, Jabhat al-Nusra reportedly looted three humanitarian
trucks containing 3,000 food baskets between Al Mayadin, Deir ez-Zor governorate,
and Al Hassakeh city, Al Hassakeh governorate, and a truck transporting medicine
and vaccines from the World Health Organization and the Ministry of Health in
Saraqeb near Idlib. In June 2013, four trucks carrying 160 tons of humanitarian
assistance were temporarily hijacked and looted by elements of Al-Khandak in Idlib
governorate.
60. Humanitarian workers, both national and international, have been intimidated,
threatened, arrested, detained, injured or killed. Since the beginning of the conflict
to the time of writing the present report, 25 Syrian Arab Red Crescent volunteers
have been killed, impacting the delivery of essential life-saving supplies and
services. On 13 October 2013, seven humanitarian staff (six from an international
agency and one national NGO staff), were abducted in Idlib governorate; four of
them were released, while the whereabouts of the three others remained unknown at
the time of writing. In addition, a total of 17 United Nations staff were abducted in
the reporting period. In one incident in May 2013, an armed opposition group under
a commander named Abu Hamza temporarily abducted eight United Nations staff
members near Aleppo, and stole a United Nations armoured vehicle. As at
31 October 2013, 13 United Nations national staff had been killed, while another
22 remained detained, missing or abducted.

14/18

13-62707

S/2014/31

IV. Advocacy and dialogue with parties to conflict to prevent
and halt grave violations against children
61. At the invitation of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, my Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, Leila Zerrougui, visited Syria
twice, in December 2012 and July 2013.
62. The establishment of a functioning monitoring and reporting mechanism on
grave violations against children to allow a thorough follow-up to the listing of
parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic was the priority of her first visit.
Subsequently, a United Nations country task force on monitoring and reporting was
established with the consent of the Government on 6 March 2013. My Special
Representative also reached out to both the Government and FSA, calling for their
commitment to end and prevent all grave violations against children.
63. On 14 March 2013, the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic shared a
report on grave violations against children in the Syrian Arab Republic with the
United Nations country task force, highlighting measures it had taken to respond to
the impact of the conflict on children, including education for displaced children
and the rebuilding of damaged schools. While advocating for a formal structure to
be put in place to address grave violations against children, the country task force
regularly raised its concerns with the Government regarding the scale of violations
against children and the need to put in place prevention mechanisms.
64. To develop preventive measures to protect children against grave violations,
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic adopted a series of legislative reforms.
Law No. 11/2013 entered into force on 30 June 2013, criminalizing all forms of
recruitment and the use of children under the age of 18 by armed forces and armed
groups, including taking part in direct combat, carrying and transporting weapons or
equipment or ammunition, planting explosions, standing at checkpoints or carrying
out surveillance or reconnaissance, acting as a distraction or human shield or
assisting and/or serving the perpetrators in any way or form. The same law
increased the sentence for the crime of rape against a girl under the age of 15. On
2 April 2013, the Government also criminalized the abduction and kidnapping of
individuals in the context of the crisis with legislative decree 20/2013.
65. During my Special Representative’s visit to the Syrian Arab Republic and
neighbouring countries in July 2013, she called for the comprehensive
implementation of the new legislation and its application to all parties to the
conflict. Furthermore, she advocated that the Government establish a formal
ministerial coordination mechanism to prevent and respond to violations against
children and to facilitate the sharing of information on grave violations within the
Government and with the United Nations. The release of children arbitrarily
detained for their alleged association with armed opposition groups was equally
discussed with Government representatives of various ministries and was foreseen
to be tackled as a priority issue during the first meeting of the interministerial
committee on children and armed conflict of the Government. Advocacy on these
issues was repeated to the Syrian Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs during his
visit in New York on 28 September 2013. The Committee’s first meeting with the
United Nations took place on 12 December 2013. The United Nations has no
information on any action taken by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
regarding children detained for alleged association with armed groups.

13-62707

15/18

S/2014/31

66. Advocacy to FSA commanders in the Syrian Arab Republic to end the
recruitment and use of children in conflict was renewed during my Special
Representative’s second visit and, in October 2013, to representatives of the
National Coalition for Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces (Syrian
Opposition Coalition) in New York. As with the Government, the situation of the
civilian population in besieged areas was addressed, and the United Nations
continuously called on all belligerents of such areas to allow humanitarian
assistance to people in need. By visiting four neighbouring countries of the Syrian
Arab Republic, my Special Representative also gathered a first-hand assessment of
the regional consequences of the conflict. With the continuously increasing number
of Syrian refugees, the pressure on host countries, in particular on social services,
reached critical levels. In all of the four neighbouring countries visited, the number
of refugees in urban areas and in camps puts increasing pressure on hosting
communities. This raises additional child protection concerns, including lack of
education and health care, the risk of child labour, incidents of child recruitment
among the refugee population, sexual exploitation and forced marriages of minors.
67. Efforts have also been made by the Syrian Commission for Family Affairs to
initiate an awareness campaign with the support of the United Nations Children’s
Fund to prevent violations against children’s rights. The United Nations is currently
supporting the Ministry of Social Affairs to develop a strategy to prevent and end
the association of children with armed forces and armed groups and other grave
violations against children. Public awareness campaigns and the integration of
mine/explosive remnants of war risk education into the education system are being
undertaken, including in partnership with the Ministry of Education. In September
2013, the Government also responded positively to a United Nations request to
sensitize State-backed media to avoid displaying children “confessing to being
associated with armed groups”.

V. Recommendations
68. The suffering endured by the children in the Syrian Arab Republic since the
outset of the conflict, as documented in this report, is unspeakable and unacceptable.
Violations must come to an end now. I therefore urge all parties to the conflict to
take, without delay, all measures to protect and uphold the rights of all children in
Syria. In particular, I urge all parties to:
(a) Respect international human rights and humanitarian law, stop all grave
violations committed against children and take all appropriate steps to protect
children and other civilians in the course of military operations;
(b) Investigate relevant incidents and take disciplinary measures in line with
international standards against individuals suspected of having committed these
violations and abuses;
(c) Put an end to all indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks on civilian
areas and public spaces including the use of terror tactics, airstrikes, chemical
weapons and heavy artillery;
(d) Allow and facilitate full unimpeded humanitarian access to all affected
populations, including to besieged communities and other hard-to-reach areas, and
implement humanitarian corridors and pauses to allow for the delivery of essential

16/18

13-62707

S/2014/31

supplies to besieged communities and immunization campaigns. In particular, I urge
all parties to the conflict to allow the delivery of medical supplies to all people
requiring medical assistance, without distinction, in compliance with common
article 3 of the Geneva Convention and its Additional Protocols;
(e)

Immediately release abducted women and children;

(f) Cease the military use of schools and hospitals and protect the civilian
character of those institutions;
(g) Immediately take all measures to prevent and halt all forms of sexual
violence and abuse against boys and girls.
69. As a State party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and to its
Optional Protocol on children and armed conflict and other core international human
rights treaties, the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic carries the primary
responsibility to ensure the protection of children throughout its territory. I call upon
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to:
(a) Put an end to the killing and maiming of children, in contravention of
international law, to investigate these incidents and to make the results of these
investigations known;
(b) Make hospitals neutral spaces by ensuring equal access for all patients to
hospitals and other medical facilities and to refrain from posting troops inside and in
the vicinity of hospitals;
(c) Halt the arbitrary arrest and detention of children, including those
detained for alleged association with the armed opposition, release all children
detained by any State or parastatal entities on these charges and allow for access to
detainees by international monitoring bodies;
(d) Take all necessary steps to facilitate the expansion of humanitarian relief
operations and lift impediments that could potentially delay the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and goods;
(e) Ensure that all Government-affiliated militias respect international
human rights and humanitarian law and put an end to all violations against children,
including but not limited to the killing and maiming of children and the recruitment
and use of children;
(f) Ensure that the interministerial committee for children and armed
conflict meets regularly with the United Nations country task force on monitoring
and reporting to discuss questions related to the protection of children in the Syrian
conflict, as well as to devise a framework to address and prevent ongoing violations
against children. In this regard, I also urge the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic to enter into dialogue with the United Nations with a view to preparing
and implementing action plans to end the killing and maiming of children, in
contravention of international law, sexual violence against children in detention and
attacks on schools and hospitals and their protected personnel.
70.

I urge all armed opposition groups to:

(a) Put an end to the killing and maiming of children and other grave
violations committed against children, in contravention of international law, to
publicly denounce all such violations, and take all appropriate steps to protect

13-62707

17/18

S/2014/31

children and other civilians in the course of military operations and in areas under
their control;
(b) Investigate and take disciplinary measures, as relevant and in line with
international standards, against those elements in their ranks who are known or
believed to be responsible for crimes and grave violations against children;
(c) Take steps to prevent and halt the recruitment and use of children under
18 years of age within their ranks, including its clear prohibition in formalized
codes of conduct, and engage with the United Nations to develop and implement
action plans to this end;
(d) Refrain from carrying out attacks on humanitarian convoys and ensure
their unimpeded access to and through areas under their control.

18/18

13-62707
