S/2020/1128

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 November 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 20 November 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, as well as the statements delivered
by the representatives of Belgium, China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia,
France, Germany, Indonesia, the Niger, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam, in connection with the
video-teleconference on “The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question” convened on Wednesday, 18 November 2020.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the
Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefing and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Inga Rhonda King
President of the Security Council

20-15767 (E) 301120 040121

*2015767*

S/2020/1128

Annex I
Statement by the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov
Allow me first to extend my deepest condolences for their profound loss
to the family of former Palestinian chief negotiator and Secretary General of the
Palestinian Liberation Organization, Mr. Saeb Erekat, as well as to the Palestinian
Government and the Palestinian people. Saeb, as we all know, dedicated his life
to the peaceful pursuit of justice, dignity and the legitimate rights of Palestinians.
He never gave up on negotiations as the only means of ending the occupation and
establishing an independent, sovereign and democratic Palestinian State. He stood
proudly and firmly for his people.
Sadly, I must also extend my condolences to the families and colleagues of the
seven peacekeepers of the Multinational Force and Observers who lost their lives in
service last week.
May they all rest in peace.
We meet today as Palestinians and Israelis continue their efforts to prevent
and control the spread of the deadly coronavirus disease (COVID-19). After weeks
of declining numbers, however, active cases are once again on the rise.
Gaza remains the most immediate and pressing concern. Its crumbling
infrastructure, poor living conditions and fragile health-care system make it illequipped to face a major spike in cases. Already affected by severe movement
and access restrictions, cycles of violent escalation and years of humanitarian and
socioeconomic calamity, the 2 million Palestinians living within Gaza’s confines
would face catastrophic consequences from a major outbreak.
For those reasons, I welcome the Palestinian Authority’s decision to restart
civilian and security coordination with Israel. I express my appreciation to Israel for
confirming that existing bilateral agreements continue to govern relations between
both parties, particularly in the context of economic, security and civilian affairs.
I want to thank everyone, particularly our Palestinian and Israeli colleagues,
as well as the entire team at the Office of the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and our partners, for working hard and putting forward creative and
constructive ideas over the past six months so that this significant challenge could
be overcome.
I have previously expressed hope that recognition of the interdependence
of Israelis and Palestinians could, with political will and leadership, translate into
tangible progress towards a resolution of the conflict. Both sides should understand
the importance of respecting the validity and continuing force of the framework that
they have agreed to govern their relations. Although the existing agreements fall
short of meeting the aspirations for peace, security and statehood for the Palestinian
people, they provide the basic foundation without which even the beginnings of a
return to meaningful negotiations will not be possible.
Eight months into the pandemic, Palestinian unemployment levels are
alarmingly high — 121,000 Palestinians lost their jobs in the wake of the first
lockdown, and the employment numbers declined by 17 per cent in Gaza. Some 40
per cent of Palestinian households lost more than half their income in this period,
and food insecurity rates have soared.
The most recent reports suggest that any recovery will be slow and partial.
Women and children continue to bear the brunt of the combined effect of the
2/32

20-15767

S/2020/1128

pandemic and the socioeconomic crisis across the occupied Palestinian territory,
facing an increased risk of violence within their homes and limited access to
support services.
In order to address the emergency, the United Nations and its partners have
continued to provide critical humanitarian and development assistance. Since the
start of the pandemic, close to 85,000 tests and advanced laboratory equipment
components have been delivered, as well as more than 5.5 million items for infection
protection and control. United Nations agencies and partners have also delivered
dozens of ventilators, monitors, beds and other crucial hospital equipment.
In addition, the United Nations has supported several quarantine facilities in
Gaza with non-food items, bolstered public communication efforts and trained healthcare professionals. Temporary arrangements by the United Nations implemented by
the World Health Organization continue to facilitate both the transfer of medical
patients out of Gaza and the importation of humanitarian supplies for the Palestinian
people. I hope that, with the restarting of coordination, those additional measures
will no longer be necessary.
I once again highlight the Secretary-General’s call for Israeli and Palestinian
authorities to re-examine and improve the nature of their economic relationship. It
is as timely as ever and in the interests of both sides to take concrete steps towards
addressing the common challenge. The United Nations stands ready to assist
in the process.
All sides can take immediate steps to facilitate the movement of goods in
and out of Gaza and allow trade to increase between the Gaza Strip, Israel and the
occupied West Bank. When health conditions allow, Israel can issue a meaningful
number of permits for Palestinian workers and traders from Gaza. Israel should also
take steps to advance the many outstanding fiscal files and ensure that sufficient
revenues are transferred to the Palestinian Government every month — a minimum
of 500 million shekels — to maintain its operations and address the COVID-19 crisis.
While its budget is currently reduced to a minimum, the Palestinian Authority
should consider steps to reform its own expenditures, in line with World Bank
recommendations, so that it can more effectively provide basic income support to
all vulnerable households. I take note of ongoing discussions on the prospect of
Palestinian reconciliation and sincerely hope the parties will be able to overcome
obstacles to holding long-overdue elections.
In a concerning development, on 3 November Israeli authorities carried
out the most extensive demolition in the occupied West Bank in the past decade,
destroying over 70 structures, including homes, in the Bedouin village of Humsa
Al-Baqai’a, in Area C. Seventy-three people were displaced, including 41 children.
Their vulnerability is compounded by the onset of winter and the ongoing COVID-19
pandemic. Home demolitions in East Jerusalem also resumed during the reporting
period, after a pause of several weeks.
In total, 153 Palestinian-owned structures in Area C and East Jerusalem
were demolished or seized. They displaced 96 Palestinians, including 22 women
and 51 children, and affecting some 1,400 others. The demolitions and seizures
were executed owing to the lack of Israeli-issued building permits, which are nearly
impossible for Palestinians to obtain. In addition, three structures were demolished
by their owners to avoid the payment of additional fines.
On 28 October, Israeli authorities cut a donor-funded pipe supplying water
to 14 herding communities in the Masafer Yatta area of Hebron, home to about

20-157673/32

S/2020/1128

1,400 people. Amid the pandemic, depriving these communities of water could have
particularly grave health consequences.
On 2 November, the Israeli Government informed the High Court of Justice
that, during the next four months, it would not demolish the Bedouin village of
Khan Al-Ahmar. In its explanation, the Government cited COVID-19 restrictions
and “additional considerations” as reasons for the delay and said that it would use the
additional time to exhaust efforts to reach an agreement with residents.
I reiterate my call on Israeli authorities to cease demolitions, seizures of
Palestinian property and efforts to relocate communities in the occupied West Bank.
Such actions are contrary to international law and could undermine the chances for
the establishment of a viable, contiguous Palestinian State.
In another concerning development, on 15 November, Israeli authorities
opened the bidding process for construction of 1,200 housing units in the Givat
Hamatos settlement. If built, the project would further consolidate a ring of
settlements between Jerusalem and Bethlehem in the occupied West Bank. It would
also significantly damage prospects for a future contiguous Palestinian State and
achieving a negotiated two-State solution based on the 1967 lines, with Jerusalem as
the capital of both States. I call for this step to be reversed.
Sporadic violent incidents unfortunately continued in parts of the occupied
Palestinian territory during the reporting period, as well. In Gaza, militants fired
two rockets and released two incendiary balloons towards Israel during the reporting
period, with no injuries reported. The Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) fired five shells
and missiles into Gaza in retaliation. There were also no injuries reported.
With regard to the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, one Palestinian was
killed and 21 injured, including eight children, in clashes, attacks, search and arrest
operations and other incidents. One Israeli soldier was injured in those incidents. On
30 October, Israeli soldiers opened fire on a Palestinian vehicle travelling near Jenin,
injuring three children. The circumstances surrounding the incident remain unclear,
with the IDF claiming the vehicle posed a threat.
On 4 November, an off-duty officer in the Palestinian security forces, who,
according to the IDF, shot towards Israeli soldiers, was shot dead near Huwwara,
south of Nablus. On 8 November, a Palestinian man, who reportedly attempted
to carry out a stabbing attack near Hebron, was injured and arrested by Israeli
security forces.
Meanwhile, settlers perpetrated some 17 attacks against Palestinians,
resulting in the injury of one child and damage to property. Palestinians perpetrated
23 attacks against Israeli settlers and other civilians in the West Bank, resulting in
four injuries and damage to property. As the olive harvest season continues, there
were incidents of settlers damaging Palestinian olive groves and agricultural fields.
Over 190 trees were burned or otherwise damaged, and large amounts of produce
were reportedly taken.
On a positive note, as in previous years, hundreds of Palestinian and Israeli
volunteers joined Palestinian farmers across the West Bank to assist in the olive
harvest and provide protection from harassment and violence.
All perpetrators of violence must be held accountable.
As of today, the funding shortfall of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) stands at a staggering
$115 million for November and December. For the first time, UNRWA forecasts
that it cannot pay salaries and expenses in full, impacting 28,000 staff members.
4/32

20-15767

S/2020/1128

UNRWA plays an essential part as the main provider of direct and often life-saving
assistance to many of the 5.7 million Palestinian refugees.
In order to sustain crucial assistance in the region, including food for
1.5 million destitute refugees in Gaza and Syria, front-line medical care vital to the
fight against COVID-19 in 58 refugee camps and education for over half a million
students, UNRWA urgently needs $70 million to meet immediate obligations. I take
this opportunity to once again urge the international community to act swiftly and
provide the necessary resources for UNRWA to continue delivering its vital services,
helping prevent serious risks to stability that the region simply cannot afford.
Moving briefly to regional developments, let me begin by welcoming the
first visit of the Foreign Minister of Bahrain to Israel today to meet with Israeli
leaders, visit with United States Secretary of State Pompeo and sign several bilateral
agreements. I agree with the statement of the Minister earlier today that the future of
peace in the Middle East requires a resolution of the Israel-Palestinian conflict, and
I hope that this development will also contribute to that effect.
Concerning the Golan, while the security situation has remained generally
stable, developments that occurred early today continue to show the volatility of the
environment. The IDF struck targets in Syria in response to improvised explosive
devices that its soldiers found in the vicinity of the ceasefire line. The IDF informed
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) that, in response to
attempts to harm its forces,
“Israel carried out a retaliatory operation against targets in Syria used by the
Iranians and its proxies”.
The Syrian authorities informed UNDOF that two Syrian armed forces
soldiers were killed by the IDF strike. UNDOF continues to engage both parties to
exercise the utmost restraint and remind them of their obligations to respect the 1974
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and to avoid any activities that might lead to an
escalation of the situation between Israel and Syria.
During the consultations on resolution 1701 (2006) held yesterday, the Special
Coordinator for Lebanon and the Assistant Secretary-General for the Middle East,
Asia and the Pacific briefed the Security Council on the situation in Lebanon in
detail. The situation in the area of operations of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon also remains calm.
I wish to emphasize that Israeli and Palestinian leaders have a responsibility
to explore every opening that can restore hope in the two-State solution. We in the
international community must help them resolve the conflict in line with the relevant
United Nations resolutions, international law and prior agreements.
As I have outlined, with the necessary political will, there are practical steps
that can be taken by all — steps that can begin to fundamentally change the dynamics
between the two sides and set the stage for an eventual return to dialogue. This work
must begin in earnest and be accompanied by concrete actions to create a legitimate
political horizon.
It is imperative that the Middle East Quartet, key Arab partners and Israeli
and Palestinian leaders build on recent developments in the region and urgently
re-engage on returning to the path of meaningful negotiations. The United Nations
remains committed to supporting Israelis and Palestinians in their efforts to return
to a legitimate political process that will deliver the long-overdue peace both sides
require and deserve.

20-157675/32

S/2020/1128

Annex II
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Belgium to
the United Nations, Karen van Vlierberge
[Original: French]
I begin by expressing our deepest condolences on the passing away of Mr. Saeb
Erekat, Secretary General of the Palestine Liberation Organization, to the Palestinian
people and to his family. Saeb Erekat was a tireless advocate of achieving the twoState solution through negotiations.
Belgium shares the vision of a negotiated solution based on the coexistence
of two States, with the city of Jerusalem as the future capital of both, in accordance
with internationally agreed parameters. We regret to note that the multiplication
of faits accomplis runs counter to that goal and risks destroying the possibility
of ever achieving it. We once again call on all parties to work towards creating
an environment conducive to the resumption of negotiations and act accordingly
to that end.
Israeli settlement policy and related measures continue unabated. The policy
is not only illegal under international law, including resolution 2334 (2016), but is
also counterproductive. It undermines all trust necessary for resuming constructive
dialogue and credible negotiations.
We share the deep concerns expressed by the High Representative of the
European Union following the decision of the Israeli authorities to open the bidding
process for the construction of housing units in the Givat Hamatos settlement. The
Heads of Missions of the European Union and other like-minded countries were
able see the reality on the ground once again this week. Building settlements in
certain sensitive areas is likely to destroy the possibility of Jerusalem becoming a
shared capital and preclude contiguity between East Jerusalem and the rest of the
Palestinian territory. Any initiative of this kind must be condemned in the strongest
terms if we are to give achieving a viable and credible two-State solution a chance.
In that regard, it is incumbent upon us to recall our shared responsibility to
distinguish in our relevant dealings between the territory of the State of Israel and
the territories occupied since 1967, pursuant to paragraph 5 of resolution 2334 (2016).
Making the distinction also serves as a tool for preventing settlement and annexation
regardless of terminology or scope.
The destruction of more than 80 structures in the village of Khirbet Hamsa
Al-Fawqa is a distressing example of the alarming increase in the number of
demolitions and confiscations, including of humanitarian structures and property,
in Area C in the West Bank. The trend is all the more worrisome in the context of
the current pandemic and its significant humanitarian impact on already vulnerable
communities. We call on the Israeli authorities to cease the demolitions, repair the
affected property and provide compensation for the damages incurred, in accordance
with international humanitarian law.
We are particularly concerned about the demolition of schools. Like all
children in the world, Palestinian children have the right to education. Belgium
therefore calls on the Israeli authorities not to carry out orders to demolish schools
in Ras Al-Tin, Jinba and Khirbet Al-Fakheit, and safeguard the 52 schools in the
West Bank that are at risk of being demolished.
We are deeply concerned about the economic and fiscal crisis in Palestine,
exacerbated by the suspension of civil and security cooperation with Israel and the
current pandemic. We welcome the announcement of the resumption of coordination
6/32

20-15767

S/2020/1128

between the Palestinian Authority and Israel, based on previous agreements, given
its impact on the Palestinian population and as a confidence-building measure. We
call on Israel to also take steps to underline its commitment to those agreements.
We call on all Palestinian factions to engage in good faith in the reunification
of Gaza and the West Bank under a single legitimate and democratic authority. We
strongly encourage the holding of democratic elections in the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem and Gaza. In that regard, it is important to safeguard the space
necessary for Palestinian civil society and the full exercise of civil liberties.
In conclusion, let me underscore the important role played by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in the
absence of a lasting solution, not only for the Palestinian refugees but also for
the viability of the two-State solution and regional stability and security. The
international community’s continued robust and predictable political and financial
support is important, especially in the context of the current pandemic.

20-157677/32

S/2020/1128

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: English and Chinese]
I would like to take this opportunity to express my deepest condolences on
the passing away of Mr. Saeb Erekat, Secretary General of the Executive Committee
of the Palestinian Liberation Organization, and my heartfelt sympathies to the
Palestinian Government and people and Mr. Erekat’s family. Mr. Erekat’s lifelong
devotion to Palestinian national liberation and the settlement of the Palestinian issue
through peaceful negotiations won him great respect throughout the world. As a
long-time friend of the Chinese people, he was actively engaged in promoting ChinaPalestine friendship.
I thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. The question of
Palestine is at the root of Middle East instability. Many people like Mr. Erekat
have dedicated their entire lives to the pursuit of a solution. As Secretary-General
Guterres said, the international community should continue its crucial work, push
to end the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.
We must stay the course of taking forward the political settlement based on
the two-State solution. The relevant resolutions, the principle of land for peace and
the two-State solution, epitomizing the wisdom and efforts of many generations,
remain an important foundation for resolving the Palestinian issue. However the
international situation evolves, they must be observed and implemented, and there
should be no turning back. Resolution 2334 (2016) unequivocally defined settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories as violations of international law
that undermine the prospects for a two-State solution.
China supports resolving the issue of the occupied territories in the West
Bank in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions and defining the
final border between Palestine and Israel through peaceful negotiations. We call
on all the parties concerned to refrain from unilateral actions that might aggravate
the conflict. In particular, there is a need to abandon annexation plans and stop
settlement activities in the occupied territories. The relevant parties should abide
by the understanding reached in late August, cease fire, stop violence and avoid an
escalation of tensions in the Gaza Strip.
We need to further coordinate and facilitate international peace efforts. During
the recent general debate of the Fourth Committee, Member States expressed their
views on the situation the Middle East and the Palestinian question and once again
set out their expectations for the realization of a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East. The international community, especially countries with
influence on Palestine and Israel, should adopt an objective and impartial, position,
actively promote peace and dialogue and make genuine efforts conducive to the
Middle East peace process.
Any initiative or plan concerning the Palestinian issue must take into account
the voices of regional countries and organizations, especially Palestine, and heed the
concerns of all the parties. No plan that deviates from the path of peace in the Middle
East will succeed in bringing about lasting peace. Imposed solutions simply will
not work. We have noted that President Abbas’ proposal for an international peace
conference to be held early next year has received positive responses from parties.
The international community should strengthen coordination to forge synergy for
multilateral peace efforts.
8/32

20-15767

S/2020/1128

We should put people first and improve the economic and humanitarian
situation in Palestine. According to United Nations statistics, since the beginning of
this year, 689 Palestinian structures have been demolished, reaching a record high.
At the beginning of this month, 76 Palestinian structures were demolished in the
West Bank, leaving more than 70 people homeless, over half of them children. China
is deeply concerned about this and calls for the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016) and ending the demolition of Palestinian homes, the destruction of Palestinian
property and violence against civilians.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has dealt a heavy blow to the economic and
social development of Palestine. We encourage Palestine and Israel to address the
problem of tax revenues through consultations and urge the lifting of the blockade of
the Gaza Strip. We welcome the Palestinian Authority’s decision to resume security
and civilian cooperation with Israel.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) provides education, medical and other essential services to
more than 5 million Palestinian refugees, while making important contributions to
improving the humanitarian situation in Palestine. The Agency now faces massive
financial strains. We are deeply worried and echo the Secretary-General’s call
for the international community to honour its commitments and scale up support
for the Agency.
China has actively supported the Agency’s work and has increased its annual
contributions to the Agency several times. Last month, the health kits donated by
China to refugees, both inside and outside Palestine, arrived in the relevant countries.
These health kits, containing personal protective equipment, will be distributed
through UNRWA to Palestinian refugees in Palestine, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria.
The consignments of anti-pandemic supplies donated by China to UNRWA medical
facilities have left port. These are concrete efforts attesting to China’s support for
Palestine and other Arab countries in fighting the coronavirus disease pandemic, as
well as support for United Nations agencies.
As a sincere friend of the Palestinian people, China firmly supports their
just cause and aspirations to establish a fully sovereign and independent State of
Palestine based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We will
continue to do all we can to assist Palestine in fighting the pandemic, developing its
economy and improving its people’s livelihoods. We will continue to make positive
contributions to achieve an early, comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the
Palestinian question.

20-157679/32

S/2020/1128

Annex IV
Statement by the Special Envoy to the Security Council of the
Dominican Republic, José Singer Weisinger
[Original: Spanish]
We thank Mr. Mladenov for his comprehensive briefing.
We take this opportunity to extend our deepest condolences to the Palestinian
people following the death of Mr. Saeb Erekat, who was instrumental in bringing
Israel and Palestine closer in their quest for lasting two-State peace. Although that
peace eluded him, we recall how, with pragmatism, determination and diplomatic
skill, he was able to advance the aspirations of his people at crucial moments in the
peace process.
On another note, we are deeply concerned about the most recent details
announced by Mr. Philippe Lazzarini, Commissioner-General of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), with
regard to the Agency’s funding shortfalls and inability to pay the salaries of its staff.
We commend UNRWA for its ongoing role in providing humanitarian assistance and
for its efforts to promote the development of the Palestinian people. This vital work
must continue. We urge donor countries to strengthen their contributions, which are
now more crucial than ever.
As for many, the humanitarian situation in Gaza remains of great concern
to the Dominican Republic. Everyone is aware of the grave state of the health-care
system in Gaza. It has been further crippled by the coronavirus disease pandemic, and
its collapse is imminent. It appears that the pandemic continues to have an adverse
effect on the provision of medical assistance and on the country’s economy. That,
along with widespread insecurity in the country, the electricity crisis, insufficient
access to safe drinking water and the lack of opportunities for young people,
results in a dire situation that threatens progress for communities, in particular the
country’s youth.
The current openness and momentum fostered by agreements to normalize
relations between Israel and Arab countries should be used to promote and
strengthen direct dialogue between the parties — genuine dialogue that addresses
the aspirations and concerns of both sides — with a view to building viable peace
for the entire Middle East region. To that end, we welcome news coverage yesterday
signalling the readiness of the Palestinian authorities and Israel to resume relations
based on previous agreements.
As members of the Security Council, we are called upon to honour and
implement the mandate of the Charter of the United Nations to strive for lasting
peace and sustainable development. We are therefore compelled to work hard
together so that these peoples experience and live peace as the rule, and conflict as
the exception.
As members of the international community, we are called upon to be
mediators, advisers and builders of mechanisms that help prevent escalating tensions
and promote dialogue. We must neither halt nor reduce our cooperation efforts to
resolve a conflict that has undermined the progress of a strong and resilient people
and of a region that deserves and expects our active participation in promoting peace.

10/32

20-15767

S/2020/1128

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I would like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.
I would like to extend heartfelt condolences to the Palestinian people following
the loss of the Secretary General of the Palestine Liberation Organization Executive
Committee, Mr. Saeb Erekat, whose work and dedication showed the importance
of peace negotiations and that Israel and Palestine can work together towards a
lasting solution.
Estonia remains convinced that, in order to reach sustainable peace and
stability in the Middle East, there needs to be a just, lasting and comprehensive
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
We have welcomed the normalization of relations between Israel and three
Arab nations — the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain and the Sudan. We believe that
these are positive steps towards achieving peace and stability in the whole region.
We acknowledge the constructive role that the United States played in this regard.
We hope that these regional developments will give impetus to reviving the
Middle East peace process and encourage Israelis and Palestinians to take steps
towards resolving the conflict and re-engaging in meaningful negotiations on all
final-status issues. The only way to achieve lasting peace is a two-State solution
through direct negotiations, while taking into account the legitimate aspirations of
both parties and Israeli security concerns.
We urge both sides to engage with the members of the Middle East Quartet,
which continues to play an important role in efforts towards resuming negotiations,
together with other regional players.
Turning to the situation on the ground, we call on all parties to refrain from
any unilateral steps that undermine the viability of the two-State solution. We call
on Israel to halt the continued settlement expansion and demolitions in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including in East Jerusalem. The recent decisions to open
the bidding process for the construction of housing units for a new settlement at
Givat Hamatos and the planned construction of close to 5,000 housing units in the
occupied West Bank are counterproductive moves.
We also condemn all acts of violence against civilians, including acts of terror
and acts of provocation, incitement and destruction. The two rockets fired from
Gaza towards Israeli residential areas last weekend were the most recent example of
the continued violence by Hamas and other terrorist groups.
We welcome the announcement by the Palestinian Authority on renewing its
coordination with Israel. A full resumption of civil and security cooperation would
be an important step towards restoring confidence and improving security on both
sides. It would also be an important step from a humanitarian perspective, in the
light of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
It is hoped that the recent agreement by Palestinian factions on holding elections
will soon materialize and that a date will be set for holding the elections throughout
the occupied Palestinian territories. We also call upon all Palestinian factions to
commit to the intra-Palestinian reconciliation process prior to the elections.

20-1576711/32

S/2020/1128

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I thank the Special Coordinator for his briefing.
I, too, wish to express my condolences to the relatives of Saeb Erekat and to
the Palestinian people and pay tribute to the commitment of this tireless advocate of
the Palestinian cause and ardent defender of peace.
We are at a pivotal point in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. It is more urgent
than ever to relaunch momentum towards peace. The parameters of its settlement are
well-known — two States, living in peace and security, within secure and recognized
borders based on the 1967 lines, both with Jerusalem as their capital. They have
been defined with the aim of bringing fair and lasting peace to the region. They
make it possible to guarantee the security of Israel and to respond to the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinians, in accordance with international law.
It is now up to the parties to define the framework for their negotiations in
order to resume their discussions with the support of the international community.
France stands ready to work to relaunch this process in close coordination with
all its partners. It calls for an end to all unilateral measures jeopardizing the
two-State solution.
We are concerned about the proliferation of settlement expansion projects and
the record number of demolitions of Palestinian structures, including those financed
by the European Union and its member States. These measures come after the
signing of the normalization agreements between Israel, Bahrain, the United Arab
Emirates and the Sudan, which could lead to the beginning of a positive dynamic for
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
France condemned new announcements concerning the building of more than
1,200 housing units in the Israeli settlement of Givat Hamatos, in East Jerusalem. The
expansion of this settlement undermines the viability of a future Palestinian State,
as repeatedly recalled by the European Union. We also condemned the demolition
by Israeli authorities, on 3 November, of the Palestinian village of Khirbet Humsa,
in the West Bank.
We once again call on Israeli authorities to reverse their decisions
on settlements and to halt all demolitions, particularly the village of Khan
Al-Ahmar and the school in Ras Al-Tin, in accordance with its obligations as an
occupying Power.
The suspension of annexation projects must become a definitive measure and
must not be replaced by annexation through increasing faits accomplis on the ground,
which would be tantamount to a de facto annexation of Palestinian territories.
France calls on the parties to create conditions conducive to the resumption
of discussions This is the focus of the continued efforts of Minister Le Drian, in
coordination with his German, Egyptian and Jordanian counterparts. Restoring
confidence requires gradual commitments from both sides. We welcome the
announcement of resumed coordination between Israelis and Palestinians and the
reaffirmation, in part, by Israel of its commitment to past bilateral agreements. This
cooperation can lead to a better response to the coronavirus disease pandemic.
This requires renewed intra-Palestinian reconciliation. It is important that the
elections announced by President Abbas at the General Assembly in September (see
12/32

20-15767

S/2020/1128

A/75/PV.10) are not postponed again. All parties must play their part to advance
peace. The parties expected to show courage are the United Nations and its agencies,
including the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, which must be supported politically and financially, and every member
of the international community. They must all play their part.
Members can count on France to contribute tirelessly to this collective effort.

20-1576713/32

S/2020/1128

Annex VII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany to
the United Nations, Günter Sautter
Let me start by extending our sincere condolences on the passing away of
Saeb Erekat. He was a champion for Palestinians’ rights and self-determination and
a passionate advocate for a peaceful resolution to the conflict with Israel through
negotiations. We call on all political leaders in Israel and Palestine to honour
Mr. Erekat’s legacy by continuing to actively pursue a peaceful and negotiated
two-State solution.
Unfortunately, the latest developments and negative trends on the ground
imperil the prospect of a negotiated two-State solution on the basis of international
law, the relevant United Nations resolutions and internationally agreed parameters.
These developments increasingly entrench a one-State reality.
We reiterate our grave concern regarding the publication of tenders for the
construction of housing units in an entirely new settlement in East Jerusalem, namely,
Givat Hamatos. After the recent decision by the Israeli authorities to advance the
construction of more than 4,900 settlement building units in the occupied West Bank,
this is another counterproductive move at a critical point in time. Israeli settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories remain illegal under international
law. They severely undermine the prospects for ending the occupation and for a
viable and contiguous Palestinian State within the framework of a negotiated twoState solution, with Jerusalem as the future capital of both States. As we have
emphasized jointly with our European partners in numerous discussions with the
Government of Israel, these steps also weaken efforts to rebuild trust and confidence
between Israelis and Palestinians, with a view to resuming dialogue. We call on
Israel to reverse these negative decisions and to immediately cease all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories, including in sensitive areas around
East Jerusalem, such as Givat Hamatos, Har Homa and Area E-1.
We are also concerned about the increasing seizures and demolitions of
Palestinian structures in the occupied West Bank and East Jerusalem. The demolition
of Palestinian housing in the village of Khirbet Hamsa Al-Fawqa, in the northern
Jordan Valley, which left 11 families homeless in the midst of the coronavirus
disease pandemic, is the most recent incident in a worrisome trend of confiscations
and demolitions since the beginning of the year. We call on Israel to observe its
obligations under international humanitarian law, in particular those set out in the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, in the occupied Palestinian territories and to halt all such demolitions.
The suspension of plans to annex parts of occupied Palestinian territories
must become permanent. We re-emphasize that we will not recognize any changes
to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, other than those agreed
by the parties. Furthermore, we remind all States to distinguish, in their relevant
dealings, between the territory of the State of Israel and the territories occupied
since 1967, in accordance with their obligations under international law, in particular
resolution 2334 (2016).
Germany remains committed to a negotiated two-State solution, where two
sovereign, democratic and independent States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side
in peace within secure and recognized borders on the basis of the 4 June 1967 lines.
This is the only viable path to fulfilling the legitimate aspirations of Palestinians
and Israelis for a life in peace and dignity and with equal rights. And reaching a just,
lasting and comprehensive solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is also the only
path to achieving sustainable peace, security and stability in the Middle East.
14/32

20-15767

S/2020/1128

We therefore call on both sides to refrain from unilateral action and recommit
to their signed agreements. In this regard, we welcome yesterday’s announcement by
the Palestinian Authority to restore cooperation in adherence to those agreements.
It is an important step to building confidence. We hope and expect that Israel will
also take steps to underscore its commitment to the two-State solution and signed
agreements, while seizing the positive dynamics of the normalization agreements in
recent weeks.
Together with Egypt, France and Jordan, we will continue our efforts and offer
our active support in facilitating a path back towards cooperation, credible dialogue
and serious, meaningful and effective negotiations on all final-status issues.
We reiterate our call on both sides to fully implement resolution 2334 (2016),
with all its provisions, that is, not only with regard to settlement activities but also
with regard to all acts of violence against civilians, acts of terror, settler attacks,
destruction, incitement, provocative actions and inflammatory rhetoric.
Let me also reiterate Germany’s condemnation of all attacks and threats
against Israel by Hamas and other terrorist groups, including the repeated firing of
rockets from Gaza into Israel.
Intra-Palestinian reconciliation and reuniting Gaza and the West Bank under
a single, democratically elected Government remain essential for achieving the twoState solution. We therefore hope that parliamentary and presidential elections in
the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem and Gaza, will take place soon. The
European Union is ready to support the holding of elections, and we call on Israel
to do its part.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) is a major provider of stability in the occupied Palestinian
territories. Therefore, Germany is very concerned about UNRWA’s substantial
funding gap, amounting to $70 million, until the end of this year. The reduction of
salaries for 28,000 UNRWA teachers, doctors and nurses is imminent and will lead
to further distress among Palestine refugees. We call on all other countries to do
more and appeal to their solidarity. Germany is the largest donor to UNRWA, with
$200 million this year alone.

20-1576715/32

S/2020/1128

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Indonesia to the
United Nations
I would like to thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing
on the current situation in the occupied Palestinian territory.
I also take this opportunity to express my deepest condolences on the passing
away of Saeb Erekat, a tenacious negotiator and a prominent voice of the Palestinian
cause. It is truly a great loss, not only for his family and the Palestinian people but
for the international community. Sadly, peace did not come during his lifetime. Our
job is to ensure that it is not too late for millions of Palestinians. On that note, I
would like to share three pertinent points.
First, we must continue forging the path to peace based on international
consensus. It is important that the international community remain committed
not only to a credible multilateral process but to protecting the internationally
agreed consensus concerning Palestine. Indonesia therefore reiterates its support
for convening an international peace conference and for a resumption of talks with
all the relevant parties on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In addition, Indonesia
reaffirms the importance of the intra-Palestine unity talks, while underlining the
unity of Palestinians in overcoming the challenges facing their cause and in creating
an environment conducive to achieving a negotiated peace.
Secondly, the expansion of illegal settlements must stop. The Israeli authorities
continued their path of violations and complete disregard for international law
earlier this month by approving yet another illegal settlement expansion. According
to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, this illegal settlement
expansion is the largest in the forced displacement operation of Palestinians in more
than four years.
Although there is little need to say it, these settlements are illegal and in
flagrant violation of international law and the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016). Despite Israel’s promise to suspend the annexation
and of a new era of peace and development in the region, it is obvious that, in
practice, its creeping annexation remains as active as ever, as does the inhumane
and degrading treatment to which Palestinians are subjected.
We continue to urge the international community to reaffirm the illegality
of the settlements and underscore the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to
self-determination, statehood and independence, within the pre-1967 borders, and
with East Jerusalem as the capital of the State of Palestine.
Thirdly, we must continue to support the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). We welcome the renewal
of the Agency’s mandate and the international community’s unequivocal support
for its important work. In this challenging and difficult time, UNRWA continues to
work on the front lines of the crisis, providing education, health and social services.
However, the Agency continues to confront the dire financial crisis that jeopardizes
its ability to provide services and assistance to the region. Indonesia therefore again
appeals to the international community to extend its full support to UNRWA’s
vital work and to match its political commitment with sufficient and predictable
financial contributions.
Once again, we have found ourselves discussing the Palestinian question. But
we are here discussing it because of continued violations by Israeli authorities and
the systemic impunity that allows it. The late Saeb Erekat once said that international
law is the civilized means to achieve our goals, our independence and our freedom.
16/32

20-15767

S/2020/1128

International law and United Nations resolutions on the status of Palestine are
very clear, and yet the Israeli authorities continue to violate them and deprive the
Palestinian people of their homes, their rights and their dignity. The Security Council
needs to stand with the Palestinians and with international law.

20-1576717/32

S/2020/1128

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Niger to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
I would like to begin by thanking Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his detailed
briefing on the situation in the Middle East.
The Niger has followed with great concern the recent developments in the
region, in particular the demolition by Israeli forces of structures and property
belonging to the Palestinian community in Khirbet Humsa, in the West Bank.
Israeli excavators and bulldozers spared no homes, animal shelters, latrines or
even sanitation facilities during this large-scale operation. We should be deeply
concerned about the cruel and traumatic plight suffered by these poor people, many
of them children, as the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues to
claim victims and as winter gradually sets in.
The Niger deplores and condemns such acts, which, moreover, are
counterproductive in the light of efforts within the Israeli-Palestinian peace process
and incompatible with the obligations of the State of Israel under international
humanitarian law. The demolition and destruction of private property in the occupied
territory violate the provisions of the relevant United Nations resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016). The lack of building permits, very often cited by the Israeli
authorities to justify operations, is also dubious, since such permits are almost never
issued to Palestinians who request them.
We therefore call on the international community, and the Security Council in
particular, not to turn a blind eye to the threat posed by Israeli policy in the occupied
Palestinian territories. The demolition and expropriation of Palestinian structures
must stop. The colonization established to manage these territories must also end.
We call on Israel to respect the principles of international law and to refrain
from any measures to the contrary that could distract us from the prospect of a
resumption of peace talks towards a negotiated two-State solution, as supported by
the international community. In this regard, the trend to normalize relations between
Israel and its Arab neighbours in recent months and the announcement made by
the Palestinian Authority yesterday of its intention to resume civil and security
cooperation with Israel should serve as a springboard for resuming peace talks for a
just and equitable solution to the crisis.
My delegation wishes to express its great concern at the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, particularly as a result of the COVID-19
pandemic and the restrictions imposed by the Israeli authorities. Since the first cases
of community transmission recorded in August, the spread of the virus in Gaza has
continued to worsen. There are now thousands of active cases, which the health
system, suffering from a lack of medical personnel and equipment, is struggling
to absorb. Long before the pandemic, the situation of the inhabitants of Gaza was
already of the utmost concern due to factors such as extreme poverty, food insecurity,
overpopulation, high unemployment, restrictions on gasoline imports imposed by
the Israeli authorities, the precariousness of the health system and the continued
blockade of the Gaza Strip, which has lasted 13 years. The United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East must have the means
to continue providing vital services to thousands of Palestinian families in need,
especially during the COVID-19 pandemic.

18/32

20-15767

S/2020/1128

In conclusion, the Niger welcomes the tireless efforts of Mr. Mladenov
and reaffirms its full commitment to supporting the efforts of the international
community towards a swift settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which
has an undeniable impact on the peace, stability and security of the entire Middle
East region.

20-1576719/32

S/2020/1128

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
At the outset, we would like to express our heartfelt condolences to the
bereaved and to the leadership and people of Palestine on the passing away of the
Secretary General of the Palestine Liberation Organization, Mr. Saeb Erekat. We
note his personal contribution to efforts towards a just solution to the Palestinian
question in accordance with the established international legal framework, including
resolutions of the Security Council and General Assembly.
We thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing.
Russia adheres to the time-tested principle that the comprehensive stabilization
of the situation in the Middle East is impossible without a lasting solution to the
Palestinian question. We maintain constructive and friendly relations with all States
in the region, hence why we consider the improvement of Arab-Israeli relations to
be beneficial in principle.
However, we proceed from the understanding that a just settlement of the
Palestinian question based on the international legal framework endorsed by the
United Nations, including Security Council and General Assembly resolutions, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the fundamental principle of a two-State solution, must
be an inherent part of any Arab-Israeli settlement. That framework provides for the
establishment of an independent, sovereign and territorially contiguous Palestinian
State along the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital and living in peaceful
co-existence with Israel.
The entire range of final-status issues should be resolved during direct
negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis. The international community should
focus its efforts on resuming the negotiation process. President Mahmoud Abbas
reiterated his readiness for dialogue under the auspices of the Middle East Quartet of
international mediators. We call upon our Quartet partners — the United Nations, the
European Union and the United States — to strengthen cooperation to that end. We
are prepared to engage in dialogue with key regional stakeholders. We are convinced
that one-sided action will never lead to a breakthrough, and that it will be essential
to make joint efforts and fully leverage the potential of collective diplomacy.
We view the resumption of contact between the Palestinian and Israeli parties
as a first step towards reinstating the dialogue between Palestinians and Israelis. We
welcome this step taken by the Palestinian leadership, which is undoubtedly aimed
at backing efforts to redress the difficult socioeconomic situation on the Palestinian
territories and enhancing the joint response to the coronavirus pandemic, as well as
promoting cooperation in the area of security. We call on both parties to uphold their
obligations in accordance with earlier agreements.
In order to ensure the implementation of those agreements, both parties
must abstain from any aggressive or provocative rhetoric or actions. As the Special
Coordinator informed us, on 15 November the Israeli authorities opened the bidding
process for the construction of more than 1,000 housing units in East Jerusalem.
We are concerned by that decision, which runs counter to the international legal
framework for a Middle East settlement. The construction of a new block of
settlements in the Givat Hamatos area would detach East Jerusalem from Bethlehem
and violate the territorial contiguity of the Palestinian State provided for in United
Nations Assembly resolutions.
20/32

20-15767

S/2020/1128

We reaffirm our principled position regarding the illegality of the Israeli
settlements in the West Bank. We call for the cessation of settlement activity and
the policy of demolishing Palestinian property. Annexation plans must also be
definitively taken off the table. At the same time, we condemn all violence and
missile launches against the Israeli territory. Such actions must stop. There is also
an urgent need to join efforts in order to counter the terrorist threat.
The task of restoring Palestinian unity remains highly relevant. We will
continue our efforts on this front and continue to assist our Egyptian colleagues.
Active international measures are necessary in order to improve the dire
humanitarian situation in Gaza. We are extremely concerned by the reduction in
funding for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA). The work of UNRWA encompasses both a humanitarian
and a political dimension and significantly contributes to stabilizing the situation on
the Palestinian territories and across the Middle East region. Russia will continue
supporting UNRWA and calls on the international community to do the same.

20-1576721/32

S/2020/1128

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
First of all, let me thank Mr. Mladenov for his informative briefing.
On behalf of the Government of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, I extend
our heartfelt condolences to the family of the late Mr. Saeb Erekat, Secretary
General of the Palestine Liberation Organization and Palestinian Chief Negotiator
for the Middle East Peace Process. Mr. Erekat will be remembered for his great
contributions and tireless efforts in defending the just Palestinian cause. In that
regard, we also offer our solidarity to President Abbas and the people of Palestine as
they mourn this great loss.
Amid this sombre moment, we are reminded of the human costs of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19). While we grapple with the ever-growing social,
economic and political costs of the pandemic, we must also spare no effort to save
lives. For that reason, we are concerned about the worsening humanitarian situation
across the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, where continued instability creates fertile
ground for increased transmission of the deadly virus. We are, however, heartened
by the Palestinian Authority’s recent announcement to resume security and civil
coordination with Israel. That is indeed a positive step, and we encourage further
cooperation between the two parties to help contain the spread of COVID-19.
Despite repeated international calls for the cessation of all settlement
activities, Israel continues to methodically plan, tender and build new settlements
while expanding existing ones. Most recently, the non-governmental organization
Peace Now reported that the Israel Land Authority had announced the opening
of tenders for more than 1,200 new structures in the Givat Hamatos settlement.
The construction and expansion of settlements are not only grave violations of
international law and numerous relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016), but are also a direct violation of Article
49 of the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention. The settlements in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem remain a serious obstruction to peace, and we therefore call on Israel
to cease their construction and dismantle existing ones.
Moreover, we remain deeply concerned about the political, physical and
socioeconomic division of Gaza and the West Bank, which remains another major
obstacle to advancing the prospects for peace. My delegation reiterates today the call
to Israel to lift the Gaza blockade.
To achieve peace and security there is no better alternative than dialogue. For
that reason, we reiterate President Abbas’ call for an international conference in 2021
under the auspices of the United Nations and the Middle East Quartet. We urge the
relevant parties to make every effort to convene such a timely international conference.
I now wish to turn to the needs of Palestinian refugees, many of whom are
located in Syria, Lebanon and Jordan, as well as in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. At
this critical time when the needs of Palestinian refugees are increasing, the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East needs
international support to address its financial shortfall. We urge donor States to fill
the large funding gap by providing additional funding to the Agency’s budget.
Let me conclude by reaffirming the need for the Security Council to speak
with one voice on matters concerning Palestine and to move decisively towards a
just and durable solution that will allow the Palestinian State, along the 1967 borders
and with East Jerusalem as its capital, to live side by side and in peace and security
with Israel.
22/32

20-15767

S/2020/1128

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Jerry Matjila
Let me begin by expressing my deepest sadness at the passing away of Mr. Saeb
Erekat. The people of South Africa extend their sincere condolences to his family
and all the Palestinian people. It is people of his calibre and stature who are required
on both sides of this conflict in order to bring about a peaceful, long-lasting solution.
I also thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing on the realities on
the ground in the occupied Palestinian territory. I would like to take this opportunity
to commend the work that he and his Office do in contributing to the resolution of
this conflict.
I also wish to express South Africa’s condemnation of Israel’s continued and
abundant illegal actions. On 3 November, the Israeli Government conducted its
largest demolition of Palestinian property in a decade. Israeli authorities destroyed
the Bedouin village of Khirbet Humsa, in the Jordan Valley. They destroyed
76 structures, including homes, animal shelters, sheds, sanitation facilities and
solar panels, leaving 74 people, including 41 children, homeless and exposed to the
harsh elements.
In 2020 alone, Israel’s illegal actions have left 869 people homeless and
689 structures demolished. In addition, the destruction of agricultural and farmland
also continues, which severely effects Palestinians’ ability to provide a reliable
source of food and generate a valuable source of income. The widespread destruction
of property, including agricultural land, and the forcible transfer of protected people
in an occupied territory are grave breaches of the Fourth Geneva Convention, to
which all of us are signatories.
Such actions continue to violate Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016), and, in the current context, are simply inhumane, especially
in the light of the ongoing global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
In addition to Israel’s continued illegal demolitions, illegal settlement activity
continues in the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem. Over the weekend, Israeli
authorities approved a tender for over 1,200 housing units in Givat Hamatos, in
East Jerusalem, in addition to previously approved settlements in the West Bank.
All of those illegal settlements would severely damage prospects for a contiguous
Palestinian State and any possibility of sustainable peace.
South Africa once again wishes to remind Israel and Council members that
such settlement activity is illegal under international law and in accordance with
relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016).
Israel’s combined illegal actions of continued demolitions, including donorfunded structures, and settlement activities all contribute to Israel’s illegal de facto
annexation plans. While Israel and its allies may not call it annexation, the evidence
that we have heard today and many times before in the Chamber points to continued
de facto annexation.
As we have done previously, South Africa calls on the Security Council to
hold Israel accountable for its illegal actions, which are in contravention of Council
resolutions as well as international law. If such events were to occur in relation to
almost any other issue on the Council’s agenda, we would not have hesitated to
take action. The double standards perpetrated by the Council only undermine its
credibility and ability to fully implement its mandate to maintain international peace
and security.
20-1576723/32

S/2020/1128

South Africa shares the significant concerns of Mr. Philippe Lazzarini,
Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), regarding the Agency’s financial situation.
UNRWA is an essential service provider for Palestinian refugees across the Middle
East region. UNRWA’s health, education, protection, social services and humanitarian
assistance programmes are vital to millions of displaced Palestinians. UNRWA’s
dire financial situation is also jeopardizing its ability to fully pay the salaries of
28,000 staffers in the West Bank, East Jerusalem, Gaza, Lebanon and Jordan.
This comes at a time when the COVID-19 pandemic is spreading across the
Middle East, including through Palestinian refugee camps. Many of those refugees
have no alternative to UNRWA assistance. South Africa therefore appeals to the
international community to support the efforts of UNRWA in providing muchneeded humanitarian assistance to Palestinian refugees.
The only way to reach a viable solution to the conflict in the Middle East is
through direct talks between the parties, on an equal footing, based on internationally
agreed parameters that take into account the needs and aspirations of the Palestinian
people. No peace plan or initiative can have any merit or success if all parties to the
conflict are not included in such talks, as equal partners, from the very beginning.
Conflicts can be resolved only by treating each party as part of the future solution,
and not as a potential adversary or ally.
In conclusion, a viable peace plan should not allow Palestinian statehood to
devolve into an entity devoid of sovereignty, territorial contiguity and economic
viability. In that regard, a solution must be premised on a just settlement with just
laws. It must be rights-based and facilitate equality for all who have a right to live in
the territories of Israel and Palestine, as well as sovereign equality between States.

24/32

20-15767

S/2020/1128

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Tunisia to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
I thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his valuable briefing and his ongoing efforts.
I should like to add my voice to those that preceded me in paying tribute to the
memory of the Palestinian fighter and leader Saeb Erekat, Secretary of the Executive
Committee of the Palestine Liberation Organization, member of the Fatah Central
Committee and head of that organization’s Department of Negotiations Affairs.
The late Mr. Erakat and an entire generation of fighters and activists who
put their faith in peace were unable to see their efforts and steadfastness crowned
by an end to the occupation and embodied in the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State. The question remains, how long will the plight of the Palestinian
people continue and when will justice be achieved and security and stability prevail
throughout the region?
The answer is clear to all. It lies in implementation of the resolutions of the
Security Council and the realization of a two-State vision based on internationally
agreed terms of reference and agreements between the two sides. That is the way
to bring about an end to the occupation and establish an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State along the 1967 borders with East Jerusalem as its capital, and to
reach fair and lasting resolutions of the final-status issues.
The international community has been engaged with the just Palestinian
cause. It has demanded that the Palestinian people should exercise their legitimate
and inalienable rights and that the occupation authorities should end their repressive
practices and expansionist and racist policies that contravene international law.
Unfortunately, what reality reflects is a blatant challenge to the international
community and the Security Council by the occupying Power and a disregard for
international conventions and United Nations resolutions, in the complete absence
of any kind of accountability or punishment.
There can be no greater testament of this than the record high number of
housing units included in Israeli West Bank settlement plans for 2020, which reflects
a systematic strategy to make Israeli annexation plans a fait accompli that threatens
the integrity of Palestinian territory. In the face of this dangerous situation, Tunisia
reiterates its condemnation of the colonial policy being pursued by Israel, its absolute
rejection of annexation plans and its insistence that such plans must be abandoned
once and for all. Tunisia also emphasizes the need for the Security Council to carry
out its responsibilities in this regard, in particular by ensuring the implementation of
its relevant resolutions, the most recent of which was resolution 2334 (2016).
In the face of continued provocation, demolition of homes and schools,
economic sanctions and the targeting of unarmed civilians, Tunisia warns that the
continuation of such practices will serve only to exacerbate feelings of despair and
injustice and increase the levels of tension and strain. Tunisia renews its call for
protection for the Palestinian civilian population in accordance with the principles
of international law in implementation of General Assembly resolution ES-10/20 of
2018. Tunisia also welcomes the call issued by a number United Nations agencies
and international organizations on 5 November 2020 for protection for Palestinian
farmers from violence by Israeli settlers, against both their persons and their crops,
and for perpetrators to be held legally accountable.

20-1576725/32

S/2020/1128

At the same time, in the face of the magnitude of the suffering being undergone
by Palestinian citizens in the Gaza Strip as a result of the continued unjust siege and
the policy of collective punishment being implemented by the occupation authority
against some 2 million Palestinians, we call on the international community and the
relevant actors to make every effort to bring about an end to the siege that has been
imposed on the Gaza Strip for some 14 years and to put a stop to the humanitarian
suffering, which has only been magnified by the coronavirus disease pandemic. In
that regard, we salute the extraordinary efforts of health and relief workers in the
face of the pandemic and call on the international community to act to make up
the budget shortfall at the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East so that the agency need not curtail its vital activities.
As we celebrate the thirty-second anniversary of the declaration of the State
of Palestine, Tunisia reaffirms its firm belief in the justness of the Palestinian
cause, its admiration for the sacrifices of the Palestinian people and its unwavering
and principled support for their inalienable rights — which carry no statute of
limitations — and, above all, their right to the establishment of an independent State
with Jerusalem as its capital.
The international community has once again demonstrated its embrace of the
just Palestinian cause with the adoption of a package of draft resolutions on Palestine
at the closing of the proceedings of the Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) during the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly. It
must now translate its robust efforts of the past few months into a revival of the
peace process and the launch of earnest and credible negotiations between the two
sides to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. In that regard, Tunisia supports efforts to
advance the initiative of Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas to convene a fullfledged international conference attended by all the parties concerned to engage
with the peace process on the basis of international law, international legitimacy and
the agreed terms of reference. We reiterate that Tunisia stands ready to contribute to
any constructive attempt to end the occupation and restore to the Palestinian people
their full legal rights.
We once again stress that the inclusion of the Palestinian side in any efforts or
initiatives aimed at resolving the Palestinian question is a prerequisite for ensuring
that a fair and lasting solution for this crucial issue is arrived at.
We also reiterate that we welcome the good-faith efforts of our brothers in
Palestine to support national reconciliation, which we consider a necessary step
towards consolidating internal ranks to help bring about the desired settlement in
accordance with the two-State solution.

26/32

20-15767

S/2020/1128

Annex XIV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, Jonathan Allen
I wish to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.
As others have done, I would like to start by reflecting on the tragic passing
away of Saeb Erekat. I echo the words of my Prime Minister and my Foreign
Secretary in offering our condolences to Mr. Erekat’s family, President Abbas and
the Palestinian people. Mr. Erekat dedicated his life to dialogue, Palestinian rights
and advancing the cause of peace. He will be sorely missed.
It is with Mr. Erekat’s legacy in mind that we must renew our commitment to
acting through dialogue, building trust and cooperation and avoiding the unilateral
and inflammatory steps that undermine the cause of peace.
As we have made clear repeatedly in the Security Council, the United Kingdom
opposes annexation and welcomes its suspension. Any other unilateral action that
jeopardizes the physical viability of a future Palestinian State is also unacceptable.
The United Kingdom condemns the Government of Israel’s publication of tenders
for construction in the East Jerusalem settlement of Givat Hamatos, an extremely
sensitive area of the West Bank. Settlements are illegal under international law and
remain an obstacle to peace and a threat to the two-State solution.
The United Kingdom also expresses its serious concern following the
demolition of Humsa Al-Baqai’a by the Israeli Authorities on 3 November. That
act caused the displacement of vulnerable Palestinians, including 41 children,
as well as unnecessary suffering. The year 2020 has seen the highest levels of
demolitions of Palestinian homes and structures since 2016. The United Kingdom
calls on the Government of Israel to cease this policy and provide Palestinians with
a clear, transparent route to construction in Area C of the West Bank. In all but
the most exceptional of circumstances, demolitions are a violation of international
humanitarian law.
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned by the situation in Gaza,
particularly at this time of a global pandemic. We continue to urge the parties to
prioritize progress towards reaching a durable solution for Gaza and to take the
necessary practical steps to ensure Gaza’s reconstruction and economic recovery.
We encourage actors to put forward long-term, sustainable proposals to resolve
the threat posed to Israel’s security by Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad and other
militants in Gaza. We call upon Hamas and other terrorist groups to permanently
end their incitement and rocket fire against Israel.
We note the Commissioner-General’s urgent call for additional funding for
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) this month, without which schools will close from the beginning of
December. We call in particular on States that have cut their funding significantly
in recent years to support UNRWA now. I note that this year the United Kingdom
has given over $65 million, which is commensurate with previous years. We are
sympathetic to those who argue that UNRWA must do more to reach a secure and
sustainable financial footing, but that cannot be achieved by 1 December, and money
is needed by then to avoid unnecessarily adding to the suffering of refugees.
This week we saw the historic first ministerial visit of the Kingdom of Bahrain
to Israel. Normalization agreements show that the Arab world and Israel can pursue
a positive path, away from hostility and towards a more peaceful, prosperous region.
20-1576727/32

S/2020/1128

With dialogue in mind, my Government therefore welcomes reports that the
Palestinian Authority and the Government of Israel will return to cooperation and
abide by signed agreements. Full cooperation across financial, security and health
matters puts the needs and security of Israelis and Palestinians first. That is an
example of the dialogue and compromise that we have called for, which will be
required to make meaningful progress towards a two-State solution. Both parties
should now seize that positive momentum and show commitment to their bilateral
agreements through their actions on the ground.
Seventy-three years ago this month, the United Nations decided on the
partition of Palestine. Piece by painful piece over many years, progress was made
towards an agreed partition — a two-State solution. As the region takes strides
towards dialogue, it is time, too, for the parties to the Israel-Palestine conflict to
stop dismantling peace and start building it again.

28/32

20-15767

S/2020/1128

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing today. We are grateful
for his efforts to keep the Council aware of the latest developments on the ground.
We also offer our sincere condolences to the Palestinian people, and to
Ambassador Mansour on the passing of Saeb Erekat. May he rest in peace, may the
region continue to move toward more peaceful days, and may the Palestinians and
Israelis soon resume long overdue peace talks. Towards that goal, we welcome the
Palestinian Authority’s recent announcement that it will resume security cooperation
with Israel and begin accepting tax revenues again.
The Abraham accords have made peace all the more possible. We are witnessing
the accumulating fruits of the accords with each passing day. It is no overstatement
to say that the accords have triggered a wave of commercial, educational and cultural
interactions in the Middle East that are without recent precedent.
Entrepreneurs from the accord countries are already developing partnerships,
including on innovative food and agriculture initiatives. Earlier this month, the first
flight from Israel travelled to Dubai, carrying Arab and Jewish Israelis and opening
a new chapter for tourism and citizen diplomacy.
Israel and Bahrain are also finalizing aviation agreements to allow regular
flights between their nations starting in January. And just today, the first Bahraini
commercial flight landed in Israel, carrying senior officials who will work with
Israel to deepen their cooperation, including through the reciprocal opening of
embassies by the end of the year.
In addition, Israel and Sudan continue to make progress on various economic
initiatives and partnerships and have recently indicated they will begin cooperating
in agriculture, water and the common fight against the coronavirus disease. These
and other positive developments stem from President Trump’s bold diplomacy and a
genuine readiness in the region to transform hostility into peace.
Forty-three years ago, Egyptian President Anwar Sadat became the first Arab
leader to officially visit Israel. As we recall that courageous step and its legacy, we
are reminded of the powerful dividends that come with peace. It is clear that the
Abraham accords have created a real momentum, and it is my sincere hope that the
Palestinians will seize this moment. The United States vision for peace provides a
flexible framework for negotiations. The vision’s recommendations are not written
in stone. Its outcomes are not fixed. It is an invitation to resume the path towards
peace. It is rooted in good faith, good intentions and reality. There are two places set
at this table.
We are quickly putting decades of diplomatic failure behind us. The time is long
overdue for these monthly meetings to be repurposed by replacing counterproductive
rhetoric that only serves to perpetuate the Israeli-Palestinian conflict with Member
States encouraging the parties to sit down for realistic, direct negotiations to resolve
their differences.
Today’s meeting and future monthly meetings would serve the region better
if the focus were on grave threats that affect millions of people. The economic
and the political crisis in Lebanon has driven much of its population into poverty,
with no prospects for progress as long as Iran continues to sponsor the terrorist
organization Hizbullah.

20-1576729/32

S/2020/1128

Millions of Syrian refugees and internally displaced persons face the
hard months of winter that are approaching, and countless Yemeni children are
malnourished because the Houthi rebels disrupt the delivery of urgently needed
aid. These humanitarian catastrophes and conflicts should be our primary focus at
meetings such as this.
I urge support for the Palestinians and the Israelis in their efforts to settle their
decades-long dispute by encouraging them to take these very great steps. Let us put
these monthly meetings to better use.

30/32

20-15767

S/2020/1128

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing.
Viet Nam would like to express our condolences to the Government and the
people of Palestine for the passing of Mr. Saeb Erekat, Palestinian Chief Negotiator
and Secretary-General of the Executive Committee of the Palestine Liberation
Organization. We highly value the contributions made by Mr. Erekat to the struggle
for independence of the Palestinian people and the search for a just and long-lasting
solution for the Middle East Peace Process.
We welcome the recent statement of the Palestinian Authority that it was willing
to return to negotiations with the Israeli Government on the basis of United Nations
resolutions and international laws. Viet Nam hopes that the long-stalled negotiations
will be resumed soon. The Security Council and the wider international community
should create all favourable conditions for the negotiations to be successful. We are
encouraged by the recent easing of tensions among countries of the region, as well as
measures and initiatives conducive to promoting regional peace and security.
We also welcome all initiatives for international cooperation that may help
achieve a just, sustainable and long-lasting solution to the Middle East peace process
on the basis of international law and relevant resolutions of the United Nations. In this
connection, we note the Secretary-General’s response to the call for an international
conference for peace in the Middle East by President Mahmoud Abbas and look
forward to working with him on this matter.
While welcoming the recent positive dynamics in the region, we are concerned
about continued violence in many places, which causes civilian casualties and widens
the gap between the parties. Israel’s continued expansion of settlements in the West
Bank and its demolitions of Palestinian houses remain a major obstacle to finding a
lasting and sustainable solution. Recently, the high rate of demolitions of Palestine
structures in the West Bank are particularly worrying. These acts violate international
law and weaken the prospects for the realization of the two-State solution.
We therefore call upon the parties to refrain from taking actions and making
statements that could complicate the situation and make it more difficult for
negotiation and dialogue. All acts of violence and hostile rhetoric must cease.
We remain concerned about the grave humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories due to the coronavirus disease pandemic and worsening
economic recession. We reiterate our calls for the lifting of the Gaza blockade so as
to ensure access to basic services and humanitarian aid. We also call for an end to the
restrictions, attacks and intimidation aimed at Palestinian farmers during the olive
harvest season. Those acts continue to be a major source of violence and put more
pressure on the economic challenges of the Palestinians. We also hope that the two
sides can reach an agreement to resolve the tax withholding issue in the face of the
humanitarian and financial crises.
In this regard, we would like to commend the role of agencies, particularly
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), in alleviating the plight of the Palestine people. In light of
UNRWA’s continuing financial shortfalls, we urge the international community
to provide UNRWA with the funding necessary to ensure the continuity of its
indispensable operations.
20-1576731/32

S/2020/1128

To conclude, we would like to reaffirm our solidarity with and consistent
support for the just struggle of the Palestinian people for their inalienable rights,
as well as the two-State solution for the establishment of an independent State of
Palestine coexisting in peace with the State of Israel along the pre-1967 lines and
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

32/32

20-15767
