S/PV.7576

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7576th meeting

Friday, 11 December 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Gombo
Ms. Sapag Muñoz de la Peña
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Hmoud
Mr. Linkevičius
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Adamu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-41986 (E)
*1541986*

Ukraine

S/PV.7576

The meeting was called to order at 11.20 a.m.

mandate. I am deeply concerned about the continuing
incidents of harassment and intimidation of the Mission.
Such harassment must end immediately.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/136)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Ivan
Šimonović, Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights; Mr. John Ging, Director of the Coordination
and Response Division of the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs; and
Ambassador Ertuğrul Apakan, Chief Monitor of
the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Ging and
Ambassador Apakan, who are joining today’s meeting
via video-teleconference from Kiev.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to warmly welcome the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson, and I give
him the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: The situation in
eastern Ukraine remains tense and volatile. Since the
ceasefire began on 1 September, fighting throughout
the conflict zone has generally subsided. However,
in recent weeks, sporadic fighting has resumed, with
varying degrees of intensity, around parts of the
Donetsk and Luhansk regions. The parties have started
to implement the agreement to withdraw so-called
lighter weapons from the contact line. But the process
remains incomplete. The Special Monitoring Mission
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe has observed the use of weapons, including
mortars, throughout the conflict zone. I commend
the Mission, under the leadership of Ambassador
Apakan, for carrying out its mandate under challenging
circumstances. It is critical that the Mission be granted
full and unfettered access to all areas covered by its

2/28

11/12/2015

I recognize the sustained efforts of the Trilateral
Contact Group and its four Working Groups, the
Normandy format leaders and other partners. On the
diplomatic front, modest but tangible progress has been
made following the 2 October meeting of the leaders
of France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine. The rebels
in eastern Ukraine have announced a postponement of
the self-declared local elections. The parties have also
committed to finding a compromise on the modalities
for local elections in rebel-held territory that respects
Ukrainian law and is in line with international best
practices. As we know from the Minsk meetings of the
four Working Groups, failure to find a compromise on
the remaining critical issues has prevented the parties
from reaching a viable solution. That includes issues
related to the local elections in rebel-held areas.
We welcome the discussions held in Berlin during
and after the 6 November meeting of the Normandy
Foreign Ministers. We also welcome the improvements
that have occurred in the security sector. But much
work lies ahead. The majority of the provisions of
the Minsk agreements remain unimplemented. There
are divergent interpretations of the sequence of
implementation, and the same is true of some of the
provisions in the Minsk package of measures, including
those related to the conditions for holding local elections
in rebel-controlled areas, control over border areas
and the departure of foreign armed groups. Amnesty
and special status constitutional changes are also on
that list. These problems threaten the whole political
process.
The conflict zone remains highly militarized, and
there is an ever-present danger of serious escalation.
The Special Monitoring Mission continues to note the
presence of weapons, including heavy weapons, along
the contact line. There is also an urgent need to address
the matter of explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices, which are now the leading cause of
death and injuries in eastern Ukraine. The problem
requires sustained attention through increased
awareness-raising, education and humanitarian
mine-action programmes. Such action would alleviate
risks, reduce suffering and build confidence.
Mr. John Ging, Director of the Coordination and
Response Division of the United Nations Office for

15-41986

11/12/2015

S/PV.7576

Ukraine

the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, who is
joining us from Kyiv, will provide more detail on the
humanitarian situation. I appeal strongly to all sides
to provide unrestricted and unconditional access for
critical humanitarian assistance and guarantee freedom
of movement for civilians throughout the country. I
also urge all those with influence over the actors to
ensure that all bureaucratic and political impediments
to humanitarian assistance are removed. I would like
to remind all parties of their obligation to guarantee
free and unimpeded access to humanitarian assistance
throughout Ukraine.
I am also concerned about how the residents
of Crimea have been affected by the cutting off
of electricity from mainland Ukraine. On 21 and
22 November, electric pylons in the Kherson region of
Ukraine supplying energy to Crimea were destroyed,
leaving much of the peninsula without power. I trust
that the electric power will be fully restored and that the
incident leading to the disruption is being investigated.
Last month we passed the two-year mark for the
Ukraine crisis. I recall my own good-offices visit to
Kyiv in early March 2014 and my subsequent briefing
to the Council from there. At the time I appealed to the
Council for dialogue, diplomacy and for cool heads to
prevail. Today, with no comprehensive political solution
in sight, I reiterate that appeal. During those difficult
first days and weeks two years ago, we spearheaded the
establishment of a United Nations presence through the
United Nations Human Rights Monitoring Mission in
Ukraine and, later, a large country team. That Mission
continues to perform critical monitoring, reporting and
prevention work, and we will hear more on that from
Mr. Šimonović, the Assistant-Secretary-General for
Human Rights.
In conclusion, I would like to point out that the
Minsk agreements remain the best available viable and
accepted path to resolving this conflict. They must be
implemented in full. All parties must work towards a
durable political solution without delay, and greater
political will and flexibility must be demonstrated by
all concerned. Millions of women, children, the elderly
and persons with disabilities are directly affected on
both sides of the contact line. Further delays will mean
further suffering for far too many people who are
hoping for a peaceful holiday season.
The United Nations, through the good offices
of the Secretary-General, remains fully committed

to supporting and promoting peace and stability in a
manner that upholds Ukraine’s sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity. The vital work of the human rights,
humanitarian and development actors on the United
Nations country team in Ukraine will remain critical.
Let us together intensify our work so that we do not
have to meet here for yet another briefing next year
on the third anniversary of this crisis. Let us ensure
that we meet the aspirations of Ukraine’s citizens for
stability, peace, reform and prosperity.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Šimonović.
Mr. Šimonović: I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council. I am very happy that Ambassador Apakan
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, with whom we cooperate closely in our field
activities, is also with us today via video-teleconference.
The assessment of the situation in Ukraine of the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) is based on reports from the United Nations
Human Rights Monitoring Mission over the past
20 months, both in Government-controlled areas and in
areas controlled by the armed groups. The Mission has
also continued to monitor the human rights situation
in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, whose status
was defined in General Assembly resolution 68/262,
on the territorial integrity of Ukraine. The Mission’s
twelfth report, covering the period between 16 August
and 15 November, was released two days ago.
The past several months were marked by a
considerable decrease in hostilities. Alhough the
hostilities have not ceased completely, the shelling
of populated areas has decreased dramatically. The
number of civilian casualties, especially those caused
by shelling, has also significantly decreased. The total
number of civilian deaths recorded by the Human Rights
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine between 16 August
and 15 November was 47. That is a sharp decrease as
compared with the previous reporting period from
16 May to 15 August, when we recorded that 105
persons had been killed. We are now seeing the longest
period since the beginning of the conflict in which no
large-scale indiscriminate shelling of populated areas
is taking place, and reports about people killed by
shelling are unusual.

15-419863/28

S/PV.7576

Ukraine

However, people continue to die, increasingly from
explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive
devices. The percentage of civilian casualties including
deaths and injuries caused by explosive remnants
and improvised devices in recent months stands at
about 80 per cent. We should also not forget that the
current relative calm in the conflict area may be just
another manifestation of the repeated pattern we have
been observing in Ukraine since the beginning of
the conflict — a surge in hostilities accompanied by
massive civilian casualties, followed by a ceasefire
agreement, which is in turn followed by a decrease
in hostilities and civilian casualties, and then a new
escalation of hostilities begins. That must not happen
again. The overall death toll of the conflict is already too
high. Between the start of the hostilities, in mid-April
2014 and 7 December 2015, at least 9,115 people were
killed in the conflict area of eastern Ukraine. As in
the past, that is a conservative estimate. The real
number of conflict-related casualties is considered to
be higher. Looking ahead, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights sees
the implementation of the Minsk agreements as the
only viable strategy for achieving a peaceful solution
in Donbas, which, in turn, is a key for resolving the
human rights crisis in Ukraine.
In the area of hostilities, the continued avoidance of
shelling of populated areas remains a top priority, along
with mine action activities. All the parties involved
in the hostilities should investigate all incidents of
civilian casualties caused by military action, and are
encouraged to establish civilian casualty mitigation
cells. There is an urgent need for extensive mine action
activities, including the establishment of appropriate
coordination mechanisms, mapping and mine-risk
education and awareness on both sides of the contact
line. In that regard, we are glad to see that discussion
on coordinated demining efforts is progressing in the
Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine. The work of
the Mine Action Sub-Cluster supports the efforts to
decrease risks for the local population.
One of the most gruesome legacies of the conflict
is that of awaiting action on the search for missing
persons and the recovery and identification of mortal
remains. According to the Ministry of Internal Affairs
of Ukraine, as of 18 September, over 3,000 people were
still registered as missing. In the search for them, three
factors seem to be essential. First, there needs to be
better internal coordination of the governmental bodies

4/28

11/12/2015

of Ukraine, in particular the Ministry of Internal
Affairs, the security service and the Ministry of
Defence. It would serve as a one-stop shop mechanism
for the relatives of missing persons. Secondly, civil
society should be more actively engaged in the effort.
Last, but not least, interaction with the relevant actors
on the territories controlled by the armed groups is
needed.
Let me now turn to the situation in the east. Even
with the relative military calm on the ground, the lack
of the rule of law makes the human rights situation of
the estimated 2.7 million people living in the territories
controlled by the self-proclaimed Donetsk people’s
republic and Luhansk people’s republic very difficult.
Reports of human rights abuses in those territories
persist, including those related to killings, torture
and ill-treatment, illegal detention and forced labour.
The rights of local residents are still not effectively
protected, and there is a lack of accountability or
possible redress. The places of detention maintained
by the armed groups remain virtually inaccessible to
independent oversight, and international organizations,
including the Human Rights Monitoring Mission, do
not have access to detainees. Those are the places where
human rights abuses are most frequently reported, and
where victims are most vulnerable.
Let me give an example. On 15 October, the
Human Rights Monitoring Mission interviewed a man
who had spent a year as a captive of the armed groups.
He described in detail the conditions in the former
premises of the security service of Ukraine in Donetsk,
namely, overcrowding, insufficient nutrition and lack
of adequate medical treatment, as well as ill-treatment,
torture and forced labour. He also reported numerous
incidents when he and other detainees, including
women, were tortured — mock executions, beatings
and electrocution.
Residents of the territories controlled by the armed
groups also continue to face difficulties in exercising
their economic and social rights, especially with respect
to access to quality medical care, accommodation,
social services and benefits, as well as insecurity related
to housing, land and property rights, including possible
confiscation and lack of compensatory mechanisms for
damaged, seized or looted property. The onset of winter
and the impediments encountered by humanitarian
organizations could worsen the situation.

15-41986

11/12/2015

Ukraine

A person recently interviewed by the OHCHR team
in Donetsk said, “we are afraid to give birth and we
are afraid to die”. Owing to the further deterioration
of the economic situation and the lack of employment
opportunities, even a funeral has become unaffordable
for some families. In addition, civil registration
documents — birth, death, marriage, divorce and
medical certificates — issued in the territories
controlled by armed groups are considered invalid
by Ukrainian authorities. That precludes people from
accessing basic social and medical services. I have
heard numerous examples of the hardships faced by
people to validate their documents or obtain new ones.
There are concerns that children being born now may
remain stateless. Immediate steps need to be taken to
address that problem.
OHCHR also continues to observe pervasive selfcensorship and an inability for media professionals to
exercise any type of freedom of expression in the east.
We also observe that rallies to challenge the policies
of the self-proclaimed Donetsk people’s republic and
of the Luhansk people’s republic have been extremely
rare because people report being afraid to assemble
and speak out. The majority of civil society actors and
human rights defenders are unable to operate.
Restrictions on movement across the contact line
imposed by the Government of Ukraine in January
remain one of the major challenges for people living in
the conflict area. That has led to their sense of increased
isolation, as well as to their impeded access to medical
care and social benefits, and disrupted family links.
People often spend hours, and even nights, waiting in
queues to pass the series of checkpoints, with limited
access to water and sanitation facilities. The presence
of mines alongside the official transport corridors is an
additional security risk. The efforts of the Government
of Ukraine to restore law and order in the conflict zone
continue to be accompanied by allegations of enforced
disappearances,
arbitrary
and
incommunicado
detention, as well as torture and ill-treatment of people
suspected of trespassing against the territorial integrity
or engaging in terrorism or believed to be supporters
of the self-proclaimed Donetsk people’s republic and
the Luhansk people’s republic. Elements of the security
service of Ukraine appear to enjoy a high degree of
impunity, with rare investigations into allegations
involving them. The conduct of those elements of
Ukrainian law enforcement that are under the Ministry
of Internal Affairs is also of concern.

S/PV.7576

OHCHR reiterates that a proper and prompt
investigation of every single reported case of a serious
violation of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law by Ukrainian military
or law-enforcement elements should be carried out;
perpetrators should be brought to justice; and victims
should receive compensation.
Accountability has yet to be achieved for the
killing of protesters and other human rights violations
committed during the Maidan events in Kyiv, from
November 2013 to February 2014. Similarly, there has
been no progress in ensuring accountability for the
deaths of 48 people during the violence of 2 May 2014
in Odessa, and criminal proceedings so far do not seem
impartial.
Looking back, the human rights situation in
Crimea has shown no sign of improvement in 2015.
Fundamentally, it is still not possible to express
views that differ from those promoted by the de facto
authorities and the Russian Federation. Those perceived
as being in opposition are intimidated and persecuted.
The law-enforcement and justice systems are used
as instruments of repression. Crimean Tatar media
outlets have been shut down. Seven Crimean Tatars
who participated in a pro-Ukrainian demonstration in
February 2014 have been arrested this year. No progress
has been made in the investigations into the murder of
Reshat Ametov or the disappearance of pro-Ukrainian
activists in 2014.
A recent development that brought additional
attention to Crimea has been a trade blockade initiated
in September by the Crimean Tatar leadership in
Ukraine. A further development was the damage
caused to four transmission towers located in mainland
Ukraine that supply electricity to Crimea. While the
de facto authorities of Crimea have redirected the
existing energy resources to the most critical social
infrastructure, such as hospitals, the human rights
impact of this situation has been particularly acute for
people living alone, with limited mobility and on a low
income in remote areas.
On the positive side, during the reporting period,
the Government of Ukraine adopted a national human
rights strategy and started to develop an action plan
to implement it. Ukraine extended the jurisdiction of
the International Criminal Court, which applied to the
period of the Maidan events, for crimes committed
after 20 February 2014, including, therefore, in

15-419865/28

S/PV.7576

Ukraine

relation to the violence of 2 May 2014 in Odessa and
the conflict in the east. Constitutional amendments on
decentralization were also passed on first reading. All
of these are welcome developments.
Finally, a few words on the way forward. In
the territories controlled by the armed groups, the
priority is the release of all illegally detained persons
and the provision of independent monitors, including
international organizations, with access to places
of detention. In this context, we were glad to learn
about the recent statement made by Martin Sajdik, the
Special Representative of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Chairperson-in-Office in
Ukraine and in the Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine,
who said that it was very important to achieve progress
in the release of detainees by the New Year. We have
advocated for an “all for all” release to be included in
the Minsk agreements and now urge its full and speedy
implementation.
Regarding the Government of Ukraine, OHCHR
would prioritize justice and accountability for the
violations committed during the Maidan events, the
violence on 2 May 2014 in Odessa, and the human
rights violations reported to have been committed in
the armed-conflict area.
We also call on the Government of Ukraine to
reconsider the restrictions on freedom of movement
across the contact line imposed in January 2015. We
also look forward to seeing the implementation by the
Government of the decision of the High Administrative
Court of Ukraine to resume the payment of pensions
and benefits for people living in areas controlled by the
armed groups and the adoption of amendments to the
law on internally displaced persons.
As an additional human rights and humanitariancentred confidence-building measure, we would
encourage the Government of Ukraine to recognize
civil registration documents such as birth, death and
marriage certificates issued in territories controlled by
the armed groups, in line with the jurisprudence of the
International Court of Justice and the European Court
of Human Rights.
With respect to Crimea, we reiterate the importance
of OHCHR monitors being granted access to the
peninsula in order to be able to effectively monitor,
on the spot, the human rights situation, which, as I
mentioned earlier, shows no signs of improvement.

6/28

11/12/2015

The sentencing of Oleg Sentsov and Aleksandr
Kolchenko are recent examples of the failure to uphold
fair-trial principles. Urgent steps must be taken to
address all disappearance cases, as well as the killing
of Reshat Ametov in March 2014.
We also call for the unimpeded exercise of the
freedoms of peaceful assembly, expression and
religion by all Crimean residents and urge the de facto
authorities and the Russian Federation to accept and
protect all non-violent forms of expression, including
cultural and language rights.
OHCHR will continue to monitor and advocate
on the human rights situation in Ukraine in 2016. We
are planning to look into particular human rights,
especially those that are most at risk, and expand our
presence in the east with the opening of the new office
in Kramatorsk, and by increasing the number of staff in
Donetsk and Luhansk. We also stand ready to facilitate
a number of visits to the country under the special
procedures provisions, so that the Council can have a
better and more comprehensive vision of the human
rights situation.
Last but not least, we are planning to support the
implementation of the national human rights action plan,
working hand in hand with the Council of Europe, the
United Nations system in Ukraine and other international
partners to conduct additional technical-assistance
activities so as to build the capacities of national and
local actors, including the Ombudsman’s Office and
non-governmental organizations, in order to contribute
to strengthened human rights protection for all. The
deterioration of the economic situation will make the
necessary reforms more difficult, and international
support will be needed for their success.
The President: I thank Mr. Šimonović for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ging.
Mr. Ging: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to brief the Council from Kiev on
the humanitarian situation on behalf of Mr. Stephen
O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator. I myself
have just returned from a mission to eastern Ukraine,
where I witnessed the devastating impact of the conflict,
in particular on the most vulnerable: the elderly and the
sick.

15-41986

11/12/2015

Ukraine

Approximately 2.7 million people are living
in non-Government-controlled areas with limited
freedom of movement, and 800,000 people live under
difficult and dangerous conditions along the contact
line between Government and non-Governmentcontrolled areas. There are now up to 1 million people
internally displaced, and more than 1 million have fled
the country.
Over the past days I have seen the unacceptable
physical and mental hardships and indignities faced by
people, so many of them elderly, simply trying to move
about their own country to access basic services such as
health care and pensions. People have to queue on the
roadside for hours and hours, as Assistant SecretaryGeneral Šimonović has also said, and this is just to
cross contact lines, often overnighting in freezing
conditions, with no shelter or sanitation facilities.
Almost a year ago, we welcomed the commitments
of the Minsk agreements, where it was committed to
ensure safe access, delivery, storage and distribution
of humanitarian assistance to those in need. However,
these commitments have not been met. In July, the
United Nations and international non-governmental
organizations were instructed by the de facto authorities
in the non-Government-controlled areas of Luhansk and
Donetsk to register for formal accreditation. Following
our inability to do so, constrained by international
conventions, the de facto authorities imposed what has
amounted to a four-month suspension of the work of
most of the international aid agencies, along with the
expulsion of a majority of humanitarian actors from
these areas.
I protest, in the strongest possible terms, the
suspension of humanitarian programmes and the
expulsion of humanitarian actors, which stands in stark
contravention to international norms and principles.
Closing protection, food, health, water, shelter and
recovery programmes has had a devastating impact on
an already vulnerable and suffering people. Just one
alarming example of the impact involved in ending
programmes is the case of the termination of a Doctors
Without Borders programme that was treating 146
multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis (TB) patients, which
now dramatically increases the risks of the spread of
drug-resistant TB in those areas.
I welcome the recent progress made with the
authorities in the non-Government-controlled areas of
Luhansk following the Emergency Relief Coordinator’s

S/PV.7576

recent visit. There, United Nations agencies and one
international non-governmental organization and
the International Committee of the Red Cross have
been able to resume their work. Yesterday, I saw the
immediate positive impact of those programmes. But
there is so much to be done and, as winter sets in, I
urgently I appealed to the de facto authorities to allow
the immediate return of all international humanitarian
organizations.
In
the
non-Government-controlled
areas
of Donetsk, on the other hand, United Nations
humanitarian programmes remain suspended, with
only two humanitarian organizations allowed to resume
their operations. Approximately 37 national and 12
international staff members of the United Nations are
present there and are ready to work, but are not allowed
to do so. That is not sustainable, nor is it acceptable. We
urgently need a breakthrough. I therefore appeal for the
support of Council members on that issue, so that we
can secure the return of all aid agencies to those areas.
I recognize and appreciate the open, constructive
and productive cooperation that we have with the
Government of Ukraine, but I must also add my voice
to that of Assistant Secretary-General Šimonović
and appeal for urgent solutions to overcome the
administrative blockages hampering the delivery of
essential humanitarian supplies and services. For
example, the recent reduction in the volume of water
being piped across the contact lines is having a serious
impact on the health of people in those areas, especially
the most vulnerable.
It is unacceptable that existing laws prohibit the
transport of much-needed commercial supplies into
non-Government-controlled areas. I am also deeply
concerned by a proposed law that, if adopted, would
prohibit the transfer of water and electricity across
contact lines; that would have a disastrous impact on
the civilian population.
The United Nations and international non-governmental
organizations, in spite of the constraints they face,
continue to assist wherever they can. In 2015, 2.1 million
people were provided with access to safe water, nearly
320,000 with food assistance, over 230,000 people
with non-food items, and 75,000 people benefited from
mobile medical consultations. That is a testament to the
dedication and commitment of the aid agencies and the
generosity of those who are providing funding.

15-419867/28

S/PV.7576

Ukraine

Finally, in the past few days, I have seen the
inhumanity, the indignity and the needless suffering
endured by people in eastern Ukraine as they try to
go about their daily lives. The conflict is having an
unacceptable impact on those least able to bear it. I
return to New York tomorrow distressed, having seen
at first hand the particular inhumanity suffered by the
elderly and the children in the conflict-affected areas.
Hopes are pinned on the fragile ceasefire, for which
there has been renewed respect since September. I
earnestly appeal to everyone with power and influence
to put the humanitarian plight of civilians affected
by the conflict at the centre of their attention so as to
ensure positive action to help those civilians. They
desperately need our urgent help.
The President: I thank Mr. Ging for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Apakan.
Mr. Apakan: I would like to thank the President
for the opportunity to brief the Security Council on
Ukraine.
A period of relative quiet started on 1 September
and lasted for six weeks, which proved that tranquillity
is possible if all sides exercise maximum restraint.
The ceasefire has largely held, which has brought
about some positive changes for the local population.
However, violations have been concentrated around
several hotspots in the Donetsk region; their number
has also increased in past weeks. Some 70 to 90 per
cent of them are taking place in such locations as
Pisky, Spartak and Horlivka. There, days of intense
localized fighting alternate with days of relative calm.
Ceasefire violations do not seem to reflect the intention
to undertake a military expansion, but they lead to the
return of fire and to armed exchanges, which in turn
leads to a further erosion of trust.
Ceasefire violations can be attributed to both sides,
and mostly involve small arms and light weapons.
However, I should note that proscribed heavy weapons
are still being used. The Special Monitoring Mission
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) has reported publicly on that point.
This unpredictable situation presents an obstacle
to a political settlement and normalization. Only a
comprehensive ceasefire along the long line of contact
can lead to trust. It is the basic requirement for peace.
Another important issue is the widespread presence of
mines and unexploded ordnance in the conflict zone.
In that regard, action needs to be taken as a matter of

8/28

11/12/2015

urgency. The Minsk agreements clearly stipulate the
responsibility of the parties in that matter.
In addition, the humanitarian situation remains a
matter of concern. Access to water, heat and medical
care are urgent problems in many areas. Long
lines at checkpoints expose people to the dangers
of mines and shelling. I wish to reiterate that this
affects people remaining in the vicinity of the line of
contact, especially the elderly, children and internally
displaced. We are monitoring the situation and, in that
respect, we are cooperating closely with the United
Nations and its specialized agencies. We are grateful
to them for their cooperation. I should also mention
that we are cooperating with Ukrainian institutions on
humanitarian issues, and we are also grateful to them.
The Minsk agreements stipulate that the Special
Monitoring Mission should facilitate and monitor the
withdrawal of heavy weapons. That is one focus of our
work. I coordinate the Working Group on Security.
In that context, we also cooperate closely with the
Trilateral Contact Group and other working groups on
political, economic and humanitarian issues.
On 29 September, the Working Group on Security
reached agreement on an addendum concerning the
withdrawal of tanks and certain weapons. The process
of implementing that arrangement has worked to a
large extent, with the withdrawal schedule having been
mostly observed. However, we are still encountering a
number of challenges, shortcomings and discrepancies.
We ask the parties to adhere to the agreements in letter
and spirit. We have also encountered challenges with
regard to the withdrawal of heavy weapons, which
should have been completed in February.
On 16 October, we informed the parties of a stricter
verification regime. However, substantial progress
since then towards the full withdrawal of heavy
weapons cannot be reported, although I acknowledge
that the signatories have begun to cooperate.
Another aspect of our work in the Working Group
on Security is mine action. To that end, the Special
Monitoring Mission is working towards an agreement
on a set of universal principles. At the nineteenth
meeting of the Working Group, participants also agreed
on the prioritization of mine clearance in five areas
related to power, water and railways in the region, but
more progress must be made to agree on a list of 12
priority areas for demining before the end of the year.

15-41986

11/12/2015

Ukraine

The Special Monitoring Mission remains a sensitive
mission in a conflict zone. The main aim of our mandate
is the stabilization and normalization of Ukraine. The
Mission continues to expand geographically in terms of
numbers and the use of technology. We now have 650
monitors from 44 participating States on the ground,
and will expand by eight monitors by March. We
continue to open new bases to increase our presence in
the conflict zone. Just two days ago, we opened a new
permanent presence in Horlivka and Debaltseve, two
areas right on the contact line, and we will open more.
The Special Monitoring Mission is playing its part in
the de-escalation on the ground. We have been present
even under the most difficult circumstances and have
facilitated and negotiated many local ceasefires. We
have undertaken vital consultations to allow for critical
infrastructure and utility repair work and will continue
to do so. Freedom of movement for the Mission is
also important for the verification process. Denials
of access still occur, in particular in some parts of the
Volta region. We need continued political support to
address that problem.
I would now like to look ahead and outline the
main priorities for the upcoming period. First, the
ceasefire needs to be kept by both sides and must be
consolidated. Secondly, we are continuing to work on
reaching consensus on the principles of mine action.
Thirdly, heavy weapons need to be withdrawn; the
sides already have a standing agreement on that issue.
Fourthly, we must continue our work on the ground to
facilitate the repair of critically needed infrastructure.
Fifthly, if the situation on the ground allows, we stand
ready to support the implementation of an eventual
political settlement and will play our role in line with
our mandate.
In conclusion, all activities by the Special
Monitoring Mission are guided by the aim of achieving
normalization and stabilization in Ukraine. As
our numbers expand, those efforts will be further
strengthened. But the political will for a full ceasefire
and a political solution and peace must come from both
sides. The next set of steps is clear and has been agreed
in the Minsk documents. The Mission will continue to
support the implementation of those provisions, in line
with its mandate and with objectivity and impartiality.
The President: I thank Mr. Apakan for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.

S/PV.7576

Mr. Linkevičius (Lithuania): I thank Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Human Rights Ivan Šimonović, John Ging
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and Ambassador Apakan, Chief Monitor of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, for
their briefings.
It has been 22 months since the Russian Federation
began to take aggressive action against Ukraine. For
nearly two years now, Ukraine has been suffering from
a conflict initiated under false pretexts and supported
by an aggressive campaign of propaganda and hate.
The redrawing of Ukraine’s borders by force early in
2014 and the continued violation of its sovereignty and
territorial integrity remain a major challenge to the
rules-based international system.
Russia’s unprovoked aggression against Ukraine
has already left over 9,000 dead, more than 20,000
injured, over 1.5 million uprooted from their homes
within Ukraine and another 1 million forced to
flee abroad. Five million people need humanitarian
assistance. The approaching winter makes the lives
of those in need even more difficult, yet by now this
conflict barely makes it into the headlines. After a
short lull earlier this autumn, the situation worsened
again in November. It is evident that peace agreements
will not be fully implemented in 2015. The OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission continues to register
daily breaches of the ceasefire. Impunity, lawlessness
and abuse continue to reign in the areas held by the
illegal militants. Again last week, OSCE monitors were
threatened with automatic rifles. Crimea — an integral
part of Ukraine — remains occupied, in breach of the
fundamental principles of international law, the Charter
of the United Nations, the Budapest Memorandum and
bilateral treaties. All this despite the fact that General
Assembly resolution 68/262, on the territorial integrity
of Ukraine, is very clear on the illegality of Crimea’s
annexation and the sovereignty, political independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders.
As the end of the year approaches, there is a
dangerously high probability that this crisis will
become yet another of Europe’s so-called frozen
conflicts. There are already too many of those. Five of
the European Union’s six Eastern Partnership countries
bordering on Russia are suffering from protracted
conflicts. Russia continues to instigate separatism in

15-419869/28

S/PV.7576

Ukraine

Moldova. Violations of Georgia’s territorial integrity
also continue unabated. The pattern could not be more
obvious.
The Minsk agreements may not be perfect, but they
are all we have. Today there is simply no alternative.
We support the diplomatic efforts undertaken in
the Normandy format and in the Trilateral Contact
Group under the auspices of the OSCE. At the same
time, we remain critical of the recent trend towards
the resequencing of commitments under the Minsk
agreements and towards increasing the pressure on
the political commitments of Ukraine, rather than on
the security commitments of Russia and its militant
proxies.
Tangible peace can be achieved only through the
full implementation of the Minsk agreements. That
means full implementation by Russia, which is a party
to the conflict and bears direct responsibility for its
de-escalation. Russia must, inter alia, withdraw its
arms, weapons, soldiers and mercenaries from the
territory of Ukraine, cease its support for the illegal
armed groups and allow Ukraine to restore full control
over its international border. All hostages and illegally
detained persons, including Ukrainian pilot Nadiya
Savchenko, Oleg Sentsov and others, must be released.
With regard to local elections, we remain concerned
that, even if they are postponed to 2016, elections in the
territories occupied by Russia’s militant proxies, with
foreign soldiers present on the ground, will be neither
free nor fair. It is up to the OSCE observers to ascertain
whether conditions are ripe for holding elections and
to assess their legitimacy. We have seen the results
of Crimea’s gunpoint referendum. We do not want to
see more of the same. All foreign weapons and foreign
fighters must be withdrawn, preferably before the
elections, to ensure that the voting is free and fair.
The lack of effective protection for human rights
in the areas under the control of Russia’s proxies has
left people vulnerable to serious human rights abuses
and violations, including, as was said in the briefings,
killings, torture, degrading treatment, illegal detentions
and forced labour. We need to continue to shine a light
on the lawlessness and impunity in those areas, and we
must work to ensure that the perpetrators will one day be
brought to account. Therefore, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the United Nations Human Rights Monitoring Mission
in Ukraine should continue their much appreciated

10/28

11/12/2015

work and reporting. In addition, monitors from the
United Nations, the OSCE, the Council of Europe and
other organizations should be allowed into Crimea to
investigate the increasingly restrictive environment and
the curtailment of the rights of its residents, especially
those of the indigenous Tatar community.
Sanctions against the Russian Federation in
response to its illegal annexation of Crimea and its
deliberate destabilization of Ukraine should remain
in force pending the full implementation of the Minsk
agreements.
The Council, too, has its responsibilities. It has
unanimously backed the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements adopted in
February, and must deliver on its promise to demand
their full implementation. Importantly, the ongoing
conflict in Ukraine cannot be allowed to fester or be
forgotten just because we are facing other pressing
needs — the need to address other urgent conflicts. We
cannot close our eyes to the ongoing breach of the ideals,
principles and rules of behaviour that have governed
the Organization and governed the whole process and
the entire international system for decades. Our failure
to stand firmly for those values and principles will only
embolden those willing to challenge the international
order, thereby bringing about even more conflict, more
instability, more human suffering.
The international community needs to continue to
support Ukraine on its path towards reforms, where
significant progress has already been made. Ukraine
and the Ukrainians have the right to create the future
they want, free from coercion and gun-point pressure
by their big neighbour.
Lithuania reaffirms its support for Ukraine’s
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity, with Crimea as an integral part of that
country. In supporting Ukraine, we support our own
freedom, independence and the right to live free from
fear and in peace.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General and all the other speakers
for their briefings. It was important that they had this
opportunity to address us all today in order to provide
the Council with a clear picture of the evolution of the
situation on the ground, covering both the political
and security aspects as well as the humanitarian and
human rights aspects. We believe that the Council is
more than ever playing the role it should by raising and

15-41986

11/12/2015

Ukraine

addressing all of those issues together, because they are
all very closely linked to the maintenance of peace and
international security, and therefore all fall under the
purview and responsibility of the Council.
I wish to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Ukraine for his presence here today. I would like
to assure him of France’s commitment to respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Ukraine. The resolution of the crisis in eastern Ukraine
constitutes a priority for France. The President of the
Republic reiterated that point during his recent trip to
Moscow by recalling how our determination to find a
solution for a political settlement of the crisis remains
unchanged.
Within the Normandy format, France and Germany
are fully committed to the complete and swift
implementation of the Minsk agreements, particularly
the package of measures adopted on 12 February. The
political mobilization of the high-level Contact Group
on Ukraine in recent months has led to significant
progress on several aspects.
First is the fact that there are no longer any large-scale
hostilities, as there were at the beginning of the year,
and a process of political settlement of the crisis is
slowly taking shape. In terms of security, the ceasefire
established in September is generally being respected,
although it has yet to be consolidated. An agreement
on the withdrawal of weapons under the 100 millimetre
to 120 millimetre calibre has been implemented and is
being monitored by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). The number of civilian
casualties has been significantly reduced.
On the political front, it is now necessary to
determine the terms of a draft bill for elections in
the Donbas region aimed at granting special status to
the territory, according to the sequence approved at
the recent Normandy format summit held in Paris on
2 October.
Turning to economic and humanitarian issues,
the parties managed to reach agreements on concrete
projects to rebuild infrastructure and on a number of
prisoner exchanges. Progress has also been achieved in
mine clearance.
Furthermore, the European Union has done its
utmost to mobilize support for the implementation of
the Minsk agreements, in particular by enabling the
conclusion of a gas agreement between Russia and

S/PV.7576

Ukraine and by initiating trilateral consultations on
the impact of the crisis on the implementation of the
detailed and comprehensive free-trade agreement on
the Russian economy. To a certain extent, things are
therefore on the right track. Nevertheless, the situation
on the ground remains extremely volatile, and we are
fully aware of the difficulties that remain.
The trend of increasing ceasefire violations
recorded since the beginning of the month of November
endangers the progress achieved so far. Those
violations must cease. It is important that an agreement
on the withdrawal of heavy weapons be approved and
implemented immediately. The Special Monitoring
Mission of the OSCE in Ukraine must also be permitted
to fully exercise its mandate. In that regard, we reiterate
our call for the monitors to have the benefit of unhindered
access to areas controlled by the separatists, including
along the entire international border with Russia, in
accordance with the Minsk agreements. It is equally
important that the Special Monitoring Mission be able
to implement without delay the permanent outposts in
accordance with its plans. The withdrawal of foreign
terrorist fighters and equipment must also be carried
out without delay.
The lack of agreement among the parties within
the political working group hinders progress towards a
lasting settlement of the crisis in eastern Ukraine. We
hope that the Ukrainian authorities and the separatists
will constructively participate in the working group
discussions aimed at reaching agreement on a draft of
a special electoral bill for certain zones and regions of
Donetsk and Luhansk that respects international law
and OSCE standards.
The economic and humanitarian situation
also remains particularly troubling in Donbas. It
continues to deteriorate as winter sets in, which is
particularly worrying. It is vital that unhindered
access be guaranteed to humanitarian organizations
throughout the territory controlled by the separatists.
Unfortunately, that is not the case today, and it could
have devastating consequences on the population, as
Mr. Ging pointed out in his briefing today with regard
to the activities of Doctors Without Borders. Those
hindrances cannot in any case justify the measures of
unwarranted administrative control.
It is also important to expand our mine-clearing
operations to cover other priority areas identified by
the OSCE. We urge the international community,

15-4198611/28

S/PV.7576

Ukraine

especially the United Nations, to support those actions,
both financially and technically. We also support and
call for the further release of all prisoners held by the
parties, which must take place as quickly as possible.
We are also deeply concerned about the ongoing
serious human rights violations observed in eastern
Ukraine as well as the situation in Crimea, and I would
like to recall that France does not recognize its illegal
annexation. In those territories, the population sees
their fundamental human rights and freedoms regularly
violated by the de facto authorities. The repression of all
dissenting voices as well as the discrimination against
and constant harassment of Tatars in the Crimean
region must cease. In that regard, it is essential that
various human rights monitoring missions have access
to the entire Ukrainian territory, including Crimea.
Finally, our ultimate goal is the return of Ukraine’s
control over all its territory within the internationally
recognized borders, in accordance with international
law. In that context, the priorities are to consolidate the
security situation on the ground and to renew efforts to
implement the political aspects of the Minsk agreements.
Those two issues are indeed at the foundation of any
long-term and lasting settlement and are inseparable.
At the Paris summit of 2 October, the four Heads of
State and Government of the Normandy format process
agreed to postpone by several months the deadline
initially set for 31 December. The Minsk agreements
constitute the benchmark for a peaceful political
solution to the conflict. We thereby have an appropriate
framework for the solution adopted by the Council
in resolution 2202 (2015). I wish to reiterate that the
solution to the crisis requires the full and complete
implementation, as quickly as possible, of the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements. Each party, but also every member of the
Council, must meet its responsibilities in supporting the
process. We will continue, together with our German
partners, to mobilize in that direction, in the context of
the Normandy format. A new follow-up meeting at the
level of Foreign Ministers for that purpose will be held
shortly.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I welcome the
briefings today from the Deputy Secretary-General and
from the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

12/28

11/12/2015

Given the interconnected nature of all the issues that
the United Nations deals with, whether in Ukraine or
elsewhere — peace, security, development, human
rights, humanitarian affairs — it is imperative that the
Council have a full picture. I am very glad that we have
been able to do so today. I also welcome the presence
in the Council of the Foreign Ministers of Ukraine and
Lithuania.
The situation in Ukraine is deeply worrying for
three major reasons. First, the Minsk agreements
remain unfulfilled, and peace remains elusive.
Secondly, the humanitarian situation is worsening,
and will only continue to do so during winter. Thirdly,
Crimea remains illegally annexed, and its people’s
human rights remain oppressed. Let me take up each
of those in turn.
First, as we have heard today, progress on the
diplomatic track has slowed, and ceasefire violations are
on the increase. Last month saw spikes in the fighting
in eastern Ukraine, with fatalities fast approaching
pre-September levels. At a conservative estimate, over
9,000 people have now been killed, and more than
20,000 wounded, since the fighting began.
Many recent casualties are a direct result of the
abhorrent use of landmines and booby traps. Others
have been caused by heavy weapons, the same heavy
weapons that were supposed to have been withdrawn
under the Minsk agreements. The OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission makes clear where the blame lies.
The majority of violations have been committed by the
separatists.
It is imperative that the ceasefire be respected by
all parties. Not only is the ceasefire vital to the success
of the Minsk agreements, it will also allow collective
action to undertake meaningful demining in eastern
Ukraine. Landmines and other explosive remnants
of war continue to inflict casualties on an almost
daily basis. The priority must be to map the areas of
contamination and agree a coordinated approach for
their removal. That cannot be achieved while hostilities
are ongoing.
There is one Council member here today whose
influence can bring an end to the fighting and whose
pressure can deliver a political solution to the crisis. We
all look to Russia to make every effort in that regard,
both by using its influence on the separatists and by
withdrawing its troops and equipment that still remain
in Ukraine.

15-41986

11/12/2015

Ukraine

Russia can also have a meaningful impact on my
second point: the worsening humanitarian situation.
The separatists continue to deny access to both the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission and international
humanitarian agencies. That cannot continue. Sadly, at
the moment, Russia’s influence only seems to increase
tensions. So-called humanitarian convoys enter
Ukrainian territory without the consent of the Ukrainian
authorities, in clear violation of its sovereignty and
territorial integrity. There have been 42 such convoys
since August 2014, and they must cease.
With over 1.4 million people internally displaced
and an estimated 2 million people living in areas near
the fighting, the humanitarian challenge in Ukraine is
enormous. The recent opening of three humanitarian
logistics centres by Ukraine is a welcome move to
ease civilian suffering, but we regret the continued
deaths of civilians from landmines owing to the lack
of sanitation facilities at checkpoints. That needs to
be addressed. Sadly, the situation will only get worse
over winter. All aid agencies must be allowed to aid
preparations for cold weather across Ukraine. If access
continues to be restricted, aid agencies will be unable to
transport, store or deliver critical supplies to thousands
of affected people. A failure to do so will only lead to
more suffering and more deaths.
Turning to my final point, it has now been 21
months since the illegal annexation of Crimea. In that
time, the human rights situation has deteriorated. We
hear regular reports, including from Mr. Šimonović
today, of repression and restrictions of the fundamental
freedoms of assembly, association, expression and
belief. The United Nations Human Rights Mission in
Ukraine noted in its report this month that most human
rights abuses in Crimea have been directed at Crimean
Tartars and people supporting Crimea’s rightful place
in the Ukrainian State.
With temperatures falling and a road blockade
denying access to food and provisions, the humanitarian
situation on the peninsula is getting worse. The
electricity crisis is exacerbating the problem, and we
have raised the urgent need to restore the damaged
electricity power lines with the Ukrainian Government.
Let me conclude by thanking the briefers again for
their contributions. I hope that the Council, working
together and alongside the relevant agencies and
regional associations, can help ensure that 2016 is a
more peaceful year for all people in Ukraine. I look

S/PV.7576

forward to working with all Council members, both old
and new, in making that a reality.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): With all due respect to you, Madam President,
I cannot fail to note that Security Council meetings
should start on time. Unfortunately, the American
presidency this month has introduced an element of
nervousness into the work of the Council and has not
always acted on the basis of consensus.
The coup d’état that extremists carried out with
the support of outside organizers during a wave of
legal popular protest has led Ukraine into a serious
economic and social crisis that has persisted for some
time. Helping to find a way out of that situation is the
challenge of the international community, including the
Security Council.
We are grateful to Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson, to the Chief Monitor of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, Ertuğrul
Apakanu, and to the Director of the Coordination and
Response Division in the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, John Ging, for their briefings.
With regard to the statement of Mr. Šimonović, I
would note that the Mission he heads in Ukraine does
not have a Security Council mandate and the subject of
his statement goes beyond the remit of resolution 2202
(2015). The report of his Mission is being discussed
in the Human Rights Council in Geneva. Returning
to that subject now is nothing more than an attempt to
divert attention from the most important task today,
which is to implement the package of measures for
the implementation of the Minsk agreements. It is
only through the full implementation of the provisions
of that document that the conflict in Donbas and the
problems related to it can be resolved.
The Security Council has met repeatedly on the
subject of Ukraine. However, most of the meetings
were of a polemical nature. An exception to that was
provided by the unanimous adoption, on 17 February, of
resolution 2202 (2015), which approved the package of
measures of 12 February and urged all parties to fully
implement it. That clear document, which presented a
road map for settlement, inspired hope that the crisis
could be resolved.
Ten months later, we consider it logical, expedient
and necessary to discuss how it is being implemented,

15-4198613/28

S/PV.7576

Ukraine

and if it is not, why. We believe that the military
provisions of the package have achieved some results.
Basically, heavy weapons have been withdrawn, and
even additional agreements have been concluded on
weapons with a calibre of less than 100 millimetres:
tanks, mortars and artillery shells. Not everything
went smoothly, but the intensity of the fighting and the
shelling on civilians in Donbas has been significantly
reduced. The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
played an important role in that regard. However, we
are concerned — and this has been confirmed by the
OSCE observers — that in the past month tensions
have increased again. Seventy per cent of the ceasefire
violations have occurred in the Donetsk region. In the
area under the control of the Ukrainian armed forces,
there was regular shelling in Horlivka, Zhabichevo,
Zheleznaya Balka, Krasny Partizan, Spartak and
Staromykhailivka. The provocative nature of those
attacks can be seen from the fact that they took place at
the same time as the Normandy format meetings.
According to the statistics of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission, the Ukrainian side bears the main
responsibility for the shelling, for placing military
equipment in the security zone and for using radiojamming equipment against the unmanned aerial
vehicles operated by the Special Monitoring Mission.
The Ukrainian armed forces continue to deploy their
forces in the region and do not hide fact that they
have heavy weapons, which can be seen in the regions
of Avdiivka, Volnovakha, Horlivka, Dzerzhynsk,
Orlovka and Pisky. In ​​
Horlivka alone, according to
Donetsk intelligence, there are 85 tanks, 12 armoured
personnel carriers and 30 rocket launchers. In addition,
on 4 December, the Ukrainian side arbitrarily and
in violation to the existing agreements seized seven
villages that were, at the time of the signing of the
package, in the buffer zone and still not under the
control of either party. We regard those actions as
provocative. The Ukrainian troops must be withdrawn
from those areas.
Those questions are of course being raised in
the Trilateral Contact Group and the Joint Centre for
Control and Coordination. However, the Ukrainians
are trying to argue that black is white, saying that
the rebels are shelling themselves. They criticize the
OSCE Mission and say that the problem is that it is not
accountable to the Contact Group. Even the politically
correct leadership of the Contact Group has had to
urge them to refrain from inflammatory rhetoric. We

14/28

11/12/2015

hope that Mr. Apakan will continue to call upon the
representatives of Kyiv to work constructively and
avoid provocative language.
It is clear that the military situation in Ukraine
cannot be considered outside the context of the
implementation of the political aspects of the package
of measures. The problems with regard to the political
area have unfortunately often led to an escalation
of the situation. Currently, we do not see anything
positive coming out of the implementation of such key
provisions of the Minsk II package as organizing local
elections, granting amnesty, providing Donbas with
permanent legislation on its special status or carrying
out real constitutional reform. Kyiv still refuses direct
dialogue with the representatives of Donbas, contrary
to what was stipulated in the Minsk agreement. The
Normandy format summit that took place on 2 October
in Paris should have provided some impetus towards
improvements on that score. Following that meeting,
the Luhansk and Donetsk authorities agreed to make
concessions and postpone elections until the winter or
spring of the following year, if Kyiv took specific steps
as agreed upon within the Normandy quartet. However,
soon after the Paris meeting of the Contact Group, the
representatives of Kyiv tried to present the situation as
if nothing needed to be done on their part. Therefore,
by ignoring the agreements reached by the leaders of
the Normandy format quartet, they returned to their
previous position.
For example, despite the agreement on the need
to adopt a law on elections in Donbas, the Ukrainians
asserted that the elections needed to be held under
the existing law under which they had been held
previously in the rest of Ukraine on 25 October and
on 15 November. In the first place, the law is far from
perfect, which became apparent during the voting.
It does not provide sufficient time to monitor the
elections, and the campaign preceding the elections is
rendered more complicated, as is the work of the mass
media. Consequently, those regions did not elect the
candidates who enjoyed the support of the majority. But
most important, that law was not agreed to by Donetsk
and Luhansk, as stipulated by the Minsk agreements,
and is in contradiction with the position that President
Poroshenko made clear at the Normandy format
summit in October. It is clear that Kyiv is not looking
for a compromise leading to a way out of the current
situation. Instead, it quickly endorsed the so-called

15-41986

11/12/2015

Ukraine

framework on the use of the law on local elections in
the Verkhovna Rada.
As is well known, the package of measures also
includes a number of socioeconomic steps aimed at
improving the difficult humanitarian situation in
Donbas. Logically, achieving progress in de-escalating
the military situation should have led to resolving some
of those glaring problems and building a climate of trust.
However, Kyiv continues the economic blockade of
Donbas, while ignoring the relevant recommendations
of international organizations. The population of
Donbas cannot count on having quality medical care.
They have limited access to safe drinking water and
basic services. Depriving the residents of Donbas of
their pensions and social benefits and hindering the
delivery of food and other essential goods demonstrate
Kyiv’s true desire to harm the people of the region.
There is an absence of services, such as the mobile
banking stations along the line of contact, through
which Ukraine is supposed to provide benefit payments
to the population of Donbas.
Moreover, the blockade is accompanied by a
number of absurd actions on the part of the Kyiv
authorities. The authorities continue to be brought to
trial in their own Ukrainian courts just to avoid paying
benefits to the residents of Donbas. On 16 October,
the highest administrative court of Ukraine ruled that
it was illegal to suspend the disbursement of social
benefits to citizens of the Donbas and Luhansk regions
and ordered their resumption. And that was not the
first time a Ukrainian court had handed down such a
decision. I am sorry to say this, but in this pre-winter
season, with increasing cold weather, the Ukrainian
leadership has quietly been encouraging those who are
working to make the situation for the people in that area
unbearable. The power supply to Donbas is unstable and
there has been no effort to improve the damaged water
supply, which is the result of shelling a 300-kilometerlong section of a water supply system that used to
supply 400,000 people. In such an extremely difficult
humanitarian situation in the south-east of Ukraine,
Russia continues to offer humanitarian aid to the
people of the Donbas region, which has been isolated
by Kyiv, including medicine, warm clothing and food
for hospitals, schools and community centres, among
other forms of assistance. By 9 December, 46 convoys
had delivered approximately 56 thousand tons of goods.
As one can see, the implementation of the package of
measures, is, to say the least, being hampered. It would

S/PV.7576

seem that no one is interested in freezing the conflict
in the south-east of Ukraine, but in order to ensure a
viable outcome and its final settlement, there needs to
be political will on the part of the direct participants,
which is clearly lacking, especially on the Ukrainian
side. We have already discussed how Kyiv behaved
after the Normandy format summit in Paris, where the
agreements reached were simply disregarded. A mere
appearance of dialogue with the people of Donbas
and Luhansk emerged in the subgroups of the Contact
Group, but the bellicose rhetoric on the part of Kyiv
abounds and the military preparations continue. What
are we to say when we see diplomatic efforts under way
yet, at the same time, a seventh mobilization campaign
is being planned and enormous amounts of scanty State
funds are being generously spent on weapons?
The deplorable situation in Ukraine is well known.
Along with a very difficult economic situation, there is
an ongoing struggle for power — reminiscent of gang
violence — endemic corruption and an inability to
establish Government administration even in regions
that strongly supported the Maidan protests. There are
many problems in Ukraine with the administration of
the legal system. There is much evidence of human
rights violations by the Ukrainian security forces
and mercenary battalions, including torture, general
mistreatment, abductions, arbitrary detention and
extrajudicial punishment. The crimes committed in the
Maidan have not been investigated, and the snipers and
provocateurs are still walking free. No one has been
brought to justice for the terrible murders of the victims
in Odessa. International observers note the absence of
efficiency and objectivity in investigations, which are
being intentionally drawn out, and the efforts by the
authorities to conceal the results of the investigations.
There is growing pressure on the courts. The Ukrainian
authorities are still prosecuting civilian activists from
the opposition. Human rights activists continue to
condemn Kyiv’s actions with regard to its restrictions
on the media and its exerting pressure on journalists.
Kyiv is also surreptitiously selling weapons and
military equipment to the Middle East through very
dubious channels. Those could possibly wind up in the
hands of terrorists.
We are not ruling out the fact that, in order to
conceal the problems in its domestic policy, the Kiev
authorities continue not only to undermine the peace
process in Donbas, but are also promoting military
provocations. It is clear that one of the factors behind

15-4198615/28

S/PV.7576

Ukraine

the political situation and the actions of the Kyiv
authorities is the spread of the ideology of extremism
in parts of Ukrainian society, including neo-Nazism
and aggressive nationalism. That is the sort of ideology
led to the coup d’état in Kyiv in 2014 and the later socalled counter-terrorist operation in the south-east
of the country. We are convinced that, as long as the
expression of such ideology is justified as part of the
right to freedom of expression and as a potential factor
in consolidating the country and society, we cannot
legitimize the authorities in Kyiv.
We were shocked to hear that a new Ukrainian
military transport aircraft has been christened the
Bandera, after the Nazi collaborator. Will they paint
a swastika on it? A glaring example of the outrages
committed by the armed nationalist radicals was
the destruction of the transmission lines supplying
electricity to Crimea, which has resulted in a crisis for
schools, hospitals and other facilities on the peninsula.
That threatened the lives of patients on life-support
and constitutes a gross violation of the right to life.
The Kyiv authorities have demonstrated their complete
inability to react to or condemn such actions.
The position of a number of States that claim to
want the best for Ukraine is unhelpful in that regard.
Recently, the Vice-President of the United States went
to Kyiv. Addressing the Verkhovna Rada, he spoke
about Minsk agreements. He said that Russia was
presenting an obstacle to the implementation of the
Minsk agreements. But everyone knows that Russia
cannot modify the Ukrainian Constitution, adopt laws
regulating elections in Ukraine or grant amnesty. It is
puzzling that, in a similar vein, he did not take that
opportunity to call on Ukrainian lawmakers and the
President of Ukraine who hold such power.
In conclusion, we confirm that there is no alternative
to the implementation of the Minsk agreements of
12 February and of resolution 2202 (2015). We are
pleased that, although the work of the Trilateral Contact
Group is difficult, its participants are working in an
orderly manner.
Mr. Adamu (Nigeria): I would like to thank
the briefers — Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson,
Mr. Šimonović, Mr. John Ging and Ambassador
Apakan — for their informative remarks.
We have been following the developments in
Ukraine very closely and are concerned by the tenuous
peace prevailing in the country. In our view, the

16/28

11/12/2015

package of measures for the implementation of the
Minsk agreements of February 2015 provide a concise
and clear road map for settling the situation in Ukraine.
That is why we urge the parties to abide by their
obligations under the agreements in order to achieve
the objectives of the ceasefire.
Reports of indiscriminate shelling of populated
areas are a matter of concern to us. That endangers
the lives of civilians and exacerbates the humanitarian
situation. We therefore urge the parties to take care
not to expose civilians to unacceptable risks. Nigeria
is also concerned about the humanitarian situation
in eastern Ukraine. According to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, many civilians
in Donetsk and Luhansk continue to endure limited
or no access to humanitarian assistance. We urge the
authorities to remove the bureaucratic impediments to
the work of humanitarian actors in order to facilitate
the delivery of much-needed assistance. On the same
subject, we applaud the efforts of the United Nations
and other humanitarian actors to address the challenges
in eastern Ukraine. We urge them to remain engaged in
the situation until it stabilizes, and call on the authorities
to take steps to ensure the establishment of an effective
system for the adequate coordination of relief efforts in
the region.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Mr. Šimonović, Mr. Ging and
Mr. Apakan for their briefings.
Angola supports the peaceful resolution of
conflicts through dialogue, negotiations and strict
respect for the Charter of the United Nations and the
principles of international law. On this occasion, we
want to reiterate our attachment to Ukraine’s unity,
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity,
as well as our support for the implementation of the
package of measures adopted in Minsk on 12 February
and for a permanent ceasefire a the prerequisite to the
expeditious implementation of the Minsk agreements
and, ultimately, to the establishment of peace in
Ukraine.
We took note of the relative optimism expressed by
the briefers regarding the prevailing peaceful situation
in eastern Ukraine, which we hope will strengthen and
allow for the recovery of the region, thus enabling the
population in those areas to enjoy a better life in peace
and security. In that regard, we hope that the separatists
in eastern Ukraine will soon give up the territories they

15-41986

11/12/2015

Ukraine

control in order to restore normalcy to the lives of the
people under their yoke and permit the restoration of
the unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
We regret the constraints on humanitarian access
and the freedom of movement faced by United
Nations agencies across the line of contact between
Government- and non-Government-controlled areas
because of security reasons. We strongly condemn
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. We call upon the parties to the conflict to
allow and facilitate safe, rapid and unhindered access
by humanitarian organizations to all areas and people
in need.
The situation of internally displaced persons is a
matter of concern. Owing to inconsistent solutions for
housing internally displaced persons, delays in winter
protection, the significant number of landmines and
unexploded ordnance remain the main causes of high
casualty rates.
The conflict in Ukraine is a senseless one. It must
stop as soon as possible, with the Ukrainian people able
to live in peace with one another. The Deputy SecretaryGeneral referred to the Minsk agreements as the only
viable strategy for the achievement of peace. We join
our voice to his appeal for political will and flexibility,
and we call on the parties to the conflict to respect
the ceasefire, fully implement the Minsk package of
measures and allow the Organization of Security and
Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission
freedom of movement to verify the ceasefire and the
withdrawal of heavy weapons from the designated areas.
The Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
2202 (2015), endorsing the Minsk agreements and
conveying the international community’s commitment
to peace in Ukraine.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Jan
Eliasson, the Chief Monitor of the Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Mr. Ertuğrul Apakan,
the Director of the Coordination and Response Division
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, Mr. John Ging, and the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Human Rights, Mr. Ivan Šimonović, for
their informative briefings.
Jordan reiterates the need for a permanent political
solution to the crisis in eastern Ukraine so as to
establish peace and security there, as well as to restore

S/PV.7576

its territorial integrity and sovereignty. Prolonging the
conflict will not serve the interests of any of the parties.
Moreover, the continuation and expansion of military
confrontations and acts of provocation can lead only
to the exacerbation of the current situation, while
rendering the agreements devoid of all meaning. That
will aggravate outstanding issues among the parties
involved, leading to the deterioration of economic and
humanitarian conditions, which will have even greater
adverse effects on civilians in particular and on the
security and stability of the region as a whole.
Jordan calls upon all parties to assume their
responsibilities and focus on positive and constructive
dialogue within the framework of the Normandy
format and the Trilateral Contact Group, in order to
achieve a peaceful settlement of the crisis. The Minsk
agreements and resolution 2202 (2015) provide a basic,
solid foundation for any political settlement. The
parties concerned should demonstrate sincerity and
commitment to the implementation of those agreements
and build upon them in order to achieve a ceasefire and
settle the conflict. In that connection, we emphasize the
need for the comprehensive implementation of all the
terms of the agreements.
We are deeply concerned about the continued
breaches of the ceasefire and the fragile security
conditions that have led to the humanitarian crisis in
which thousands have been displaced, a further 9,000
people have lost their lives and more than 20,000 people
have been injured. We emphasize that the political
de-escalation of the Ukrainian crisis would help to
resolve the humanitarian crisis. In any event, efforts to
mitigate the crisis must be redoubled. It is imperative
to protect civilians and their rights, to investigate all
crimes and violations of those rights and to ensure the
prevention of impunity.
We reiterate the need to support the OSCE and
to facilitate its work and access to all areas so that it
can discharge its mission and verify the withdrawal of
heavy weapons from the areas adjacent to the contact
line. We also call upon the Government of Ukraine
to proceed with the positive measures and reforms it
is undertaking, including the recent adoption of the
national human rights strategy. We emphasize the
need to provide basic humanitarian and social services
to civilians and to internally displaced persons in
particular, regardless of the political affiliations of the
parties to the conflict.

15-4198617/28

S/PV.7576

Ukraine

Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
welcome the presence here today of the Deputy
Secretary-General, the Assistant Secretary-General
for Human Rights, the Director of the Coordination
and Response Division of the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates
that the full implementation of resolution 2202 (2015),
which supports the decision adopted in Minsk on
12 February by the representatives of Ukraine, the
Russia Federation, France and Germany, is essential as
part of the consolidation of efforts to be pursued by the
parties in the quest for a political and peaceful solution
to the crisis in Ukraine.
During the meeting of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) troika
against the backdrop of the Ministerial Council meeting
on 3 December, the Foreign Ministers of Serbia,
Switzerland and Germany reaffirmed their full support
for the political process within the framework of the
Trilateral Contact Group and the work of the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine. Furthermore,
they expressed their concern in the light of the fact
that, although the ceasefire was holding, periods of
relative or absolute calm were nonetheless frequently
interspersed with intense and targeted fighting. We
are unequivocal in our demand that the parties to the
conflict must be determined and unrelenting in working
towards delivering a complete and sustainable peace. A
definitive cessation of hostilities therefore constitutes a
vital goal that cannot be postponed any longer.
In that understanding, our country welcomes the
work being carried out by the OSCE to support the
effective implementation of the Minsk agreements. It
is important to emphasize that only through dialogue,
direct negotiation and the political will of the parties
will we be able to arrive at a peaceful and durable
solution to the crisis in the region. We also believe
that the application of unilateral coercive sanctions is
incompatible with international law. Such sanctions
are also counterproductive to hopes for achieving
peace and stability in the region, given that they sour
the atmosphere necessary for the dialogue that is so
essential for rebuilding trust between the parties.

18/28

11/12/2015

With the support of the international community
and by strictly complying with the Minsk agreements
and the resolutions of the Security Council, it should be
possible to avoid military escalation and the spreading
of the conflict. All possible efforts must also be made to
address the structural and historical root causes of the
crisis, with the aim of achieving lasting and sustainable
peace.
We call upon the parties to strictly adhere to their
obligations relating to the protection of civilians in
the regions affected by violence, including the need
to guarantee access for humanitarian assistance to
residents in those areas, as well as to internally displaced
persons and refugees who find themselves in the areas
affected by the conflict. We reject acts of violence and
ethnic and politically based persecution, as well as acts
of terrorism, irrespective of who is behind them. Any
such incident must be duly investigated independently,
and the investigation must produce the evidence found
to support the conclusions drawn.
Finally, we call upon all parties to redouble their
efforts in the quest for a just and lasting political
solution, which is to their benefit and to that of the
entire region.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the briefers for the information they have provided.
For some time, the situation in eastern Ukraine
has generally been stable, and the ceasefire has been
maintained. The withdrawal of heavy weapons is under
way. Last February, leaders from four countrie —,
Russia, France, Germany and Ukraine — reached an
important consensus in Minsk on a political settlement
of the crisis in Ukraine. Subsequently, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2202 (2015), thereby
demonstrating the firm support of the international
community for the diplomatic efforts of the leaders
of the four countries for a political settlement of the
Ukraine question. At present, all the parties should
fully implement the consensus reached by the leaders
of the four countries and the Council resolutions in an
effort to further promote the political settlement of the
crisis in Ukraine.
The question of Ukraine involves a complicated
history and reality. To find a fundamental and lasting
solution to the problem in that country, we must address
the legitimate rights, interests and concerns of all the
ethnicities and regions within Ukraine, as well as the
legitimate concerns of all the parties involved, in order

15-41986

11/12/2015

Ukraine

to balance their interests. The international community
should further strengthen diplomatic efforts to achieve
a political settlement. China is open to a discussion of
this question in the Council, and believes that the debate
here should play a constructive role in alleviating the
situation in Ukraine. China is opposed, as always, to
the Council’s involvement in country-specific human
rights issues and to the use of unilateral sanctions, or
the threat of the use of sanctions freely in international
relations. That is detrimental to finding a lasting
solution. As always, China respects the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all countries, Ukraine
included, and has remained objective and impartial on
the question there.
China calls upon all of the parties to remain calm
and exercise restraint, to fully implement the Minsk
agreements and to consolidate the hard-won ceasefire,
so as to achieve peace, tranquillity, stability and
development in Ukraine. China will continue to play
a constructive role in finding a political settlement to
this question.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I would
like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson,
Mr. Šimonović, Mr. Ging and Ambassador Apakan for
their briefings today. I also welcome the participation
of the Foreign Ministers of Ukraine and Lithuania in
this meeting.
In resolution 2202 (2015), the Council unanimously
called on all parties to implement the package of
measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, which was to have been completed by
the end of this year, less than 20 days from now. We
are very concerned at the slow progress, and we urge
renewed efforts to ensure full compliance with the
commitments under the agreements, which, as others
have noted, offer the best chance for a durable peace.
As the briefers have outlined today, the continuing
presence of foreign fighters and the flow of weapons
and ammunition into the separatist-controlled areas
make the renewal of hostilities a constant possibility.
New Zealand calls on all the parties to the conflict to
deliver on their commitments to a genuine and sustained
ceasefire and to the verified withdrawal of proscribed
weapons.
On the political track, a number of key outstanding
elements of the Minsk process still need to be resolved.
We urge the parties to reach agreement on the
modalities for free and fair elections in the conflict

S/PV.7576

areas, in accordance with Ukrainian law and with
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) standards, and for elections to be monitored by
the OSCE. The restoration of lasting peace to the region
requires the restoration of Ukraine’s control over its
border with Russia. In order for that to occur, the parties
will need to reach agreement on, and implement, all of
the political elements of the Minsk agreements.
All parties to the conflict agreed that the OSCE
would play a special role in monitoring and verifying
compliance with the Minsk agreements. Yet the OSCE
continues daily to report significant restrictions on its
access throughout eastern Ukraine. The separatists
must comply with all the obligations undertaken in
Minsk, including by ensuring that OSCE monitors are
able to carry out their work effectively and safely. We
call on Russia to use its considerable influence over the
separatists to ensure such compliance.
The twelfth report on the human rights situation
in Ukraine by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights records a troubling list
of human rights abuses in eastern Ukraine and Crimea,
including a lack of protection and justice for victims,
impunity for perpetrators on both sides and a prevailing
climate of fear in the separatist-controlled territories.
We call for urgent independent oversight of places
of detention and for investigation and accountability
for all violations of human rights. It is clear that the
humanitarian problems are large, with millions of
affected people in the conflict area. As we have heard
today, the situation is already dire in some areas. With
the further onset of winter, the already difficult lives of
civilians affected by conflict in Ukraine will become
even more perilous.
As we have also heard, critical infrastructure has
been damaged in the conflict and is in need of repair.
Many are without adequate shelter owing to the shelling
of residential areas. Secure access to food has become
increasingly challenging. Landmines and unexploded
ordnance are posing a critical risk to civilians, thereby
underscoring the need for mine clearance and mine
awareness on both sides of the conflict line.
The difficult situation facing civilians has been
greatly exacerbated by the restrictions imposed on
humanitarian actors in recent months, such as purported
registration requirements enforced by the separatists.
We call on all parties to do everything within their

15-4198619/28

S/PV.7576

Ukraine

power to ensure that humanitarian assistance can freely
reach those who need it in Ukraine.
The Council has previously determined to remain
seized of the situation in Ukraine. Until fundamental
issues have been resolved, it is right that the Council
continues to monitor the situation very closely.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): We are very grateful for the information
provided to the Council by Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson; Mr. Šimonović, Assistant Secretary-General
for Human Rights; Ambassador Apakan, Chief Monitor
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine; and by Mr. Ging, Director of the Coordination
and Response Division of the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. I also thank
the Lithuanian delegation for the initiative of convening
this meeting.
The last time that the Council met for a
comprehensive overview of the situation in Ukraine
was several months ago, in June (S/PV.7457). Spain
favours the Council maintaining a close and watchful
eye on the situation in Ukraine, together with the
ongoing process of the Minsk agreements.
My delegation regrets the increase in hostilities seen
since the beginning of November along the contact line.
We also regret the fact, and as we have heard today, that
compliance with the Minsk agreements is not moving
ahead at the pace we all desire. Spain therefore calls
for a rekindling of the spirit of understanding that the
countries gathered under the Normandy format have
always tried to foster, with a view to advancing full
compliance with the Minsk agreements.
That is why that process must play a decisive role
in the resolution of the crisis. It is not a perfect process,
nor does it cover all aspects of the crisis. Nonetheless,
it continues to be the only solution available and the
most appropriate one if we are to achieve a political
solution to the conflict that should never have taken
place in the first place and has already lasted far too
long. That is why it is critical to maintain the ceasefire
and implement the commitments on the withdrawal of
heavy weapons, thus enabling the political efforts to
lead to lasting results.
Spain also acknowledges and highly values the
important work being carried out by the Special
Monitoring Mission of the OSCE. It is essential to

20/28

11/12/2015

provide access to all areas of the territory so as to
enable the Mission to fulfil its mandate. Moreover, it
is crucial that all parties to the conflict scrupulously
and without exception respect the status of the Special
Monitoring Mission, as well as its members.
It is also essential and urgent that all of the
stakeholders involved renew and strengthen their
political will and efforts order to guarantee the full
and effective implementation of the Minsk agreements.
In that connection, I would like to reiterate Spain’s
resolute support for President Poroshenko and his
determination to pursue legal and constitutional reform
that will provide stability and progress for his country
and the people of Ukraine. Some additional reforms are
still needed for the swift holding of local elections in
the eastern part of the country, in accordance with the
Minsk process.
We are deeply troubled by the persistence of serious
human rights violations, particularly in those areas
controlled by the self-styled republics of Donetsk and
Luhansk, which were condemned in the recent report
of the Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine.
There are also reports of human rights violations in
Crimea and clashes and acts of aggression suffered by
the Tatar minority in the peninsula.
Against that backdrop, I would like to refer to the
recent report issued in November by the OSCE High
Commissioner on National Minorities, Madam Thors.
The report called for a tolerant and diverse society
to be fostered and supported under a solid, robust
institutional framework. The effective protection of
the human rights of all residents of each and every
region of Ukraine must remain an ongoing priority.
We welcome the recent adoption, in August, by the
President of Ukraine, of the first national human
rights strategy. It is our hope that it can be swiftly and
thoroughly rolled out and applied across the territory
of Ukraine in accordance with the plan of action that
has been announced. We also welcome the acceptance
of the jurisdictional competence of the International
Criminal Court to investigate future crimes under the
Rome Statute.
The role played by the Special Monitoring Mission
in terms of information and awareness-raising in
human rights is also equally important and enjoys our
full support. Access must therefore be granted to the
Mission throughout the entire territory of Ukraine,
without any restrictions.

15-41986

11/12/2015

Ukraine

On the humanitarian track, we are particularly
concerned by the fate of the hundreds of thousands of
displaced persons both within Ukraine and the refugees
in neighbouring countries. It would be remiss of me not
to mention the numerous civilian victims who continue
to lose their lives or suffer injury each day as a result
of the conflict. On the other hand, the onset of winter
is at our door, which gives rise to further concern
about the need to provide humanitarian aid to those
in non-government controlled areas. We believe that
hindering humanitarian access to the non-Government
controlled areas cannot continue, because those efforts
include actors such as Doctors Without Borders.
Hundreds of thousands depend continuously on
humanitarian aid to survive and there can be excuse to
hamper that work.
I conclude by recalling the fact that my delegation
wishes to again draw attention to General Assembly
resolution 68/262, and our firm conviction that any
lasting solution needs to include respect for the political
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine.
Ms. Sapag Muñoz de la Peña (Chile) (spoke in
Spanish): As we have mentioned on other occasions,
it is once again a pleasure to see a woman presiding
over the work of the Security Council, even though her
presidency is coming to an end.
We highly welcome the briefings by Mr. Jan
Eliasson, Mr. Ging, Mr. Šimonović and Ambassador
Apakan. We also welcome the participation and
presence in the Council today of the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Lithuania and Ukraine.
We wish to express our profound misgivings in the
light of the resurgence of tensions in various localities
of Donetsk. In particular, we are tremendously worried
about the failure to observe the ban on using heavy
weapons — a point already raised by previous speakers.
Faced with that reality, it is imperative and urgent to
preserve the ceasefire.
As we have indicated previously, we believe that
full compliance with the ceasefire, to be monitored
and verified by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine, in line with the provisions of the Minsk
agreements and the dialogue between the parties, is the
only way to achieve lasting peace. We call upon the
parties to refrain from actions incompatible with the

S/PV.7576

Charter of the United Nations, international law and
international humanitarian law.
We are particularly troubled by the multifaceted
fallout from the crisis and its impact on the civilian
population, particularly in those areas under the
control of illegal armed groups. We urge the parties
to unconditionally respect human rights, including the
rights of minorities, and to ensure that those responsible
for such violations and abuses are brought to justice.
Moreover, accountability is another way to support the
implementation of the Minsk agreements.
The humanitarian situation is an unavoidable
issue. The situation of internally displaced persons and
civilians in need of protection is of further concern. In
that connection, we note in particular the elderly, as
Mr. Ging mentioned today. Access for humanitarian
assistance remains a core issue that must be guaranteed.
The worsening weather conditions as winter sets in will
seriously affect the population in need of assistance,
especially children and other vulnerable groups. The
international community must be ready to respond to
relevant humanitarian appeals and to strengthen efforts
to implement public health measures.
This is a moment when it is crucial that the Council
send a new message to the parties on the importance
of creating the conditions that can enable the Minsk
agreements to be effectively implemented. The facts
show that apprehensions about the precariousness of the
compliance may be justified in a context of structural
tension. Only by ensuring a political dialogue within
the Minsk framework can such cycles of violence be
overcome.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the briefers — Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson, Mr. Ivan Šimonović, Mr. John Ging and
Mr. Ertuğrul Apakan — for their presentations, and to
welcome the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania
and Ukraine to the Security Council.
Chad is concerned about the continuing serious
situation in eastern Ukraine despite the signing of
the Minsk agreements on 12 February. The chief
victims of the fighting and bombings are civilians.
The humanitarian agencies’ statistics attest to the high
human cost of the crisis in Ukraine, with more than
9,000 people dead and more than 2.5 million refugees
and internally displaced persons, with thousands of
the vulnerable having no access to humanitarian aid.
Added to all that is the massive destruction of public

15-4198621/28

S/PV.7576

Ukraine

and private infrastructure, never mind the enormous
suffering that the affected civilians have endured.
In the face of this worrying humanitarian situation,
it is vital that we ensure free and unhindered access
to the conflict zones in order to deliver essential
humanitarian assistance to the internally displaced
and improve their living conditions. Chad believes
firmly that the solution to the Ukrainian crisis must
be a political one, and as such is greatly dependent
on the willingness of the parties concerned to commit
to a genuine negotiation process aimed at achieving a
lasting peace. In that regard, we call for implementation
of the Minsk agreements, as laid down in resolution
2202 (2015), of 17 February, including a durable
ceasefire, whose constant violation by the parties
to the conflict we deplore. The withdrawal of heavy
weapons and the observance of the agreements’ other
relevant measures represent, among other things, ways
to ease the violence. In that regard, the observers of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
should not be hindered in fulfilling their mission.
Similarly, the implementation of the measures outlined
must be carried out with respect for international norms,
the recommendations in the reports of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and international law concerning the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine.

11/12/2015

of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), in order to enable it to carry out its
mandate, including by providing the OSCE with full
and unhindered access to rebel-held areas in the Donbas
region and with the information it needs to verify the
withdrawal of heavy weapons.
Malaysia looks forward to further progress being
made by both sides on determining the modalities
of local elections in certain areas of Donetsk and
Luhansk, as laid down in the Minsk agreements and in
accordance with the laws of Ukraine. We take note of
the extension of the time frame for the implementation
of the agreements from the end of this year to the end of
2016. Rather than pointing fingers about who might be
causing the delays in implementing the agreements, the
parties should engage in good-faith negotiations and
use the breathing space created to redouble their efforts
to deal with the issues of constitutional reform and
decentralization of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.

Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I would like to join other
Council members in expressing our appreciation to
all of today’s briefers for their insightful assessments
of the latest situation in Ukraine. I would also like to
acknowledge the presence of the Foreign Ministers of
Lithuania and Ukraine, who are with us here today.
Almost half a year has gone by since the Council last
met on this issue (see S/PV.7498), and we would like
to believe that the situation in Ukraine is stabilizing.
Listening to the briefers, however, we share the
concerns that other Council members have expressed
about the security, humanitarian and human rights
situations in Ukraine.

Malaysia is deeply concerned about the allegations
of violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law in Ukraine. We urge all the parties
to comply with international law and international
humanitarian law, particularly where it concerns
the protection of civilians. Reports of the summary
execution and arbitrary detention of civilians and of
torture and forced disappearance must be thoroughly
investigated in order to ensure accountability. We
also call on the parties to respect the people’s rights
to freedom of opinion and expression and to peaceful
assembly. In that regard, Malaysia welcomes the
progress made by the Ukrainian Government in
introducing a national human rights strategy in
August and looks forward to its implementation via an
action plan. We also urge all parties to allow safe and
unrestricted humanitarian access to those in need. We
would like to emphasize that humanitarian assistance
must be carried out in accordance with international
law, international humanitarian law and respect for
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.

Malaysia takes note of the progress made so far in
implementing the 13 points in the Minsk agreements,
particularly on the maintenance of the ceasefire, the
withdrawal of weapons, the release of hostages and
work on constitutional reforms. However, that progress
is far from being irreversible. We therefore call on
all parties to comply fully with the provisions of the
Minsk agreements. In particular, we urge them to
cooperate fully with the Special Monitoring Mission

We remain concerned about the insidious increase
in violations of human rights in Crimea, especially of
the right to life, liberty, security and physical integrity,
to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly, and
to an education in one’s native language. We urge
the de facto authorities in Crimea to provide access
to the United Nations Human Rights Monitoring
Mission in order to enable it to carry out its mandate
effectively. Malaysia would like to recall General

22/28

15-41986

11/12/2015

Ukraine

Assembly resolution 68/262, adopted last year by an
overwhelming majority of Member States, on the status
of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea. We share the
assessment of the Office of the High Commissioner of
Human Rights that compliance with the resolution is
crucial if we are to see an environment conducive to the
promotion and protection of human rights in Ukraine.
In conclusion, Malaysia reaffirms its commitment
to a peaceful resolution of the conflict in Ukraine
based on the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, including respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine. We also reiterate that
full compliance with the February Minsk agreements,
as endorsed by the Council in resolution 2202 (2015),
is crucial to rebuilding trust and confidence in order to
achieve a political solution to the conflict. Any military
solution is unsustainable in the long run and will only
result in further humanitarian disaster. I would also
like to take this opportunity to commend the tireless
efforts and dedication of the various humanitarian
organizations, including the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, in providing assistance and
basic services to those affected by the Ukrainian crisis.
We also greatly appreciate the work of the OSCE and
the Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine. And
we affirm the important role of the Normandy format
and Trilateral Contact Group, and urge the relevant
parties to intensify their cooperation in good faith via
those frameworks.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I would first like to join my colleagues in thanking
our briefers — Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson,
Assistant Secretary-General Šimonović, Director of
Operations Ging and Ambassador Apakan. Teams from
the United Nations and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) are active on the
ground, working in extremely difficult conditions, and
we would like to express the gratitude of the United
States and, I am sure, of the broader international
community to them. We thank Foreign Minister
Klimkin and Foreign Minister Linkevičius for joining
us.
I would like to start by apologizing for the late start
to this meeting; the delay was unavoidable and very
important to protecting the integrity of the Security
Council. I also must stress the absolute criticality
and centrality of the independent reporting of facts to

S/PV.7576

the implementation of the Minsk agreements and of
resolution 2202 (2015).
In arguing, as the Russian Ambassador did earlier,
that the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) should not brief, one does wonder
what Russia seeks to hide. But we understand its very
unfortunate desire to prevent the Council from hearing
inconvenient facts, and it is absolutely essential that we
not let that happen and that the facts be presented such
as they are.
As we have heard today, the present situation in
Ukraine looks different than it did when we last met in
June, just a few days, then, after a combined Russian
separatist force offensive that coordinated attacks
west of the ceasefire line in Donetsk. But the horrific
situation back in June cannot become the baseline for
our assessments or our actions. While major combat
is down since the 1 September ceasefire, and that is
extremely important for all of the lives affected, this
crisis remains no less real, no less urgent and no less
troubling. There are still, as we have heard, daily
ceasefire violations, and, as has been described in great
detail today, the citizens of Ukraine, all of Ukraine,
continue to suffer enormously.
Let us be clear about why we are gathered again and
what continues to drive this crisis. We are here because
Russia continues to occupy Ukraine’s autonomous
region of Crimea, in defiance of international law,
its treaty obligations, the Helsinki Final Act and
resolution 68/262, adopted by 100 members of the
General Assembly, which rejected the phony Crimea
referendum and called for Ukraine’s territorial integrity
to be respected.
Its authorities there have opened criminal cases
against critics of the occupation and specifically
targeted the Tatar community, subjecting them to
beatings, arbitrary detention and police raids. We
are here because even today Moscow continues to
arm, train, support and fight alongside separatists in
eastern Ukraine. On Wednesday, OHCHR confirmed
the continued “inflow of ammunition, weaponry and
fighters from the Russian Federation into the territories
controlled by the armed groups”. A robust combined
Russian separatist military force, led by Russian
officers, continues to operate in Ukrainian territory.
We are here because Moscow and the separatists
continue to obstruct international monitoring efforts,
undermining the ceasefire and the prospects for peace.

15-4198623/28

S/PV.7576

Ukraine

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) monitors face obstruction on a daily basis.
Just this past weekend, OSCE monitors on patrol were
threatened by separatists with automatic rifles.
We are here because, in blatant disregard for the
commitments that have been made, the Russian-backed
separatists continue to attack Ukrainian positions along
the line of contact almost every day, at times with
mortars banned under weapons-withdrawal agreements.
Ukrainian soldiers and civilians continue to be killed
or wounded in these attacks, and we cannot afford to
get used to that. The cumulative impact of Moscow’s
aggression remains the widespread and unnecessary
suffering of Ukrainian civilians. Almost 1.5 million
people are unable to return to their homes, their schools
or their daily lives. Winter has arrived, and as many as
300,000 people residing along the contact line are in
need of blankets, fuel and clothes to get them through
the cold weather.
Yet despite the urgent need, few relief organizations
are able to work in the separatist-controlled areas,
because, as we heard from John Ging, the separatists
suspended and expelled United Nations and
international humanitarian organizations in July. Only
a fraction of the aid required by the 2 million people
in need in these areas is getting through. We heard
earlier a very moving account by the Ambassador of
the Russian Federation on the plight of people living
in Donbas, yet it is Russia’s separatists that expelled
humanitarian organizations and, by and large, have not
let them resume their functions.
We urge Moscow to finally honour the commitments
that it made when it signed the Minsk agreements and
ensure that separatists lift restrictions and allow the
immediate resumption of critically needed aid. We also
encourage the Government of Ukraine to accelerate
efforts to facilitate the movement of civilians and cargo
across the contact line and continue the provision of
social, educational and economic benefits to internally
displaced persons and others in need.
There has also been a deeply concerning
deterioration of the human rights situation in Donbas,
as described in depth by the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission. Their report this week notes
“new allegations of killings, torture and ill-treatment,
illegal detention and forced labour” in separatistcontrolled areas. The self-appointed authorities in the
east have systematically failed to stop, investigate or

24/28

11/12/2015

hold to account those believed responsible for abuses
and ill-treatment. The mission also reported incidents
in areas controlled by the Ukrainian Government; we
urge the Government to immediately investigate all
serious and credible allegations.
Just as we know who is driving this conflict, we
know what must be done to end it. The September 2014
and February 2015 Minsk agreements are the best and
only way to achieve peace in eastern Ukraine. Over
the six months since we last met, we have seen how
even incomplete steps towards the implementation of
Minsk, like the 1 September cease-fire, can reduce
casualties and provide space for progress on other
fronts. What is needed now, what is long overdue is
the full implementation of the Minsk agreements. All
sides must seize the opportunity to bring this conflict
to a peaceful end. This year has seen some progress in
this direction, with fewer casualties and some limited
weapons withdrawals. Now is the time to implement
Minsk and settle this conflict. This would allow the
people of Ukraine to resume a normal life and focus
on building the democratic European society that
Ukrainians have fought and, in many cases, died for.
Let me be specific about the path to peace laid out
by the Minsk agreements. Most immediately, the daily
violations of the ceasefire line must come to an end.
Heavy weapons must be withdrawn from the front line,
and the OSCE must be allowed full access all the way to
the border. Legitimate local elections must then be held
in Donbas. Minsk is crystal-clear on the requirements
for these elections: they must be held according to
Ukrainian law and OSCE standards, and they must be
held under OSCE observation.
In October, President Putin recommitted to these
Minsk-required standards and agreed on the urgent
need for the sides to agree on election mechanics that
conform to these standards. But since then, Russia and
the separatists have rejected proposals by Ukraine and
the OSCE because they included elements such as free
media access and the right of Ukrainian political parties
to participate. While the rest of Ukraine held local
elections on 25 October and 15 November, residents of
Donbas continue to be deprived of legitimately elected
representatives, and Russia and its surrogates continue
to stonewall the work of the Trilateral Contact Group.
Holding legitimate elections is the key to unlocking
the remaining steps of Minsk and enabling the separatistheld territories to be peacefully reintegrated back into

15-41986

11/12/2015

Ukraine

the Ukrainian political and legal system. As agreed
in Paris in October, the elections must be followed by
the implementation of Ukraine’s special-status law
and the entry into force of the amnesty legislation.
Constitutional reform must also occur, and Ukraine has
been working towards this for many months. Its draft
amendments on decentralization were endorsed by the
Venice Commission’s international legal experts and in
August received the first of two required approvals by
Parliament.
Finally, Russia and the separatists must fulfil
other outstanding Minsk obligations, which include
withdrawing all foreign fighters and military equipment,
releasing all hostages and unlawfully detained persons,
including Nadia Savchenko and Oleg Sentsov, and
turning over control of the international border back to
the sovereign Government of Ukraine.
When all sides faithfully uphold their commitments,
we will see progress on this conflict. Until then, there
will be casualties, and their number will inevitably rise.
Let me conclude by trying to humanize the stakes.
Marina Reznik is 13 years old. On a Saturday back in
January, Marina was visiting her father in a residential
neighbourhood of Mariupol. That day, separatists
announced an offensive against the city. The rocket fire
that followed killed at least 29 people and injured 97
others. Marina was one of those injured. When the shell
hit the house, her father tried to use his body to shield
her, but two shell fragments sliced into her. One hit her
spinal cord. Nearly a year later, Marina, whose love
of dance led her to dream of being a professional hiphop dancer, still cannot feel her right leg. She cannot
walk. Instead of dancing, she now hopes to help other
children who have been affected by this conflict.
We are here today because of Moscow’s aggression,
because of how it continues to fuel this conflict and
because of how this conflict hurts innocent people like
Marina. We will continue meeting about this crisis.
We will continue to insist that we hear the facts until
the aggression ceases and until Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity are restored. We urge Moscow
to choose the path of peace and uphold its Minsk
commitments.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Pavlo Klimkin, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ukraine.

S/PV.7576

Mr. Klimkin (Ukraine): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening today’s meeting. It has been a
while since the Security Council discussed the situation
in and around Ukraine (see S/PV.7498), a situation that
is fluid and dangerous. The details have changed, but
not the basics. The Russian aggression has reached new
heights; it most certainly has not stopped. Crimea is
under occupation. Donbas is under attack. Minsk looks
like a jigsaw puzzle that has not been put together—
hopefully it will be. It is high time that we took a closer
look at things.
I thank my friend Lithuanian Foreign Minister
Linas Linkevičius for helping to convene this meeting.
I also thank the briefers — Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson, Assistant Secretary-General Ivan
Šimonović, Chief Monitor of the Special Monitoring
Mission (SMM) of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Ertuğrul Apakan, and
Director of the Coordination and Response Division
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs John Ging — for their informative
contributions to this meeting.
Almost 300 days have passed since the adoption
of resolution 2202 (2015), by which the Council
unanimously endorsed the Minsk agreements. Months
have passed. Hundreds and thousands of people
have died. Why are the Minsk agreements not yet
implemented? Why has peace not been reached?
Reaching peace is a matter of motivation. Peace
is possible only if peace is wanted. Ukraine wants
peace, because peace is our chance at survival. Is
Russia motivated? That is an open question. Right
after the Minsk accords were agreed, in February, we
expected, at the very least, that the ceasefire would be
implemented. We expected to see the withdrawal of
weapons and troops within days or weeks. We expected
a final political solution to be reached by the end of
2015. That was the expectation when the parties to the
Minsk accords were signing them.
However, the ink of the Russian signature was not
yet dry when the Russian regular army, along with proRussian proxies, launched a full-scale military attack
on Debaltseve. Ukraine kept suffering. It now seems
that Russia is still wondering whether that was enough
or whether it should go on. The actions in the small
town of Debaltseve were a tour de force, just a preview
of how Russia would “implement” the Minsk accords.

15-4198625/28

S/PV.7576

Ukraine

It started a pattern that we continue to see up to now:
sabotage, blockade and lies.
What did Ukraine do while Russia was tormenting
our minds and souls? It is very simple: Ukrainian forces
ceased their fire, as was verified by the OSCE among
others, and withdrew their weapons. The OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission got full access to all areas under
the control of the Government of Ukraine. Despite
endless provocations and shelling by Russia-supported
terrorists, Ukraine, in cooperation with the OSCE and
the international community, made every effort to
implement its commitments to avert a humanitarian
crisis. We have been paying social benefits to the
residents of occupied Donbas and to everyone who
is able to escape from the Russian-proxy-controlled
area. And we have given without the expectation of
reimbursement.
Ukraine is establishing special humanitarian
logistics centres and is carrying out projects on
infrastructure reconstruction, with thousands of
people coming to the centres every day. With the
withdrawal of the security clearance, teams have been
sent out to repair the damage to critical electricity
and water supply infrastructure. After an inclusive
national dialogue, including with representatives of
the Donbas region, the Ukrainian Parliament adopted,
at first reading, some constitutional amendments
on decentralization, stipulating a special order on
local self-government in certain areas of the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions. Furthermore, as previously
mentioned, Ukraine presented to the Trilateral Contact
Group a concept paper on modalities for holding local
elections in Donbas. Finally, we have been providing
comprehensive support to the OSCE to enable it to
implement its mandate throughout the entire territory
of Ukraine.
But let us look at the other side. What has the Russian
Federation done as a party to the Minsk agreements?
It has done essentially nothing. Instead, Russia and
Russian-backed illegal armed formations have engaged
in provocations and massive assaults, thus rendering the
ceasefire exceedingly fragile. It has failed to withdraw
its heavy and lighter weapons, manoeuvring and hiding
them in the prohibited areas. It has blocked access by
the Special Monitoring Mission to the areas under its
control. It has refused to release hostages in Donbas and
the political prisoners being held in Russian prisons,
such as Nadiya Savchenko, Alexander Kolchenko and
others. It has hindered the activities of the international

26/28

11/12/2015

humanitarian organizations in the region, including
Doctors Without Borders. It has rejected the holding of
local elections in Donbas in accordance with Ukrainian
legislation and international standards. It has impeded
any sort of involvement of the OSCE. And, naturally,
Russia keeps rotating and reinforcing its military
contingent in occupied Donbas.
Previously, the Council heard from the Russian
representative that Russia is not a party to the conflict.
It is the same old narrative about the conflict being a
domestic one. Once again, it has been said by the Russian
side, not just today but many times, that the Russian
military personnel there are simply on vacation. But the
truth can be proved in many ways: just two weeks ago
we exchanged a Russian major for one of our own who
was being held hostage. Russia can claim that Elvis is
alive, but no amount of lying can ever change the facts.
We need to think about why the Russian narrative
is so diametrically opposed to everything we have
heard today from all four briefers. Is Russia living in
a different reality? My answer would be, by no means.
We are continuing to hear the same propaganda from
Russia as we heard at the beginning, the reason being
that the Russians want a Russian Donbas in a Russian
Ukraine. Our simple goal is the full implementation of
the Minsk agreements. Through peace, we can have a
normal life and the return of law and order. What we
want is a Ukrainian Donbas and peace for the Ukrainian
people of Donbas in Ukraine. That is why Russia is
telling all these lies.
It is not Ukrainians fighting against Russia, but the
other way around. It is not Ukraine sending weapons to
Russia, but the other way around. And it is not Ukraine
annexing Russian land, but the other way around.
Since the Minsk agreements were signed,
Ukrainian forces and civilian locations have been
shelled or attacked more than 13,500 times. Russian
forces and pro-Russian proxies carried out multiple
massive offensives on Debaltseve on 15 February,
Maryinka and Shchastya on 3 June, Starohnativka on
10 June and Shyrokyne on many occasions. There was
a time recently when the death toll stopped rising. That
is over now. Things are deteriorating again. The trend
is very bad. The only chance to prevent things from
backsliding into full-blown is via a full commitment
to the Minsk agreements, not in words but in deeds.
They may not be perfect, but they are the only way
to end what is happening in Donbas. Ukraine is fully

15-41986

11/12/2015

Ukraine

committed to the agreements as our bridge into the
future. We will not burn them.
But why should Russia be motivated to stop
this? Things will not change until Russia changes
its attitude. It must adhere to resolution 2202 (2015).
It must implement all core elements of sustainable
de-escalation. It must cease armed provocations against
Ukrainian forces in Donbas, provide full access to the
OSCE missions to the State border between Russia
and Ukraine, verifiably stop supporting militants in
Donbas, withdraw its troops and weaponry from the
territory of Ukraine, start genuine, practical discussions
on modalities for the reinstatement of full control of
the border by Ukraine, and, of course, work clearly
towards a real electoral regime in accordance with the
criteria of the OSCE and Ukrainian law. If any of those
indispensable elements of de-escalation is sabotaged,
the outcome will be fragmented and unstable, as can
be seen today. To secure sustainable de-escalation,
coherent international action is necessary.
Back in March, Ukraine formally requested the
United Nations to deploy a peacekeeping mission in order
to support implementation of the Minsk agreements.
That mission, or its probable alternative — the expansion
of the mandate of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission — would be essential for implementing such
Minsk provisions as, inter alia, disarming the illegal
armed formations, monitoring and verifying the
withdrawal of Russian troops and weapons, delivering
and distributing humanitarian assistance and securing
an environment for local elections according to OSCE
standards. I urge the Security Council once again to
assume leadership in establishing such a mission.
Against the backdrop of the recent awful terrorist
attacks, we should not forget the innocent victims of the
crash of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. One year after
that incident, a group of like-minded States, seeking
justice for victims and their families, initiated the
establishment of an international mechanism that would
have the highest international legitimacy, effectiveness,
accountability and transparency for bringing those
responsible to account. Not surprisingly, only one State
blocked the adoption of the draft resolution in that
regard (see S/PV.7498). However, the Russian veto did
not discourage us, quite the opposite. The vote on the
draft resolution concerning the crash of Flight MH-17
was the moment of truth, and truth is what we want.
Ukraine is working closely with Australia, Belgium,
Malaysia, the Netherlands and other grieving nations to

S/PV.7576

identify another credible and effective mechanism for
delivering justice. Ukraine believes that the Security
Council should remain actively seized of th3 matter.
When the time is right, the Council must send a clear
message that it will not tolerate any infringements
on the safety of civil aviation and the delivery of
justice — first and foremost for those who lost their
daughters, sons, grandfathers and grandmothers in that
terrible disaster.
In violation of General Assembly resolution 68/262,
the Ukrainian Autonomous Republic of Crimea and
the city of Sevastopol remain occupied by the Russian
Federation, which continues to pursue its policy of
oppression against the local population, espedially
Crimean Tatars and Ukrainians. I would recall that,
under international law, Russia bears responsibility
as an occupying authority. We call on Russia to
immediately put a halt to human rights violations and
allow international human rights monitors free and
unconditional access to Crimea.
Every war is a perversion. War perverts nature,
God and humanity. Still, history has not seen many
wars more perverted than this one. This is a war
between people who often speak the same language,
read the same books and listen to the same music. They
got along pretty well until propaganda convinced the
Russians that Ukraine was ruled by Nazis. It is a war
that officially does not exist, against an enemy that
never existed. It is a war that makes Russia feel strong
but that in reality makes it weak. It is a war of the past
against the future. We have to stop it. Let us use the
opportunity of Minsk before it slips away.
It has been said that a mistake repeated is not
a mistake, but a decision. More than 9,000 people
have died between 2014 and 2015 because of Russia’s
decisions. The time has come for new attitude. Ukraine
does not want to impose anything on other nations. But
we will not sacrifice our own freedom for anything in
the world. All we want is peace and quiet and to decide
our own destiny — and once the aggression is over,
we definitely will. Those who came to make war must
go. Those who killed those 9,000 must, and will, be
punished. Those who were simply fooled by propaganda
can be forgiven. And those who thought they would
break Ukraine’s will must realize that they failed.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.

15-4198627/28

S/PV.7576

Ukraine

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Unfortunately, our discussion today did not
reach the requisite level of objective analysis with
respect to the implementation of the Minsk agreements
and resolution 2202 (2015). The pervasive lies in the
statement of the representative of the United States of
America prove that throughout the crisis in Ukraine,
from its inception right to today, Washington, D.C., by
supporting its Kyiv partners, is playing a destructive
role that departs from the context of the Normandy
format. That is certainly one of the reasons that work on
a political settlement is not so simple. Frankly speaking,
there was no greater objectivity in the statement by
the Ukrainian Minister for Foreign Affairs. Most
important, he did not say that the Ukrainian leadership
understood its responsibility for implementing the
Minsk agreements of 12 February and resolution

28/28

11/12/2015

2202 (2015), which made that into a legally binding
document. The Kyiv authorities did the opposite — and
not just once — they undermined the opportunity for a
political settlement to the crisis in Ukraine.
Under both the Normandy format and in the
Tripartite Contact Group, Russia is carrying out its
responsibilities. It will continue to do so. We hope that
the political will necessary for the implementation of
the Minsk agreements and resolution 2202 (2015) will
prevail in the end among the Ukrainian authorities as
well. Perhaps it really is time for a new approach.
The meeting rose at 1:50 p.m.

15-41986
