I NA nONS UNIES

UNITED NA TlONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAl. RECORDS
THIRTEENTH

814

YEAR

Ih MEETIN G: 29 APRIL 1958

---

eme SEANCE: 29 A VRIL 1958

TREIZIEME

:\'.,',1

ANNEE

CONSEIL DE SECURITE

I

DOC1JMENTS OFFICIELS
NEW

1
r

YORK

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agendaj814)

,..........................

Adoption of the agenda

(

1
1

Complaint of the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist TIepublics in
a letter to the President of the Security Council dated 18 April 1958 entitJed
" Urgent measures to put an end to flights by United States military aircraft armed with atomic and hydrogen bombs in the direction of the

frontiers of the Soviet Union" (S)3990, S/3991, S/3995, S/3997).... . . . .
Annex .,

,

1
17

(
TABLE DES MATIERBS
Ordre d\] jour provisoire (SjAgenda/814). . ..

1

Adoption de l'ordre du jour

1

Plainte du representant de l'Union des Rcpubliq'Jes socialistes sovietiques,
contenue dalls une leUre en date'du 18 avrill%8 au President du Conseil
de secul'ite, et intitulee : «( Adoption de mesures urgentes pour faire cesser
les vols d'aeronefs militaires des Etats-Unis d'Amerique, annes de bombes
atomiques et de bornbes il I'hydrogenc, dans la direction des frontieres de

l'Union sovietique" (5/3990, 5/3991, 5/3995. 5/3997)..............
Annexe

,

,

1
17

5jPV.814

Relevant documents not r~produced in full in the records of the meetings
of the Security Council are published in quarterly supplements to the Official
Record.~.

Symbols 0/ United Nations docu.ments are composed 0/ capital letters combined
with figures. Mention oJ such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.

•••
Leg documents pcrtinents qui ne sont pa reprdouits in extenso dans les comptes
rendus des seances ciu Conseil de securiM sont pllbli(~s dans des supplements tTimcstricIs aux Documents officicls.

Les cofes des documents de l'Organisation des Nations Unies se composent
de lclires majuscules et de chinres. La simple mention d'un cote dans un texte signifie
qu'it s'agit d'un document de l'Organisation.

I!

,

•

I

j

EIGHT HUNDRED AND FOURTEENTH MEETING
Held in New York, on Tllt:sday, 29 April195S, at 11 a.m.

HUIT CENT QUATORZIEME SEANCE
Tenue i New~YQrk, le mardi 29 avriJ 1958, a II heurea.

President: Mc Henry Cabot LODGE

President: M. Henry Cabot LODGE

(United States of America).

(Etats~Unis (1' Amcrique).

Pre:>cnl: The represedatives of the following countries: Canada, China, Colomh:a, France, Iraq, Japan,
Panama, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and :;.:lorthern Ireland,
United States of America.

Presents: Les reprcsentants des pays sULvants :
Canada, Chine, Colombie, France, Irak, Japan, Panama,
Suede, Union des Republiqucs socialistcs soviitiques,
Roya.ume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et cl'lrlande du
Nord, Elat.s·Ullis d'Amerique.

Provisional agenda (S{Agenda/814)

Ol'dre du jour provilj()ire (SjAgendaj814)

1.

Adoption of the o.g~nda.

1.

Adoption de l'ordre dll jour.

2.

Complaint 01 the representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics in. a letter to the President
of the Security Council dated 18 April 1958 entitled
"Urgent measnrr.s to put. an end to i1iRhts by
United Slates military air~aft armed ",itlt atomic
and hydrogen bombs in the direction of the fron~
tiers of the Soviet Union" (Sj3990).

2.

PI<linte dll representant de l'Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques, contenue dans une I~ttre en
date du 18 avril 1958 au President du ConseB de
securiLc, et intill1!1:;e : tl Adoption de fhCSUfCS
urgcntes pour faire cesser les vots d'aeronds militaires des Etats-Unis d'Amerique, armes de bombes
atomiques et de bombes
I'hydrogfme, d:ms la
direction des frontieres de ['Union sovi6Lique»
(S/3000).

i

a

,
jl

Adoption de l'ordre du jour

AdoptioD of the agenda

r

L'ordrc du joltr CS! adopU.

The aqenda Wt<S adopted.
Complaint of the repre~cntathe of the Union or Soviet
Socialist RCllUblic8 in n letter to tbe President of
the Security Council dated 18 April 1958 tlntitled
"Urgent measures to put on cud to flight8 by
United Stotes militarJ' :UfO'Oft armcd ,..,ith atGmic
and hydrogen bomb~ in tile direction of the {,'ontiers of thc Sovict Union" (8j3990, 8/3991, 8/3995,
5/3997)

j

Plainlc du represenfllIlf de J 'Union des RepuLliql1M
socialisfes sovi6tlquell, confenutl dans un~ lcttre
cn date du 18 .ll;Vl'i1 1958 au Presidcot dn Couseil
de 8eCllrite, et intitwee : .( Adoption de me8ur~
urgentes pout' faire ce8~r les vol" d. 'alil'onds miJitaires des Etats~ Urns d'AIIlelique, al'mes de homhcs
atomiqucs ct de bomhcs
I'hydrogene, dans In
dil'eelion des frontih'e3 de I'UniOIl sovietique»
(5)3990, S;399', 5)3995, S/3997)

1. The PRESIDENT: I call on the represenLative
of the Soviet Ullion on a point of order,

1. Le PRf:SlDENT (lraduit de l'anglGis) : Je <imme
la parole au representS.llt de l'Cnion sovietique pour
une question d'ardre,

J

2,

Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Repub·
from Russian): [should ILtc to a~k a
question. Does the President pro}lose to apply rule
20 of the rules of procedure of the Security Council,
which reads:
" Whenever the President of the Security Council
deems that, for the proper fulfilment of the responsibilities of the Presidency, he should not preside
over the Coullcil during the consideration of a p:lrl:i~ular q:xcstion with which the member he represents

2. M. SOBOLEV (Union des }'(C]Jubliq:ues socialistes
sovictiques) [lraduit du russe] : Monsieur le President,
je voudrais poser une question. N'avez-volls pas l'intention cl'nppliquer l'nrticlc 20 du reglement interieur du
Conseil de securile? Cet :\rtide sr· lit COln1l1e s.lit :
« Si le P~esident du Consei! de securite estime que,
pour s'acquitter commc il convient des devoirs de
sa charge, il doit s'absbenir de diriger les dcbats lors
de l'examen d'une question delerminee au regard de
laquelle le membre qu'iJ represente se trouve dans

1

1

1i

I
I

a

lic~) (translated

JI
I

1

..)

is directly connected, he shall indicate his decision
to the Council. The Presidential chair shall then
devolve, for the purpose of the consideration of that
qucst~on, on the representative of the member
next In English alphabetical order ...."

une position particuliere, il fait part de sa decision
all Consei[, La presidence echoit alors, en Cl'. qui
concerne ledit examen, au representant du membre
suivant du Conseil de securite dans l'ordre alphabetique anglais ... ))

My question is prompted by the fact that at the
last meeting of the Council it was sometimes diflicnlt
to tell where the statements of the United States repre~entutive ended and those of the Presid~nt of tile

3. Si je pose cctte question, c'cst qu'a la derniere
reunion du Conseil il a parfois em difficile de determiner
Oll fmissait I'intervention du representant des EtatsUuis d'Amerique et 011 commcnyait la declaration dll
President du Conseil.

:3.

Security Council began.
,I. Sir Pierson DIXON (United Kingdom): I W<.lS
fiurpds('.d to hear the representative of the SovieL
Union imply that the President should vacate tlle
Chair on this occasion. Under rule 20 of the provisional
rules of procedure of the Security Council, whicll has
been quoted, this is entirely ll. matter ,...ithin the discretion of the President of the Council. Rule 20 permits
the President to vacate the Chair when he deems
that, for t.he proper fulfllment of the responsibilities

j

;

of the presidency, he should not preside over the Council.

4. Sir Picrson DIXON (Royaume.Uni) [tradllit de
l'anglaisJ : Je suis surpris que le representant de l'Union
sovietique ait laisse entendrc que le President devrait
abandonnel' la presidence it cette occasion. Aux tennes
de I'article 20 du rcglemcnt inte-rienr provisoire du
COllseil de sccurite qtti a cte cite, la dtkision est entierement it la discretion du Presideul. L'article 20 perrnet
au President d'abandonner la presidence lorsqu'il estime
que, pour s'acquitter comme il ecnvient des devoirs de
sa charge, il doit s'absterur de diriger les debats.

5. r·'or lUy part, I wish to say thal my delegation has
the fullest confidence in the l)resident's capacity to
eonduct our deJiberations with fairness and impartiality.
I express the hope that he will not feel it necessary to
invok~~ rule 20.

5. Je ticns a dire, pour ma part, que ma delegation
a la plus entiere confi.ance dans I'aptitude du President
a diriger nos deliberlltions avec cquite et impartialile.
J'espere qu'il n'estirncl'a pas necessairc d'invoqllcr
]'nrlicle 20.

n.

Mr. ILLUECA (Panama) (translated from Spanish):
I doubt very much whether the question raised by the
rcprcs<:mt3tive of the Soviet Union is really a point
of orde.r. I say this because rule 20 of the rules of procedurt~. which the Soviet Union representativc quoted,
docs not authorize members of the Security Coundl
to rnisc points of order of Dds kind, but quite dearly
nn rl den nitely leaves to the discretion of the Presidcnl
the decision to cease presiding over a debale if he
dc{'m~ that advisable.

6. M. ILLUECA (Panama) [traduil de l'espagnolJ :
Je doute fort que la question soulevee par le representant
de l'Union sovietique constitue vraiment une question
d'ordre. En efiet, rarlicle 20 du reglement intcricur,
auquel s'e,;G rCiere le representant de l'Union sovietiquc,
ne coufere pas aux mcmbres du Consei] la faculte de
soulever des questions d'ordre de cc genre. Cet article
conferI'. an President, de fayon claire et precise. la
faculte de s'abstenir de diriger les debab s'i1 cs time que
c'est ce qu'il convient de fairr.

7. At HIe- same time none of us can have failed to
ouservc that when the Soviet Union representalive
~ublllitted his complaint on 18 April he did so in the
knowledge that Mr. Lodge was President of the Council.
\Ve observed the promptness with which Mr. Lodge
responded to the Soviet request and his impartiality
during the- debate. In the circumstance,; it seems to
me inappropriate for the Soviet Union representative
to raise this point of order, sinCe il deals with a matter
whk,b is entirely within tlte discretion of the President.

7, 11 n'echappe a aucun de nons que, lorsquc l'Union
sovietique a presente sa plainte le 18 avril, eUe savait
fort bien que M. Lodge etait president du Conseil.
Nons avons pu observer la promptitude avec laquelle
M. Lodge a repondu a la demandc dll representant de
l'URSS, ainsi que l'impartialite dont it a fait preuve
dans le debat. Duns ces conditions, il me semble que
le representant de l'Union sovietique ne peut pas soulever nnt tclle question d'ordrc, pnisqu'il s'agit d'une
question qui releve cntiercment du pouvoir discretionnaire du President,

8.

Mr. GEOHGES-PICOT (France) (translated from
French): Since the representative of the Union of Soviet
Socialist. HeplLblics sought to justify Iris point of order
hy r!.'ft'.rring to the way in. which the discussion 'Yas
t'ondu/:lcd at our last meeting, the French delegatIOn
l'l'('ll{ eompcllcd to give its opinion on the conduct o[
the (lig(~ussion.

8. IlL GEORGES-PICOT (France): Le representant de
l'UrJoll des Republiques socialistes sovictiqucs ayllnt
fOllde sa question d'ordre sur les conditions dans k,;queUes avaicnt etc conduits les debats a notre derniere
seance, la delegation franyuise pense qu'elle doit donnr.r
son avis sur la fayon dont ccs debuts ant cie diriges.

n.

9. Evidcmment, nons avons siege de 15 henres a
21 heures, et certains d'cntre nons ont peut-ctre pense
quc c'etait du travail force. Mais le travail force n'est
pas de la competence du Conseil de securite ; i1 est de
celle du Conscil economique et social. D'ailleurs, personne n'a propose que la seance de l'apres-midi soit
ajournee pour ctre reprise apres le d:iner. Dans ccs
conditions, nous n'aurions qu'a nons en prendre a
nous-me-mes si nous e.stimions que cette seance a ete

True, we sat from 3 p.m. to 9 p.m. and some of
us may have felt that that was forced labour. But
fnr(:('r! labour is not within the competence of the
Sccul'iLy Council;. it is within that of the Economic
and Social CounCIl. Moreover, no onc suggested that
the afternoon meetin~ should be adjourned and resumed
.tHer dinner. Such bemg the case, wc should have only
;lUr~clves to blame if we felt that the meeting was too
long. No one, in fact, proposed such an adjournment.

2

1

1
I

t

Yet it was for us to do so, and not tile President. The
Pl'esident, for hi~ part. took a vote on all the proposals
put forward. It is our view, thcreiorc, that the ?roce~
'dure followed was perfectly regular, and we have complete confidence in the President's capacity La continue
to preside over our debates with all the neces!'iary
impartiality and objectivity.

trap longl-le. Personne, en etre.t, n'a propose eeL ajol.lrnement, Or, c'etait a nous a le fa ire, et non pas au
President, Pour ;m part, le President a mis aux voix
toutes Ies propositions qui lni ant ete ,<:oumises. NOl1s
cstimons doue que la procp.clure a ete eonduite regulierement, et nous avons pleine con fiance en la. capadte
du President pour continueI' a presider nos debats avec
toute l'impartialite et tauLe l'objectivite necess!lires.

10.

10. M. .sOBOLEV (Ilninn des RepubJiques sodalistes
sovie.liques) [lraduit du nme} : Je nc comprends pas
tt'e.s hien la discussion qUtl ma question a provoquee.
Jc n'Qi pre~ente aucune pmposition; je n'ai lien
demande : j'ai pose ane question au President dn
Consell de sel:urite conecrnant I'Drticle 20. J'ai d()nne
lecture de l'artic.le, qu; indique tres clairemcnt - et
je le ._<lis fort hien - que }i' President a le droit d'appliquer 011 de ne pas appJiquer cette disposition.

1
I

Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Sovid Socialist TIcpub-

1

lies) (translated from Rus.~ian): I do not quite undcr~

i

stand the discus!5ioJl to which my qU{lstion gave rise,
r did not submit any proposal, nor did I :nalie any
t'equest. I merely put a question to the President of
the Security Council in connexion with rule 20. I
quoted that rule and I am fully aware of the fact
that it is for the President to decide wheth~r or not to
apply it,

,
I
I

!

I

1

' '"

1
\

I

1

r
.I
r

l'

r

11, In view of the fact that the issue before the Council
is one with which the United States is directly connected
- for that rule covers prlOcisely such C!\$CS
my
question was f:Jlly justified. It was addressed to the
PrlOsjdent of the Council and not to members.

11. Cependant, puisque la question que nous examinons interesse directer.wnt les Etats~Unis ~ et que
cet art.icle vise precisement des eas de ce genre ~ ma
question est tout a fait legitimc. Ell= etait. d'ailleurs,
adressee an President du ComeH, et non aux membres
du ConseiL

12, The PRESIDENT: The present o(:wpant of the
Chair would like to express h:s thanks to the members
who have spnken and also to say that tlle question of
the representative of the Soviet Union is perfeetly
bgitimatc, There is no question about that. The pertil;ent part of rule 2U which Lhe preslOul occnpant of the
Chair would like to quote is as follows:
" Wlwnever the President of the Sccurtty Council
deems that.., he should not preside over the Council. ..
he shaH indicate his d€dsinn to the CounciL"
In other words, the Pre~ident of the Council hrls to
~onsider the matter fl nd then decide it.
t3. The present occupant of the Chair has consiuered
ihis question carefully. In order to reach the spirit. of
the rule he has taken note that in parliamer:tary bodies
within a national govcrnmel1't a member \Vi:J disqnalify
himself if in his opinion the matter titat clill[ron'tE the
body involves his personal interests, Transferring
that line of thought to an ir.tcrnotionaJ body like this,
one would conclude t[lat a representative of a Government should di'>qualify himself if the matter before
the int3rnational body is one in which his Government
has a selfish national interest. In my ...iew tlmt is not
the case today. The proposal which is beIure us i~ onc
which involves immediately all the countries which
arc in the Arotll: "one, and it involves only l'l. little
bit less imfficciately the whole world because it involves
n quMtion of war ::mrl peace,
14. So, the pending question not bi;ing one which
involv<3s u selfish national ir.tfl.rest for ~ny oius, including the United States, the present occupant of tl:e
r:hair does not consider that he should vacate it.

12. Le PRESIDENT (lraduil de l'an!1l~is): Le President en exercice voudra;t remereier les memhres du
ConseU qui ont pris la parole et ajouter que la question
posee pm· le revresentant de l'Union sovietigue f~t pl'l.rfaite:nent legitime, Il r.'y a aucnn doute a Cc sujet. Les
dispositioM pertinentes de l'article 20, que je me
permettrai de citer, sont les suivantes :
(t Si le Pr~sident du Conscil
de securite estime
qu' (...) il doit ~'abstenir de dinger les debats (...),
it fait part de sa decision au Conscil... ~
En d'n.utrcs tennes, le President du Gunseil de 5ecuritc
doit examiner la question et prendre une decision.

13, Le Pdsident en exercice a examine la queslion
avec beaucoup d'rlttention. Soucieux de bien saisil'
l'esprit de cet c.l'Lidc, iJ a note que, d(tlls les parlmnent.s
des divers pays, un membrc d'une asscmblee s'abstient
s'il juge que la qw'.s·:.inn it l'etnde mel: en cause ses
intcrets personnels. En appliquant [8 IIleme principe a
une assemblCe intt'-I'llationale comme cellewci. on pourrait coaclllrc qu'un r£·presentant d·un gOLlvernement
doH s'cbstenir si la question a l'etude met en cause
l'intcrN cgoiste national de ~Olt pays, .le nl" reuse pas
que ce soit le ens Rujo:.lrd'hui. La p:-opcsition dont
nous sommes s~isifj inL~.resse direetement tOllS les pays
ayant des terrtLoires dans la zonc arcLque, et un pea
mo:ns directement le monde entier, car il s'agit (\'une
questioll de guene ou de pa:x.
Aussi, la qnestion a l'examen ne meUant en cause
des pays reprcsentcs
id, y cornpris les E-Lats~Unill d'Amel"ique, l~. Pn~sidcnt
en exerdce n'estime pas devoir abandonner la pr'~­
.sidc:ncc.
15. M. SQBOLEV f.Un:on des Republiql1es socialistes
sovietiques) [iraduil du rrlS3e] : Jc {lrcnds a,~tv. de la
decision du President au s\~jet de la question que j'ai
posee - Lien que je ne puisse accepter l'interprei:aticm
que le President n dDnnce de I'article 20, DallS l'article 20, il n'est nullement question de K l'inter~t national
egoIste I) cl'un Etat.

14.

l'illter~t national egoLsle d'aucun

lS. 1\11'. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) Uranslaled from Rus,~ian): I take note oi Lhe
President's decision concerning the qnestion which I
raiscd, although I cannut agree with his interpretation
of rule 20, 'lllere is not a sillgle word in rule 20 about
the ~elfish national interest nf any State.

3

16. The PRESIDENT: We now proceed to the discussion of the item on the agendD. The Council has
before it a draft resolution [8{3995] submitted by the
United States of America. 111,e President of the Council,
therefore, proposes to recognize himself in his capacity
as the representative of the UNITED STATE:S OF

16. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de ['rmglais): Nons.
allons passer n l'examen de la question inscrite a
l'ordre du jour. Le Conseil est saisi d'un projet de
resolution presente par les Etats~Unis d'Amerique
[8/3995]. Le President du Conseil de securite se propose
de parler maintenant en sa qualite de representant des

AMERICA.

ETATS-UNIS D'AMERlQUE.

17.

17. Je commencerai mon expose devant le Conseil de
securite, ce matin, en mentionnant la lettre que le
president Eisenhower a envoyee le 28 avril aM. Kroucht~
chev, president du Conseil des mini5tres. Le president
Eisenhower y declarait :
~ Les Etats-Unis viermcnt de demander que le
Conseil de securite se reumsse a nOllveau pour etudicr
l'etablissement d'un systeme d'inspection internationalc de la zone arctique. Les Etats-Unis ant presente
a cette fin une proposition constructive. Je vous prie
instamment de vous joindre a nous pour appuyer la
L'esolution des Etats~Unis dont le Conseil est actnellcment saisi. En appuyant celle proposition et en pretnnL
ulterieurement votre collaboration, vous aideriez il
accomplir un pnmicr pas important. Vous contribueriez a reduire la tension, a aceroltre la confiance entre
les Etats et a rcduire les craintes mutllelles d'nttaquc
par surprise. "

I begin my presentation to the Security Council

Lhis morning by referring to the letter which President
Eisenhower sent to Prime Minister Khrnshchev on
28 April. In that letter he stated:

"The United States has just asked the Security
Council to reconvene in order to consider the establishment oI an international inspection system for the
Arctic Zone. The United States hns submitted a
constructive proposal to this end. I urge you to
join with us in supporting the resolution of the United
States now before the Council. Your support of this
proposal and subsequent co-operation would help to
achieve a significant first step. It would help to
reduce tensions, it would contribute to an increase
of confidence among states and help to reduce the
mutual fears of surprise attack."

\

r

I
~

18. The United States has asked the Security Council
to meet today to take a step which we believe can in
all truth swiftly and significantly lessen the danger to
wod peace. Last week tJ1e Security Council met [813th
meeting] to consider the complaint of the Soviet Union
that flights by United States military aircraft made in
tIle direction of the frontiers of the Soviet Union constituted a threat to the security of nations. We believe
the Council's discussions were useful in that they
demonstrated beyond question that the Soviet eharges
were groundless. We showed that the activities of the
United States military aircraft represent purely defensive measures which are altogether reasonable and
necessary in view of the conditionll with which they
must cope.

18. Les Etats-Unis ont deruancte au Conseil de securite
de se reunir aujourd'hui pour prendre une decision qui,
croyons-nolls, pe'Lt veritablement amener une diminution rapide et sensible du dangcr qui menace la paix
du monde. La semalne dernit~re, le Conseil de sccurite
s'est r€Ull( [813£J seance] p01lr examiner la plainLe de
l'Union sovietique selon laquelle des vols d'aeronefs
militaires des Etats-Unis dans la direction des frontieres de l'Union sovietique cOllstituaient utle menace
contre la securit6 des nations. A notre avis, les discussions flui se sont dcrouh~es au Conseil ont eH. utiles en
ce sens qu'elles ant prollve de faQon incontestable que
les accusations sovieliques etaient denuecs de fondement. NOlls avons montre que les activites des aeronefs
militaires des Etats-Unis etaicnt purement defensives
et correspondaient a des mesures a la fois raisonnables
et necessaires, etant donne la situation.

19. Our fligllts are a nceessary defensive me3sure
against massive surprise attack and it follows, therefore,
that if the danger of such attack were removed, the
need for this defence could be correspondingly lessened.
The United States and many other independent nations
bave been concerned for a IOIlg time about the possibility of such an attacl.. Wc must continue to be concerned until a workable solution is found. Despite tl10
s~r:ctures made against the United Stales by the
Soviet Union last weck, Soviet emphasis upon this
problem leads us to hope that the Soviet Union muy
this wcel[ be prepared constructively to join hands
with the rest of us.

19. Ces vols constituent une mesure dCfensive necessaire cantre une attaque massive par surprise; iI
s'ensuiL, par consequent, que si le danger d'une attaqll(,
de cc genre etait ecarte, ceLte defense serait d'auLant
moills necessairc. Les Etats-Unis et nombre d'aulre&
nlltions independantes se preoccupent depuis longtemr~
de la possibilite d'une telle attaque. Nons dcvon~
continncr a nOlls ell preoceuper jusqu'a ee que I'on
trouve une solution viable. En depit des accusations
que l'Union sovietique 11 portees la semaine dernicre
contre les Etats-Unis, l'importullce qu'ellc attaehe apparentmen'L a ce probleme nous luisse esperer qu'elle sera.
cette semaine, disposee a se joindre a nom tous {Ians
un csplit constructif.
20. L'cITroyablc pouvoir destructif des armernents
modcrnes pcrmet, en thcorie, tout ~u moins, de reduire
il neant le potcntiel militaire d'un Etat - meme d'une
des plus grandcs puissances -- en une seule attaque.
Mai~ une attuque de ce genre, pour etre couronnee de
stlcces, doit se prncluire sails avertissement. S'i1 existe
un moyen de se premullir contre une attaque massive
par surprhw OLl de dissiper la crainte d'une telle uttaque

20, The awesome destructive power of modern arm,,·
menls makes it at le.a.'lt theoretically possible to wipe
out the military capacity of a Slate - even one of
the greatest Powers - in a single attacle But such
an attack must come without warning if it is to succeed.
Tf them is a way to guard against SUCll massive sUIJlrise
attack or to allay fears 01 such an attack - and the
United States believes that there is - we here must

4

leave r10 stone untumed in our effort to find it. In

- et les E.tats-Unis croient que eela est pos:;ible - nous
ne devons rien negLiger pour le trouver. En demanchmt
au Conseil de securite de reprendre aujourd'hui I'examen
de la question proposee par la deJ(~gation de l'Unjon
sovietique. les Etats-Unis esperent !lider a decQLrvrir
une solution. Si l'on trouvait des rnoyens propres a
garan-tir d'une atts.qu€ par surprise, Ies perspectives
d'avenir en seraient considerablement ameliorees en ce
qui concerne la detente et le maintien de la paix internationale, Le jour 0(1 chaque pays aura la certitude qu'il
ne ?eut pas ~tre victime d'nne attaque par surprise,
[a rrnintc de 1::1 g\lcrre diminuerE\ et nollS pourrons
faire de~ progres importanLs vers le desarmement. 11
est grand teMpS que nous nous engagions dans eette
voie.

reconvening the Security Council today on the item
submitted by the Soviet lJni{)ll, the United States
hopes to help fmd such a way. Finding means to
guard against a surprise attack can have an important
hearing on the prospect for flltllre progress on the
lowering of tensions and the contirmed maintenance of
international peace. If each country knew for certain
that there was no possibility of:3 surprise attfwk bEing
launched against it, the fear of wa.r would decrease

t

and we could move forward towards important disar-

i

21. The United States believeg that, given good faith
ar,d willillglless la engage in purposeful negotiations,
the time lms come to agree tu intenatioClal inspection
to remove the fear of surprise attack in the vital Arctic
region. Assuming that t1110 Soviet Union mcant what
it said last week concerning its fears of surprise attack
and knowing that other countries truly fear the prospect oi such an attack, we must tlY to eliminate this
danger, We seek a measure which would give "Us a
start toward making great surprise attacks virtually
impossible, which consequently would reduce Lhe ~cale
of military activity and could ease the way to significant
arms reduction. We propose going ahead with this
proposal for an inspection zone in the Arctic witltout
awaiting agreement on disarmament as a whole. This
i~ entirely consistent with the original "open-skies"
proposal made by President Ksenhower at the Geneva
Conference of the Heads of Government of the four
great Power>; in HI5fi 1 which we have always been
ready to acept as an independent measure.

21. Les Etats-Unis croient que. si les parties en cause
!':ont clf'. bonne foi et ont vraiment le desir de negocier,
le moment est venn cl'accepter une inspection intcnationale'propre a dissiper la crainte d'une attaque par
sur!rise dans la region arr.tiqne, dont l'importance est
capitalc. Nous supposerons que I'Union sovietic;ue etait
sincere la semaine derni~re lorsqu'elle parlait de sa
craintc d'une attaque par surprise, et nons !H1VOnS que
d'autres pay, ont vraimellt cette crainte ; iJ faut donc
essnyer d'ecarter cc danger. ee que nous voulons,
c'est une premiere mesure visant it rendre pratiquemilnt
impossible en fm de compte toute attaque par surprise,
une decision qui ~ermettrait de reduire l"activitc miIitaire el faciliterait une diminution rensible des armements. Nous avons l'intention de soutenir notre proposition de zone d'inspection dans la region arctique
sans attendre un accord ~ur la qUe5tion gcncralc du
ctesanmment. CeUe position est parfaiternent compatible avcc la proposition initiale, dite « du ciel ouvert 11,
faite a la Conference des Chefi; de gouvernement des
quatre puis5ances, tenue u Geneve en 1955, par le
president Eisenhower 1, proposition dont nous avons
toujours ete disposes a accepter I'application con:me
une mesure isolee,

22. Our present proposal in no way diminishes our
helief that discussions should be renewed urgently on
thc general question of digMmament.

Notre proposition actuelle ll'afIecte en riell notre
opinion selon laguelle les discussions sur la question
generale du desannemed devraient etre reprises
d'urgence.

During t.hr, C:ouncil's discussion last week. various
representatives referred to the need to dEal witl\ the
problem of surprise attack, The Canadian representative
reaffirmed his Government's willingness to co-operate in
measures of inspection and control invoLving Canadian
territory. He emphasized that it was open to the Soviet
Union "to bring about improvement in the international situation .. , by concerning itself with co-operation
in the Arctic region on a system oi control and inspection ". [81Jlh meeting. para, 62.}

23. An cours du de'Jat qui a eu lieu an Conseil, la
semaine dernicre, plusieurs reprisentants onl mcntiollne la necessite de s'occuper du probleme de l'attaque
par surprise, Le representant du Canada a reaffirme que
son gouvern~ment eta:t dispose a cooljen~r a des me5urCi'l
d'inspection et de contr<'lle intercssant le ten'itoire
canadien. L a souligne qu'il etail loisible <'l I'Union
sovietique « de. facilitcr (...) l'amelioration de la situation
internationale, en cooperant a un systeme de contri'Jle et
d'inspection dans la region arctique ». [8136 .~l!ance,

i
I

I
"

I

f
\
1

'1
I
i

I

'I

r

"

~

r
I

)

of')-

mament meusure:;. The time for such a beginning is
long o';erdue.

22.

23.

par, 62,}

24. Le representant du Japon a invite les Etats
interesses a faire un serieux effort pour rel!rcndre le5
negociations en vue d'Ull accord de desarmement qui
comprendrait « les moycns de prevenir une attaque par
surpri~e~, [Ibid" par, 103,1

24. The representative of Jap:m urged the States
concerned to make a serious e[fort to resume negotiations for an agreement on disarmament including" ways
and means of preventing surprise attack". [Ibid"
para. 103.)

1

O(fitiul Rwm!s Of iht Disarmamen/ Commission, SUpplWltIJI

t

for April to Decembtr 19.5.5, document DC/71, annex. 17.

Dotl.Jm(n,'", aflldt!! de la C~mml~s{r)(l ,·u dr!!arwtmtnt, SuppUannexe 17.

m~nl d'/writ iI dictmbre 1955. document DC/71,

5
(

, i

I1

r

25.

In the statement of the Soviet Foreign Minister,
which was cirClllated at the request of the Soviet
delegation, Mr. Gromyko made reference to the possibility of a flight of United States aircraft approaching
the frontiers of the Soviet Union, in which ea.~e,
Mr. Gromylw said, "the n~ed to ensure the sflfety
of tllll Soviet people would require the USSR to take
immediate measures to remove the approaching threat".
[S/3991, para. 2.]

25. Dans la dl!claratioll du ivIinistre des afTaires I!tJ'au~
geres de I'URSS, distribuee il la demande de la delegation do ['Union sovictique, M. Gromyko a evoque
la possihilite de vols d'aeronefs americains a proximitedes frOlltieres de I'Union sovietique ; dans cc cas, a dit
M. Gromyko, « la necessite d'assurex la securite du
peLlplc sovietique obligera l'URSS a prendre des mesures.
immediates pour ecarter le danger qui s'approehera
d'elle l). [S/3991, par. 2.]

26, Although we have made it wholly clear that the
United States will not attack any country, if
Mr. Gromyko's statement ['epresents a sincere concern,
no matter how groundless, Slll'e1y the Soviet Union
will agree that the establishment of an acceptable
system of iIlspection would be desirable. Let us attack
the cause of thc Soviet concerns, not their symptoms.
Surely this is what Prime Minister of the Soviet Union,
Mr. Khrmllchev, had in mind when he said last
November: "Our belief and our position are today th:tt
c.onditicllls should be created that would preclude the
possibility of a surprise attack by some countries tlgainst
others. " The United StaLes believes that what is now
needed is the will to take constructive action.

25. Nous avons bien pnkisc que les Etats-Unis
n'attaqueront aUCllll pays, mais si la declaration de
M. Gromyko rcfh'lte une preoccupation reelle, aussi
depourvue de fondement qu'elle soit, l'Union sovietique admettra ccrtainement qu'i! serait souhaitable
d'etablir un systeme d'inspection, qui puisse Hre
accepte par tOU$. Attaquons-nous a la cause des preocc!l~
pations sovietiques, nOIl aux symptOmes. C'est salls
cloute a quoi songeait M. Khrouchtchev, president Ju
Cam;ei! des ministres de I'URSS, lorsqll'il disait en
novernbre dcrnier : 11 Nous croyons et nous soutenOlls
aujourd'hui qu'il y a lieu de ereer des conditions qui
rendcnt impossible une attaque par surprise de certains
pays contre d'autres. I~ Les Etats~Unis pensent que ce
qu'il fallt aujourd'hui, c'est la volonte de prendre une
decision constructive.

27, Geography makes it npparent that inspection in
the Arctic area can be at least the first line of approach
to the problem of surprise attack. We are loath to
believe thflt the Soviet Government really wants to
deny to its people the kind of safeguards which would
make surprise attack virtually impossible. We trust
that Mr. Sobole.v favoured providing such safegnards
when he referred to the Soviet Union's wish to promote
an improvement in the international situation and to
esLablish the necessary trust among States, and when
he stated that the Council should take steps designed
to reduce the threat of war.

27. Pour des ra~)ons geographiques, il est clair que
l'inspcction dans la region arctique peut au moins
constituer [e premier pas Vel'S la solution du probleme
de l'at.taque par surprise. NOlls hesitons it eroire que Le
Gouvemement sovictique desire reellement refuser a
son peuple les garanties qui rendraient une telIe attaquc
pratiquement impossible. NailS sommes persuades que
M. Sobolev etait favorable a de. telles garanties, lorsqu'il
a parle du desir de I'UniDn sovictiqne de favoriser une
amelioration de la situaLion inlcrnationale et d'etablir
la COil fiance necessaire entre It's Etats, et lorsqu'il a
declare que le Conseil devrait prendre des mesures
propres a reduirc la menace de gucrre.

28. Let me review briefly some of the background to
the proposals we afC making today.

28. Je ferai brievement l'historique des propositions
que nous presentons aujourd'hui.

29. On 21 July 1955, at the Geneva sllmmit meeting,
['resident Eisenhower introduced a proposal which
called for "open-skies" inspection over the Uniled
State~ and the USSR, and a mutuul exch:tnge of
blueprints between the two countries. At that time,
!le said:
"The United States is ready to proceed in the
study and te~ting of a reliable system of inspectiotls
and reporting, and when that system is proved,
then to reduce armaments with all others to the
extent that the system will provide assured results." 2

29. Le 21 juillct 1955, a la reunion « au sOllllllet 11 qui
s'est tenue a Geneve, le president Eisellhower a pre..
sente une proposition d'inspection (( a eiel ouvert n d~s
territoires des Etats-Unis d'Amcrique et de l'UnLon
sovietiqne, uinsi gu·un echange mutuel de plans entre
les deux pays. Il a declr!fl~ alars ;
(! Les Etats-Unis sonL pn!ts a entreprendre l'etlldc
et it faire l'essai J'un systeme silr cl'inspections et
de rapports et, lorsque ec systeme aura ete mis a
l'epreuve, a re.duire {curs armcments en meme tcmpa
que taus les autres pays dans la me sure oil ce systeme
ll11ra donnc des resuttats certnins 2. "

He envisaged this as a pracLical step which would
reduce the danger of surprise attack, reduce tension
and tll1\s create an atmosphere which could lead to
further progress.

C'etait la, a "on avis, une mesure pratique qui uimil1uerait le clauger d'une attaqne par surprise et reduirait
la tcnsioll, cL'cant ainsi Ull climnt propice il de nouveaux
progres.

30. Also at the Geneva Conference, former Soviet
Prime Minister Bulganin reafllrmed an earlier Soviet

30. A la mcme conference, l'll.itcien president du
Consetl des mini~Lre~ de l'URSS, M. Boulganine, a

~ ORfcia/ Records ollfre Disarmamcn/ COIll/lli~~i'!Jl, Supplcm~nl
for April 10 December 1.?i5i5, document DC/71, 1l1\l1CX 17.

• Doclllmnls o!fidel< rip /" Cr>mmi.'s;on dll dcsarmemclll, Supf111.
menl d'a!Jril dCCWlbrc J%:i. ctr>cumCllt DC/71, Ollllcxe 17.

a

6

1

-as follows:

r

" I have not forguLlen your proposal having to
do with stationing inspection teams at key points
in our countries, and if you feel this would help to
create the better spirit I refer to, wc wuId accept
that too."

J•
f

}Jnisente a nouveau line proposition sovi~Lique lelluanl
a l'etabJissement d'un systeme de postes de contrOle
tertl.'.stre 3. Les Etats-Unis ont considere qu'il s'agissait
d'une mesure raisODllable et, le 11 oetobre 1955 le
president Eisenhower a ecrit 3 M. Boulganine :
'
"Je n'ai J1~S (11lh\ie votre proposition conccrnant
l'installation d'equipes d'inspedion en des points
clefs de nos pays; si voua estimez que ce systeme
contribucrait u creer l'esprit mp.illf'.\lt dont j'ili parle,
no us pounions l'accepter egalement.)

proposal for a system of ground control posts. 3 We
recognized this as a Round me::lsnre, [lnd President
Eisenhower, on 11 October 1955, wrote to Mr. Bulganin

.31. Since the President's Geneva proposal, the UniLel1
States, along with other countries, has continued to
emph:lsize the importance o£ aerial and ground inspection. As the Secretary of State, Mr. DuIles, said on
29 May 1957, we were" trying to get something' started
quickly; aor! as far as we are concerned we wm take
any area which is sufliciently free of political complications 50 that the whole process does not get bogged
down". To this end till" TJnitf'.d States sugge!lted tllat
we make a beginning in the Arctic region where Soviet
and American territory significantly adjoin,

31. Depuis la proposition faitc it Geneve pM le Prrsident, les Etats-Unis, avec d'autres pny.q, n'ont cesse
de SQUligl'.er l'importance de l'inspection aerienne et
terreslre. Ainsiquc I'n dit le Secretaire d'Etat, M. Dulles,
le 29 mai 1957, nOllS nollS efIorcions ~ de mettre rapidement quelque chose en rot:te ; pOur notre part, nous
aeCepteriow:; n'llllporte quelle region qui· cchuppc l1uffisaIUment nux complications politiques pour que tOnle
I'operation ne soit pas vouec it l'echec ». A eet efIet,
les Etats-Unis ont stlgg~n~ que l'on commence par la
region arctique, oil le territoire sovietique l't le territoire americain se touchent,

32. No action was taken at that time. Then, last
week, LIte SQviet Union raised the item plaep.d on our
agenda, which clearI)' gave new significance to this
earlier Arctic zone proposaL After careful consideration
we concluded th;>t this proposal was Dpplicable to tll£'.
present circumstances,

32. A l'epoque, nucune mesure n'a He prb;e. La semaine
derniere, la delegation sovietique a souleve la question
inscrite a l'ordre du jour, ce qui a munifestement dUlInc
un interet nouveau a. la proposition anterieure relatlve
i1 la zone antique. Apres nn examen atLcntif, les
Etats.-Unis ont conclu que cette proposition valait pour
les c:rconstances actuelles.

33. Let me make clear that this United States proposal
is made entirely apart from the general topic of disarmament. The UniLed States ts not !lOW attempting to
bring the subject of disarmament before the Security
CounCil, There is before the Security Council an aUeged
tl1reat to the peace. We want to dispel ally possibility
of fear that the peace will be disturbed even aecidentally.

33. J e tiens a preciser que la proposition de~ EtatsUnis est nbsoIlLment distincte de la question generale du
clesarmement. Les Etats-Unis ne cherchent pas a
entrainei le Conse:! dflIlS uae discussion sur le desarmenlent, Le Conseil de securite est saisi d'une pretendue
menace eontre la paix. Nous tenons a clissiper taute
possibilite de crainte de voir la paix troublee, ffieme
par tlccident.

34, The United States has never considered that
inspection agaimt snrprise attack was in itself disarmament. President Eisenhower put forward his" openskies" proposal as a prelude to disarmall1cnt, as so:ne·
thing that might l'llnke disarmament easier, But it
was never a part of disarmament, and we do not now
P:.lt forward this proposal as an entering wedge to
bring the disarmament proposal before tlle Security
Council, although we do recognize that under Article 26
of the Charter the Secnrity Council does have responsibility for the establishment of a s~tem for tl~e regulation of armaments, However, that is not now being
brought before the Council.

IT

Les Etats-Unis n'ont jamais considere que l'inspection contre une attaque par surprise constituait par
elle-mcmc un desarmel11f'.nt. Le president Eisenhower
a presente Sf] proposition 'f du del ouverl p comme un
prelude au desarmement, comme une mesure pl'opre a
re11l1re le desermcment plus facile. Mais f'.lle n'a jamais
fait partie du dCilarmement, et les Etats-Unis lie
cherchent pas au:ourd'hui a frayer la voie a la presentatiun au Conscil cl'une proposition sur If'. M~>1rme­
ment, bien gt:.e, aux termes de l'Artic1e 26 de la Charte,
certaines responsabilites incombent au Conseil de securite en vile de l'etab!issement cl' un systeme de reglementation de~ <lTmements - tependant, ce n'cst pas
la quest:on g·.!i est actuelle:nent souroise au Conseil.

35. Let me talk about the provisions of the draft
resolution which the United States has introduced
[S/JP.,].

35.

(

36, The drnft looks towarus CIR agreement establishing
mutually acceptable safeguards against surprise attack
in an important area,

36. Cc projet envisage un accord ecablissallt des
garanties mutuellement acceptables cOlltm UllC attaque
par surprise dans une region imporlante,

,
I

!
r

I

I

rI
1(
'I

I

1

34,

Pennettez-moi de dire quelques mots an sujet des
dispositions du pro jet de resolution qu'ont present~ les
Etats-Unis (SIJ996.1.

• [bid., lInnexe 15.

1I,id., annex: 15.

7
t

37. It recommends prompt establishment of a northern
zone of inspection against surprise attack.

37. 11 recommande la constitution rapide d'une zone
septentrionale cl'inspection contre une attaque par
surprise.

38. It calls upon the five countries which engaged in
lengthy negotiations on this problem in 1957, together
with Denmark and Norway, both of which have also
concurred concerning their territories to designate
representatives to participate in immediate discussions
" with a view to agreeing on the technical arrangements
required". This proposal would als(} apply to any
other States baving territory north of the Arctic Circle
which desire to have such territory included in the
inspection zone.

38, Aux termes du projet, les cinq pays qui ant menc

The zone open to inspection would include:
" All the territory north of the Arctic Circle of the
Soviet Union, Canada, the United States (Alaska),
Denmark (Greenland), and Norway; all the territory
of Canada, the United States and the Soviet Union
west of 140 0 W. longitude, east of HiOo E. longitude
and north of 500 N. latitude; •.. all the remainder of
the Kamchatka peninsula; and all of the Aleutian
and Kurile [slands ...." 4

This proposed inspection zone encompasses a principal
area oyer which the major part of any attack might
pass. We believe that this vital region should be brought
under internutional inspection.

39. La zone ouvcrtc a !'inspection comprendrait :
«Tout le territoire de I'Union soviaique. du
Canada, des Etats-Unis d'Amerique (Alaska), du
Danemnrk (Groenland) et de la Norvegc situe an
nord du cercle polaire arctique ; tout le territoire du
Canada, des Etats-Unis d'Amerique et de I'Union
sovietique situe a I'ouest du 14Qe degre de longitude 0., a l'est du 160 e degre de longitude E. et au
nord du 50 e parallele de latitude N. ; ... tout le reste
de la peninsule du Kamtchatka ; et l'integralite des
tles Aleoutiennes et Kouriles (...) 4. »
La zone d'inspection proposee englobe une region Oll,
en cas d'attaque, pourrait passer la majeure partie des
forces assaillantes. Nous esumons que cette region vitale
devrait etre placee sous inspection internationale.

40, The UnitBd States is open-minded about the
technical arrangements for such an international inspection system. This is a matter to be worked out during
the course of discussions among the participating
States. That is why we have proposed that technical
discussions on this matter should begin as soon as
pO&sihle,

40. Les Etats-Unis n'ont pas d'idee precom;uc quant
aux dispositions techniques a prendre pour l'etablissement cl'un tel systeme. C'est la une question a mettre
au point au COUTS de discussions entre les Etats participants, C'est pourquoi nous avons propose que les
entretiens techniques u Cl'. sujet commencent des que
possible,

41. Let me emphasize several important considerations
regarding an inspcCltioll system in the Arctic zone.
1t should be an agreed international system and not
just a national system; allY such system should include
some means of advance notiEcation of flights and any
other movements of military significance in the Arctic
zone; there should be radar monitoring of all such
flights; and the concept of ground inspection posts, as
suggested by the Soviet Union, should be included.

41. Permettez-moi de souJigner quelques points importants en cc qui concerne un sy:;teme d'inspection de la
zone arctique. 11 doi! s'agir d'un systeme international
arrete d'un wmmnn accord, et non pas simplement d'un
systeme national; le systeme doit comporter la possibilile de prevenir a l'avance des vols et des autres
mOllvements militaires importants dans la zone arctique ; il doit y avoir une surveillance par radar de taus
ces vols; et ron devrait reprendre l'idee des pastes
d'inspection terrestre, telle que 1'a suggeree I'Union
sovietique.

4·2. In order to make possible the inclusion of several
additional segments of territory within the Arctic
Circle which are not specifically coyered, we have
provided in this draft resolution for the paniclpation
in ottr discussions of such other States as have terdtory
within this area and desire its inclusion in tbe zone of
inspection.
43. The draft resolution makes clear that the States
concerned must work out the actual inspection system,
which mcarts that the final product must be satisfactory
to all of them. This provision protects U!i all.

42. Afin de permettre l'inclusion de plusieuTs autres
portions de territoire situees a l'inteTieur du cercle
polaire arctique qui ne sont pas e.,'{pressement visees,
le projet de resolution prevoit la participation aux
entreliens des autres Etats qui ant des territoires dans
cctte region ct souhaitent que CC!! territoires soient
inclus dans, la zone d'inspection.

en 1957 de longues mlgociations a cc sujet, ainsi que
le Danemark et la Norvege, qui sont d'accord en ce
qui concerne leurs turitoires, sont invites a designer
des representants pour prendre part a des entretiens
qui amont lieu immediatement « en vue de parvenu 8.
un accord sur les dispositions techniques requises ».
Cette proposition s'appliquerait egalement a tout autre
Etat ayant des tenitoires au nord du cercle polaire
arctique qui desirerait voir ces territoires compris dans.
la zone d'inspection.

39.

\

!

43. Le projet de resolulion indique clairement que
le:) Etats interesses doivent mettre au point le sysreme
d'inspection, ce qui signific que le resultat final devra
satisfaire chacun d'entre eux. Cette dispo~ition nous
protr.ge tous.

• O{Jicial RtlJords of Ih~ Disarmament CDmmission, SUPFlemwl
December 1967. document DC/113, nnnex 5,

• Documenfs offieief,1 de la CommissiDn du dtsormtmtnl, Sllpplta deeembre 1%7, document DC(113, annexe 5.
sect. VII.

for January ID
sect. VIl.

menl de janlJ~r

8

44. The United States believes that mutually accep-

t
I
I

1
I'

I
i

l'

r

I

'I

" ,

'1
.I.

table arrangements along these or similar lines can be
d.evised, that our prcposal is serious, and that it affords
a reasonable basis for a discussion which can lead to
an agreement.

44. Les Etats-Unis estjment qu'i! est possible d'elaborer des arrangements mutuellement ~~ceptables sui_
vant ces principes ou des principcs similaires, que lenr
proposition est serieuse, et qu'elle peut founir une base
raisonnable de discussion permcttant d'aboutir it un
accord.

45. If we can proceed gradually and first experiment
with limited measures of aerial and ground inspection,
this should facilitate the subsequent expansion of
inspection. Once this limited ir.spcction system has
proved its value 8rtd has begun to rebuild mutual
confidence, any suspicions that ulterior motives underlie
proposals for aerial inspection arrangements should be
removed once and for all.

45, Si mills faisions d'abord UTI cssai en commen~a[lt
par des mesures limitees d'inspeetion aerienne et ter_
restre, l'extension ulterieure du systeme devrait s'en
trcuver facilit.el". Une fois que ce systeme d'inspection
limitee aurait fait ses preuv€s et contribue it renforcer
la confiance mutuelle, taus soup.;ons d'arriere-pensecs
chez les auteurs de propositions d'inspection aerienne
devraient se trouver dissipes une fois pour toutes.

46. We urge all members of the Council - and all
::ountries concerned -- to join in making this b~ginning.
Let us at least lessen our mutual worry over surprise
attuck. Let us create by our action in this Cemndl
today that mutual confidence so essential to progress
towards peace. Let us begin the long-sought, longawaited and long-hoped-ior step which will lead us
Hnd other nations of the world to the just and durable
peace all mankind seeks.

46, Les Etats-Unis invitent tOllS les membres du
Conseil et taus les pays interesses a se joindre it eux
pour faire ee premier pas. Reduisons au mains notre
inquietude mutuelle d'une attaque par surprise. Par la
decision que nous prendrons aujourd'hui au Conseil,
etablissons cette con fiance mutuelle si essentielle au
progres vers la paix. Faisons ce premier pas si longtemps
chereM, tant attendu et taut espen\ qui no us conduira.
neus et les autres pays du rnonde, a cc-tte paix juste
et durable a laqueUe aspire l'huwanite tout entiere.

47.

47. This meeting of tl1is Security Council here in

La seance d'aujourd'hui du Conseil de securite

New Yorlt todny could mark thp- tllrn in the road for
which humanity has been looking. Let us reassure the
world by reaching agreement on this imporlnnt matter,
Let us rise to the occasion.

a New-Yorl. pourrait marquer le tournant qu'attend

48. Mr. JARRING (Sweden): It L, appropriate to
recall at tlle outset that the question of measures
designed to prevent surprise attack hll,S in recent years
attracted increasing attention. During the debates in
the Uniled N~tions on the disarmament question,
various proposals lmve been put forward with the aim
of achieving, in some form, safeguards against such
llttack Under the terms of General Assembly resolution
1148 (XII), adopted on 1·1: November 1957, a disarmament agreement should provide, inter alia, for:

M. .J ARR IN rT (Stled~) [iraduif de. [' anglais] :
It convient de rappeler au depart que, ces cernieres
annees, la question des mesures destinees a prevenir
une attaque par surprise a de plus en plus retenu
l'attention. Au cours des debats qui se sont deroules
a I'Organisation des Nations Unie~ sur le de~armelTlellt,
diverses propositions ont ete presentees qlli visaient,
SOllS une forme Oll sous une autre, a instituer des
garanties contre une attaque de eet ordre. Aux termes
de b r~soll1tion 1148 (XII) de l'Assemblee genemle,
adoptee le t4 novembre 1957, un accord sur le dcsarmement devrait notammcnt prevojr ;
~ (La) mise en place progressive cl'un systeme de
llbre inspl'etion, comportant des elements terrestres et
aeriens, destine a fournir une garantie contre l'eventualite d'une attaque pa,- surprise. ~

l'humanite. Rassurons le monde en aboutissant a un
accord sur cette irnJ:orlante question. Montrons-nous
dignes d~s cireonstances.
48.

1

"The progressive establishment of open inspection
with ground and aerial comp(jnent~ to guard aguinst
the possibility o~ surprise attack."

,I

49. This question has recently assumed a particular
sense of urgency in the light of information which has
now been given concerning the extremely lligll sbte
of preruredness rr.aintained by the big PO'INers. It is
not for Sweden te judge the necessity for this preparedness, but my ddegatioll would wish to make the
general observation that a state of preparedness may
reach so high a level as to involve, in itself, greater
risks to world peace than those it is intended to eliminute. In many cO/ntnes. this has given cause for serious
concern.

49. Cette question a recemment revetu un caractere
d'urgence tout particulicr etant donne les renseignements fournis au sujet de 1'£tat de preparation extreme
des grandes puissances, Il n'appartient pas a la Suede
de juger de la neces.site de cette preparation, mais ma
delegation tient a faire observer d'uoe fac;on generale
que I'etat de preparation risque d'atteindre un niveau
tel qu'il comporte par lui-meme de plus grancs risques
pour la paix du mande que GellX qu'il vise it eliminer.
Dans de nombreux pays, cela a ceusc de graves
inquietudes.

50. It is therefore gr"tifying that the question of
measures aimed at achieving safeguards against surprise attack has bcen brought up for international
discussion and tnat the Security Council is now to
give this question thorough consideration.

50. II Caut done se feliciter que la question des mesures
tendant a assurer des garanties contre une attaque
par surprise ait cte proposee a l'examen d'un organe
international et que le Conseil de securite doive I'Ctudier
de fa.;on approfondie.

(

(

i'f
r

9

\

'1'·
,

51. The first step must reasonably be that the parties
concerned - especially the atomic Powers themselvesslwuld agree to examine in common the technical and
military possibilities for a system of control and safe~
guards. These studies may extend over the whole of
the problem or be limited to include only a particular
geographical zone. The essential thing is that the
parties, bearing in mind the seriousness of the problem,
should agree to initiate the studies. We feel certain
that agreement on this point would by itself greatly
contribute to a reduction of international tension.

51. Ce qu'il faut en premier lieu, c'est que les parties
interessecs - et en particulier les « puissances atomiquc:,; I) elles-memes - decident d'examiner en comnlUn le:,; possibilites techniques et militaires d'un syste-me de controle et de garanties. Les etudes pouITont
porter Sill' l'ensemble dn probleme ou se limiter a une
region gcographique particuliere. L'essentiel demeure
que les parties, conscicntes de la gravite dn probleme,
s'entendent pour entreprendre les etudes, Nous sommes
certains qu'un accord sur ce point contribucrait granclement par lui-meme a reduire la tension internationale.

52. The Swedigh Government has for its part expressed
the view that it is unrealistic to expect that the disarmament question can bc solved othcrwise than by
stages, Consequently, it has also maintained that one
does not further disarmament by insisting on a comprehensive agreement in which all aspects of disarmament would be treated and which would put too much
stress on the interdependence of the various disarmament measures.

52. Pour sa part, le Gouvernement su6dois a cxprime
l'opinion qu'on manquernit de realisme en croyant que
la question dn desarmement peut etre resull1c autrcmcnt
que par etapes, En consequence, il a egalement anirll1e
que ce ne serait pas servir la cause dll desarmcmcnl
qu'insister sur la conclnsion d'Ull accord general porbnt
sur taus les aspects de la question et soulignant trop
l'interdepcndance des diverses mesures de desarmcmcllt.

53. In the light of what I have just said, it is clear
that my delegation is prepared to vote in favour of
the draft resolution submitted by tile representative
of the United States [5/39951. We should, however, like
to add one paragraph to the tcxt. This new paragraph,
which would be inserted between operative paragraphs 2
and 3 of the U niled States draft resolution, reads as
follows:
" Expresses the view that such discussions might
!icrve 3S a useful basis for the deliberations on the
disD.rmament problem at the summit conference, on
the convening of which talks are in progress".

53. Etant donne ce que je viens de dire, il est evident
que ma delegation est disposee a voter en faveur du
projet de resolution des Eta ts-Unis [SI39951. EIle voudrait
toutcfois ajollter un paragraphe all texte propose. Cc
nouveau paragraphe, qui viendrait s'inserer enlre lc~
paragraphes 2 et 3 du dispositif du projet de resolution
des Etats~Unis, aurait la teneur suivante :

«Exprime l'avis que ces entretiens pourraient utilemcnt scrvir de base aux deliberations sur le problcme du desarmcment lors de la conference au
sommet en vue de laquelle des conversalions sont
en cours,» fS{399S,]

[ 5/3998J

54, In deciding its stand on the draft resolution
submitted by the representD.tive of the Soviet Union
IS/3997], as well as on other proposals on tilis matter
which may he put before the Security Council, my
delegation will also be guided by the considerations
which 1 hrwe set forth earlier in this statement.

54. Pour prendre position au sujet du projct de l'eSOlution presente par l'Union sovietique [5/3997}, ainsi
que des autres propositions sur la question dont le
Conseil de securite pourrait etre saisi, ma delegation
se laissera egalement guider par les considerations que
j'ai exposees.

55. With regard to Sweden's participation in the
proposed s.tudies and the inclusion of Swedish territory
in the international inspection ZOill'!, my Government
has not yet been able tu l;omplete the deliberations
which the importance of the question necessitates. I
expect to have further instruclions on this point at
a later stage,

55. Quant a la participation de la Suede aux etudes
envisagees et a l'inclusion de territoires suedois dans
la zone d'inspection internationale, mon gouvernement
n'a pas encore acheve les deliberations qu'exige l'importance de la question. Je pense re~voir de nouvelles
instructions a ce sujet a un stade ultcrieur,

56, Mr. SOBQLG:V (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (franslalcd from Russian): Tile Security Council
is once again meeting to discuss the item proposed by
the Soviet Union con~rnillg " urgent measures to put
an end to !lights by United Stales military aircraft
armed with atomic alld hydrogen bombs in the direction
of the frontiers of the Soviet Union".

56. M. SOBOLEV (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovie.tiques) {lradllil du russe} : Le Conseil de securite
s'est reuni a nouveau pour poursuivre I'examen de
la question presentee par l'Union sovietique sous le
titre ~(Adoption de mesures urgentes pour fain~ cesser
les vols d'aeronefs militaires des Etats-Unis d'Ameriqlle, armes de bombes atomiques et de bombes a
I'hydrogene, dans la direction des frontieres de l'Union
sovietique It.

57. At the Council's meeting of 21 April 1958 [813tll
meeting] the Soviet delegation called attention to

57. A la seance du 21 awil 1958 [813 e seancel, la delCgation de l'Union sovietique a cite des faits qui attestent
que, ces derniers temps, des aeronefs de l'aviation
rnilitaire des Etats-Unis d'Amerique, ayant a bord des
bombes atomiques et des bombes a l'hydrogene, ont
elTectue El. maintes reprises des vols a travel'S les regions
arctiqucs, dans la direction du territoire de l'Union

facts which showed that recently United States Ail'
Force planes, carrying atomic and hydrogen bombs,
had repeatedly eanied out flights over the Arctic
.areas in the direction of the territory of the Soviet
Union. These flights, as indicated in published reports,

10

iQ

I

If
,

I
I

I
I
I

1
I

I
i

",

r

ir
I

I

I

I
'r
r
I

.ne carr:ed out on a systematic and regular basis.
According to the same reports, these plane~ were
ordered to take ofT when American radar stations
reported that Soviet guided missiles were approaching
the terri:ory of th~ llnjt~rl St~t~s. Of cour5e, no Soviet
missiles have threatened or are threatening the United
States, and the American radar stations, as might have
been expected, we=c. giving out inaccurate signals.

SOVle.lque. Conme le montrcnt les d~p~cbes publiees,
ces vols ant llD caracten~ sy~tematique e.t rcgulier.
D'apres ces ml!mes infor:nations, l'ordre d'entreprendre
ces vols n ete donne p<irce que les stations de rad:n dES
Etats~Unis fi"aient signale que des engins guides
sovietiqucs ap?rocl:aient du territoirc des Etut:s-Unis.
11 VB sans dire qu'ancull projectile de I'UniOll soviCtiquc
n'a menace ni ne menace les Etats-Unis, et que les
st:ltions de radar americain{'.s ont, commc iI fnJlnit s'y
attendrc, fOilrui des l'enscignements inexacts.

5B. The Soviet delegation called ~ttention to tlle
sc:riplls danger to the C{itlS<'. of peace which arises each
time American bombers toke off in the direction of
the Soviet Union's frontiers with £I load of hydrogen
bombs. The danger to the cause of peace which such
flights constitute is obvious, inasmuch as a simple
mhtake in the LransmistiLOn of signals might cause a
world-wide catastrophe.

58, La delegation soviHiquE'. a deja denonclS le grave
danger qui menacc la paix chaque fais que des bombardiers americains charges de bombes it l'liydrugcnc
se dirigent vers les fron<jhes de l'Union sovietiquc. Le
danger que ces vols fad eO'lrir a la paix est evident,
puisqu'une si:nple erreur dans la transmission des
signaux pcut declencher une catastrophe mondiale.

O/licial t<lpresl'ntfltivp..~ of the United St.-lteS, in
particular here in the Security Council, at first completely denicd that such flights had b~en carried out by
United States aircraft. Subsequently, it was alleged
LJmL these were tl'uining flights. However, all such
attempts failed, r.nd the representatives of the United
Stales have now been forced to acknOWledge that
continued flights by A:m'riean bombers, carrying atomic
and hydrogen bombs, in lhe direction of the frontiers
of the Soviet Union, increase the tllreat of an outbreak of war as El result of a mistake or an accident.

59. Les rep:-esentants omciels des Etats-Unis, et

!l0.

notnmmcnt leur representant all COllscil ue SeC\irjte.
ont commence par nicr purement ct simplement ces
vols des aeronefs arnericains. Par la suite, ils or.t teIlte
de birc croire que ees vols etaient des cxerciccs d'entrainement. Cependant, ces tentatives ont ete vaines, A
l'heure actuelle, les representants des Etats-Unis sout
bien obliges de rcconnaitrc que le fait de continuer les
vols de bomhardiers amcricains, pOlteurs de bombes
atomiqnes et de bombes a l'hydrogcne, dans la direction
des frontieres de :'Union sovietique aceroit le danger
de voir eclater la guerre a la suite d'nne erreur au d'un
accident.

{iQ.

lL is characteristic that, even after our appeal
Lo the Security Coundl, fUTther repol'ts were published
indicating that planes of the United States Strategic
Air Command have repea~edly carried out flights in
the direction of the frontiers of the Soviet Union in
ordcr, as the reports aay, to strengthen the diplomacy
QC the United ::itates.

60. Fait significatif : depuis 110tre requMe au Conseil
de sccurite, de nouvelles donnecs pUDliees ont montre
C}lIC les aeronefs du Strategic Air Command des Etats~
Unis ont etIectuc des vols repetes Cll direction des
frontieres de ['Union sovietique, afin - disaient les
communiques - J d'appuyer la diplomatie des EtatsUnis»,

61. The Soviet Governmcnt has strongly protcsted
against the provoca.tive acts of the United States Air
Force and has demanded that the United Stales .~hcul{l
immediately cease its proctice of sending bombers
armed with atomic and hydrogen bombs in the direction of the fron'jers of lhe Soviet Union. Tl1e Soviet
Government has called upon tlle Governments of other
countr:es to raise their voices in prote:st toe, with a
view tD delivering the peoples from the nightmarish
danger inherent in these acts by the United States Air
Force.

61. Le GOllvernement sovietique a cleve une protestation energique contre les oetes provocateurs de
l'aviation militaire americnine ; il a demt:lllde que les
Et...ts-Unis c{'.ssent immcdiatel1lent d'envoyer des bombardiers charges de bombes atolllique~ et de bombes a
l'h:ydrogene oans la diredion des fronticrcs de l'Union
soviMique. 1.l~ GOllvernement sovietique a invite le<;
gOHVernl'ment,> des autres payfi a 5'fl~5ocier a sa protestation et a f<'.ire en sorLe que les peuples soient delivres
de ce canchemar et n'aiellt plus a craindrc le danger
qlli cst inherent it ces operaLons tie I'aviation americaine.

62. Nothing has changed s:ncc the di~cussion of
this question began in the Council and a real tllreat
to peace continues to exist. This threat to peace CUIllC-'S
from (me direction - fr,nu the United States. The
Government of the United Sbtes can easily free the
worl!i from tbe fear of a sudden outbreak of <"I destrnc~
tive atomic war. 1t can do this by taking an immediate
decision to stop the flights of United States aircraft,
carrying atomic and hydr'Jg:en bombs, in the direction
0: the frontiers of the Soviet Unio::\. This is prell:scly
what t11e Soviet Government was seeking to acllieve
\\'hcn it came to the S::C{lrity Council. UnforLunately,
owing to the position taken by the representative of
lhe United States, the Security Cound hflS not yet

62. Depuis que l'extlmen de ceUe queslion £l. COlllnll'nCe
au ConsciJ, ricn n'a change, ct il l;xiste iou:ours un
danger reel pour la paix. Ce dangrr nr. vient que d'un
cMe : des Et!lis-llrlls. Le Got!velT.Cment des EtatsUnis peut aiscment dClivrer le 100nde de la crainte de
voir eclater soudain line g;\erre atomique dcstrnctrice.
Il peut le :aire en prellEnt suns tarder la deci.~i(]n
d'arreter les vols d'acronefs milituires chargc.s de
bO'llbes atomiques et de bombcs ;i I'ltydrogene en direction des frontieres de I'Union sovietique, C'est prccisement Cc que voulalt obL~nir le Gcuyern.(;\.llent soyj(itique en s'adressant au Conseil de seCllritc. Malhellreusemel1t, le Conseil de sccnritc, en raison de l'attitude
a.doptee par le representurrt des Etuts~Unis, n'a pas

11

taken any measures to avert this threat to peace which

,

i

continues to hang over the world.

encore pris les mesures necessaires pour prevenir la
menace a la paix qui continue a peser sur le monde.

63. The Soviet Union's complaint to the Security
Council met with wide response throughout the world.
The anxiety and fears felt by the peoples of many
countries as a result of the provocative acts of the
United States Strntegic Air Command were in no way
allayed by the soothing statements of official United
States representatives and by the inaction of the Security Council.

63. La requete de l'Union sovictique au Conseil de
securite a eu un large retentissement dans le monde
cntier. L'inquietude et les apprehensions que les provocations du Strategic Air Command americain ont
suscitces parmi les populations de nornbreux pays n'ont
point ete dissipees par les declarations apaisantes des
representants officlel:; des Etats-Unis, ni par l'inaetion
du Conseil de se.curite.

64. The Government of the United States, instead of 64. Au lieu de prendre l'unique decision juste dans
taking the only correct decision. possible - namely, ce cas, au lieu d'arr~ter les vols des bombardiers amerito stop flights of United Slates bombers in the direction cains en direction de l'Union sovietique, le Gouvcrof the Soviet Union - hos unrlertal,cn a diversionary nement des Etats-Unis a entrepris une manceuvre de
manoeuvre in the Security COlmcil. The representative diversion au Conseil de securite. Le representant des
of the United States 11as called a meeting of the Council Etllts-Unis a convoque le Conseil et l'n saisi d'un projet
and has submitted a drnfl resolution the purpose of de resolution qui n'a nullement pour objet d'adopter
which is certainly nol to enable measures to be taken des mesures propres a d~tourner la menace du declento avert the threat of :1 SUdden outbreak of nuclear chement soudain d'une guerre nucle-aire. En deposant
war. By submitting ils draft resolution, the United son projet de resolution, le GOllvernement des EtatsStales Government is attempting to substitute a dis- Unis essaie de changer la question: au lieu de discuter
cussion on inspection in the Arctic for the question of de la cessation des vols provocateurs que les aeronefs
putting an end to the provocative flights of United americains charges de bombes atomiques et de bombes
States aircraft, carrying atomic and hydrogen bombs a I'hydrogene efTeetuent vcrs les frontieres de l'Union
in the direction of the frontiers of the Soviet Union. sovietique, il propose d'ouvrir un debat sur la creation
It is thus attempting to give the impression that it d'une zone d'inspection dans les regions arctiques. 11
is not responsible for the tension created by its own compte ainsi s.e soustraire a In responsabilite qui lui
acts. In other words, the United States Government ineombe en raison de la tension provoquee par cea
evades the adoption of measures which might really actes des Etats-Unis. En d'autres termes, le Gouvereliminate that tension.
nement des Etats-Uuis refuse d'adopter les mesures qui
pourraient r~ellement dlssiper cette tension.
65. The action of the United States Government in
raising the question of inspection of territories north
of the Arctic Circle not only does nothing to eliminate
the threat of a surprise attack and to reduce tension
among States, but, on the contrary, reveals once again
its real purposes. The authors of the proposal wish to
divert the Security Council from the important question
raised by the Soviet Governmcnt. At the same time,
they wish to ohtain intelligence data concerning a
large part of the territory of the Soviet Union, which
is not sending its bombers in the direction of the
frontiers of the United States and which is not causing any threat either to the United States or to any
other State.

65. En soulevant la question de l'inspection des territoires situes au nord du cercle polaire arctique, le Gou~
vernement des Etats-Unis ne fait rien pour prevenir
le danger d'une attaque par surprise ni pour reduire
la tenslon dans les relations entre Etats. n montre au
contra ire, llne fois de plus, queUes sont les intentions
veritables des auteurs de cette proposition. Ceux-ci
cherchent a distraire le Conseil de securite de l'importante question qu'a souJevee le Gouvemement sovietique, En meme temps, ils veulent. obtenir des renseignements militaires sur line partie considerable du
territoire de l'Union sovietique - qui, elle, n'envoie
pas de bombardiers vers les frontieres des Etats-Unis,
et ne fait peser aucune menace, ni sur les Etats-Unis
ni sur aucun autre Etat.

66. The United States proposal for inspection of the
Arctic regions canllot eliminate the tensio:J. created by
the flights of its aircraft carrying atomic and hydrogen
bombs unless the United States Government puts an
end to these provocative flights. Thi~ is precisely the
action which the Security Council should recommend
to the Government of the United States.

G6.

67. An attempt is made in the United States draft
resolution to represent matters as if the Soviet Union
were threatening the United States with a surprise
attack across the Arctic. This is a false and baseless
charge. The Soviet Union is consistently carrying out a
peace-loving policy, the basic aim of which is the maintenance and strengthening of peace. We do not propose
to attack anyone. and there are no facts which would
warrant an assumption that we do.

67. Les auteurs du projet de resolution des Etats-Unis
voudraient fain~ croire que les Etats-Unis sont menaces
d'Hre attaquc:; brusquement, a travers l'Arctiquc, par
l'Union sovictique, Tentative hypocrite, menee avec de
pietres moycn!!. L'Union sovi6tique ne cesse de poursuivre sa politique pacifiquc, dont le but essentiel est
de maintenir et de consolider la paix. Nous n'avons
pas l'intention d'attaquer qui que ce soit, et il n'y a
pas de faits qui etablissent le contraire.

12

La proposition des Etats-Unis concernant l'inspection de la region arctique n'arrivera pas a supprimer
la tension ereee par les vois des aeronefs americains
charges de bombes atomiques et de bombes a l'hydrogene, a. moins que le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis
d' Amerique ne mette fin a ccs vols de provocation. C'est
precisement cette mesure que le Conseil de securite
doit recommander au Gouvernement des Etats-Unis,

r
t
J

rj
\

.~

r

i

T

.~

-",
]

r

f
}.
f

l

L

"'/
I

f

'f

r

68.

No devkes by United States diplomats or marlOeuvres by the United States representative in the
Security Council can alter the fact that tension in tIle
Arctic region is due entirely to the acts of the United
States in dispatching aircraft carrying atomic and hydrogen hombs in the direction of the frontiers of the Soviet
Union. One thing is perfectly clear to all: a decision by
the United States Go\'ernment to !Jut all immediate
end to those flights is all that is needed to eliminate
that tension.

68. Les artifices de la diplomatie americaine, les
manceuvres du representant des Etats~Unis au Conseil
de seeurite, n'y changeront rien : la tension dans le:>
r~gions arctiqnes n'a pas d'untre cause que l'initiative
des Etats-Unis, qUi envoient des avions charges de
bornbes atomiques et de bombes a l'hydrogene vers les
frontieres de I'Union sovil~tique. De toute evideme, it
sufHt, pcur climincr cette tension, que le GOllverne.ment
des Etats-Unis decide d'arreter immCdiatement ces vols,

69.

60. Les Etats-Unis proposent de scparer du problerne
general du rlesarmement la question d'une zone septen~
trionale d'inspectioli j cette proposition ne temoigne ni
du desir d'arrHer Cl'. jeu dangerenx avec les armes
Iltomique5, ni de la volontc de resondre le probleme du
desarrnement.

The United States proposal to separate the

ql1f~!'.tion of 00 Arctic zone of inspection from the aeneral

prohlem of dis8:mament does not indicate a readiness
to put an end to this dangerous playing with atomic

weapons nor a desire to solve the problem of disarmament.

70. In fad, what is the use of the United States proposal to establish an Arctic inspection zone when
United States military authorities refuse to put an end
to provocative fights by their bombe:s earrying nuclear
weapons in the direction of targds mapped out by
their ~tllfis in the territory of the Soviet Tlnion? Would
SllCh inspection prevent faIling meteorites or electro-magnetic disturbances from appearing on radar screens
Le: serve as a pretext for dispatching United States
bombers to targets in the Soviet Union?

70. En fait, que "allt la proposition des Etllts-Uni!{
tendant a creer dans les regions arctiques une zone
cl'inspection, si on la rapproche du refus, par les autorites rnilitaires americaines, d'arreter les vols de provocation des bombardiers charges d'armes nuclCaires veTS
des objectifs designes par les Hats-majors americains
sur le territoire de l'Union sovietique? L'inspection
arretera-t-elle les chutes de meteorites, ou les perturbations electr(lmagnttiques dont l'apparition sur les
ccrans de radar sert uctuellcment de pretexte !l l'envoi
de bombardiers americains vers des objectifs situes dans
I'Union sovietique ?

71. Or would the inspection of the Arctic wastes
cause the United States to liquidate its military bases
011 foreign soil from which its bombers, carrying nuC'.Iear
weapons, are :systt:matically dispatched to the peaceful
cities of the Soviet Union whenever some UnLted
States technician thinks he sees a "danger" on a
radar screen '!

71. Pellt-Hre aussi ['inspection des glaces de l'Arctiquc
incitera-t-elle les Etats-Unis d'Amerique a supprimer
leurs bases militaires en territoire etranger, d'dl les
hombardiers am£'ri(';~iTl~ s'l'.nvoIent regulierement, avec
leurs bombes fiucleaires, vers les viIles paisibles de
l'Union sovietique, chaque fois que quelque technicien
americain crait deceler un • danger 'I sur l'ecran de
.5on mdar ?

72. Can this Foposal be designed to bring about an
early settlement of the disarmament problem? Is
it by any chance inte:lded to promote the implementation of the General Assembly's directives concerning
the prohibition of the use and manufacture of nuclear
weapons, the conversion of eXisting stocks of such
weapon~ for peaceful purposes, ~ sllbstantiClI reduction
in conventional arms and armed forces, and the establishment of eflective international control over these
measures?

72. Cette proposition serail-eUe ut:l;liuee it resoudre
rapidement le probleme du desarmement '? Aurait~elle
pour but de {aciUter l'execution des directives de
l'Assemblee gencralc qui concernent !'interdiction de
l'emploi et de la fabrication des armes nncleaires,
l'i::lfTcetation des stocks eristunts d'nrmes nucleaire£ a
dcs fins padl1ques, la rCrluction substantielle des forces
armees et des annemcnts de type clas~ique. et enfin
l'etablisscment d'un controle international efficace
gD.ranti~sant l'applicution de ces me"ures ?

73, These questions [teed only be raised for it to be
perfectLy obvious that the proposal submitted by the
United States has no relation either to a settlement
of the disarmament Fob/em or to tIle elimination of
the exi~ting threat to [l('Jl('.e:.

73. Il sumt de poser ees questions PO~lT .~e rendrc
a l'evidence : la proposition presentee par le!' EtatsUnis U'fl allcun rnpport ni avcc la solution du problemc
du desarmement, ni avec I'elimination Cl'. in mcnac~
qui pese actuellemcmt sur la paix.

74. What purpose does the United States seek to
achieve by introducing a completely new question,
namely, tl1atol the establishment of an inspection zone
in the Arctic region, during consideration of the qlles!ion entitled "Urgent measures to put an cnd to
fights by United States military aircraft armed with
atomic and hydrogen bombs ip. Ue direction of the
frontiers of the Soviet Union " ? Its purpose can only
be to divert public opinion from the terrible danger
inherent in the continued flights of Ullited States
bombers, armed with nuclear weapons, in th.e di.rection

74. Quel but visent donc les Etab-Unis en soulevant,
alars q'.le le ConseiL dehat la question intitulce "Adop~
tion de mesures urgentes pour faire cesser les vols
cJ'aeronefs militaires des Eiats-Unis d'Amerique, armes
!le lWl1:lJcs utamigue~ et de nombc~ h l'hydrogene, dun!>
la direction des frollticres Qe l'Union sovietiqne D, une
question entieremcnt nouvelle, celle de la creation d'llne
zone d'inspeetion d2ns les regions arctiques? Ils ne
peuvent avoir qu'un senl but : dCtourn,~r l'at!ention
mondirlc du danger - proprement terriblE': IHlT lcfi
consequences catastrophiques qu'il peut avoir pc,ur des

13

of the frontiers of the Soviet Union, and the risk of
catastrophic conslOquences to millions of people which
these flights cntlli)'

millions d'hommes - que presente la continuation des
vols de bombardiers americains, armes d'engins
nucleaires, vers les frontieres de rUnion sovietique.

75. Mr. Lodge has made it dear to us that these flights
will be continucd. Consequently, the peoples of the
world will remain in a state of deep anxiClty over their
fate and the fate of peacCl on earth; tension will be
rnaintaizled in relations among States. Inspection
'!lights over the Arctic ice cannot possibly dispel the
legitimate concern of the peoples or reduce the Lension
IlO\V existing in the world,

M. Lodge nOlls a hit claircment comprendre que
ccs vols se poursuivront. En consequence, les peuple:>
du monde continueront a eprouver les plus vivc.s
inquietudes pour leur sort, pour la paix du monde, et
les rdntions internationnlcs demenreront tendues, Aucun
vol cl'inspection an-dcssl18 des glaces arctiques ne
pourra di::;siper I'angoisse legitime des peuples, ni
attenuer la tension dont soufire [lctuellcment le mande,

76. The action of the United States Government in
raisillg the question of inspecti.on in the Arctic merely
proves once again that it does not seriously intend to
have the UniLed Nations take up truly important ques·
tion:; ill the interests of peace and of eliminating the
threat of war. It is clear to anyone who soberly appraises
the situation that the group of States called upon to
consider the question of in:;pection, in complete isolation from any disarmeml'nt questions, shows an even
stronger bias than does the membership of the Disar·
mumeut Conlnlissioll.

70. En sOllle\'unt la question de la creation d'un systeme d'inspection dalls la region arctique, le Gouvernl'.ment des Etats-Unis montre une fois de plus qu'il n'll
pas vraiment I'intention d'aidcr l'Organisation des
Nntions Unics a. s'occuper de questions reelIemenL
importantes dans l'interet de la paix, et a cearter le
danger de guerre, Pour quiconquc juge froidement la
situatioll, il est clair que le grollpe d'Etats auquel on
propose d'eiudier la question de I'inspection, en isolant
d'ailleurs enlierement cette question des probIemes du
desarmement, a une composition encore plus desequilibrec que la Commission du desarmemcnt.

77. By acting in this manner, the Government of
the United States is continuing to abuse its position
in the United Nations, and in particular in the Security
Council; as in the past, it is relying on a mathematical
majority of votes instead of ~eeldng a mutually acceptable agrL'C!ment among the States concerned.

Le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis d'Amerique, en
ainsi, continue a abuser de sa situation dans
l'Organisation des Nations Unies, et en particulier au
Conseil de sGeurite ; il compte comme par le passe sur
la majorite llumerique des voix, au lieu de rechercher
un accord mutuellement acceptable entre les gouvernemcnts interesses.

78. The submission of the United States draft resolution to the Security Council can be interpretcd only as an
attempt to impose a decision on one aspect of the disar~
mameut problem by holding a vote in a body the
majority of whose members are linked by military
agreements. Howevcr, such methods cannot succeed.
The entire course of disarmament negotiations in the
Unii.cd Natiuns has shown that imposed decisions by no
means lead to a solution of the disarmament problem,
and remain on paper. The disarmament problem cannot
be solved by a vote. The only real l'oad to a solution
is that of negotiation on the basis of equality and
mutual recognition of the need to guarantee the security of both sides.

78, Le depe:.t du projet de resolution des Etats-Unis
au Conseil de securi.te ne peut et!'e LnLerpn~te que comme
une tentative d'imposcr une decision sur l'un des
aspects du desnrmement gr:1ce a un voLe pris dans un
organe dont la plupart des membres sout lies entre
eux pllr des accords militaires. Or, de telles methodes
ne pem'cat aboutir. Tout le deroulement des negociations sur le desarmemenL i l'Organi5ation des Nations
Unies a mon'tre que des decisions imposees ne cOlluuisent
nullement!l line solution du probleme du desarmelOent
et qu'clles restent des decisions purement thCoriqucs.
On ne peut reglcr le probleme clu desarrnement par 1In
vote, La senle voie possihle est eene de ncgociations
mences sur la base de J'egalite et de la reconnaissance
mutuelle de la neeessite, pour les deux parties, d'assurer
lem sccurite.

79. The Soviet Government helieves tllat at the
present time effecLive measures to avert the threat
of war, to prorluce a shift towa.rds a healthier international atmosphere, to create proper conditions for the
peaceful co-operation of all States, can best be taken
at a conference of heads of Government, The Soviet
Government, desiring the swiftest solution of mgcnt
international question~, particularly the disarmament
problem which so vitally affects the C'1.I1Se of peace,
has proposed that this conference should t:li~cuss and
take action on those highly important questions,
agreement on which would bring the solution of the
disarmament problem as a whole within the realm of
possibility.

79. Le Gouverne.mellt de l'Union sovietique estime
que c'est :l une confcrenc:e des chefs de gouvernement
que ron pent prendre le plus efficacement, it. l'heurc
actuelle, cles meSllres reellement propes a sup primer la
menace d'unc nouvelle guerre, a provoquer un reVl·
rernent dans toutel:\ situation internationale, et a
creel' les conditions necessail'cs a III cooperation paci~
fiqlle de taus les Etats, Desireux de voir intervenir
rnpidcment ulle solution des qnestions internationales
urgentes - et, avant tout, du probl~ml' du desarmement, dont la paix depend aU premier chef, le Gouvernement sovietique a propose que cette conference
etudie, cn prenant des me.sures concretes it ICllr sujet,
ees questions extremement importantes, ann d'aboutir
a une entente qui penncttrait de regler de fa~on pratiqne l'ensemble Ult probleme du desarmement.

75,

77.

agis.~ant

14

80. 1 shall enumerate the questions which the Soviet
Government )la5 proposed for the agenda of a summit
conference: (1) the immediate cessation of tests of
atomic and hydrogen weapons; (2) the renunciation by
the Soviet Union, the United States and the United
Kingdom of the use of nucle:lf weapons; (3) the establishment in central Ellrope of a zone free of atomic
weapons; (4) the prohibition of the use of outer space
for mililary purposes Rnd liquidation of milittl.ry h.'Ises

in foreign territory; (5) the conclusion of a 000agression agreement between the States member!'i of the
North Atlanlh; 1\-eaty Organization and the Stat.es

1

signatories of the Warsaw Treaty; (6) a reduction in the
nnmber of foreign troops stationed on the territory of
Germany and other European SLates; (7) the worldng
out. of all agreemellt on questions connected with tIle
prevention of surprise attacks; and (8) other questions,

1

I
'.f

,
I
I

.,l

81, N'est-il pas evident qu'un prompt examcn de ccs
questions par les chefs de gouvernement. a la wnference, et la realisation d'um entente entre eux ·sur
I'udoption de Dlesures cOllcretes, contribueraient effectivement raliermir la paix et la contlance entre les
peuples, dors que les manreuvres des Etats-Unis DU
Conseil de seCllrit~. np. peuvent qu'entraver l'obtention
de ce resllltat 'f

If the Duited States Government is really inter-

82. Si le Gouvcrnemcnt des Etats-Unis desire vraiment
un debat serieux sur la question de la prevention d'une
attaquc p"r surprise, il sait fert bien que le seLlI moyen
(l'y pflrvenir est d'en saisir une conference des chefs de
gonvernement.

82,

c~tcd in business·like consideration

of the question of
preventing surprise attacks, it knows full well that
the only way to ac:lieve this j~ to discuss the matter at
fl conference of the heads of Government.
The Security Council, for its part, can also make

a useful contribution to the cause of strengthening
I

"f

r
I
I

1

r
\
I

,
'1

f'f

y

a

Surely it is ekar that thc speediest possible ('.on·
sideraticm of these questions at a eonfel'cnce of heads
of Government and an agreement among them
t(l take specific measures will truly contribute to the
strengthening of prace and confidence among nations,
whereas the manoeuvres of the United States in the
Security Council can only hinder their attainment.
81.

83.
,

80, Je vais enumcrer ces questions, que le Gouver_
nement sovietique a propose d'inscrire a. l'ordre du
jour de la conference l( au sommet ll: 1) cessation immediate des e&sais d'armcs atomiques el d'armes it ]'hydrogene; 2) renonciation par l'Union sovietique, les EtatsUnis d'Amerique et le Royaume-Uni a l'emploi d'armes
nucIeaires, 3) c:eation, en Europe centrale, d'uue zone
d'Oll toutearme atomique seralt exclue j 4) interdiction
de I'utilisation de l'espace extra-a::mos?Mriqu€
des
fms milita,ires, et suppression des bases militail'€s etablies en ierritoirc etrangtr ; 5) conclusion cl'un accord
de non-agression entre les Etats membres de l'Organisation du Traite de l'Atlantiqlle nord et le" Etats
signataircs du Traite de Varsovie; 6) reduction des
cfiectifs dFS troupes etrangeres statiollnees sur le territoire de t'Al1emagne et dam; d'autres Etats europCells;
7) elaboration d'un ncoard sm les questions li~es a la
prcvcmtiol1 d'une att~{(rlP par ~urprise; B) Qutres
questions.

peace and ea!;lng internati.omd tension by recommending
t.hat a conferellce of heads of GovcrnrnCllt should be
held at tlle earliest possib:c date. This is precisely
what the USSR delegation, in submitting its new d1,dt
resolution, calls upon the Security Council to do.
The text of the drdt is as follows:

" The Sl'Curi/y Caundl,
"Having examined the question submitted by
the Soviet Unicn concerning • Urgent measures to
put an end to Bights by the United States military aircraft armed with ntomic and hydrogen bombs
in the direction of the frontiers or the Soviet UniO:1"

" Considering that the practice of making such
fliglll$ increases tension in international rcJ8tions,
constitutes u threat to the security of nations and. if

eoutinucd, may lead to a breach of world peace
alld tIle unleashing of an atomic war of annihilation.

" [:nlls upon the United States to refr:iill from
sending its military aircrnft carrying atomic and
11ydrogen bombs towards the frontiers of other
StHtes for the purpose of creating a threat to tlleir
security or staging military demor.stmtiollS;
"Mindful of the necessity for taking ~teps as
soon as possible to avert the threat of atomic warfare and ease international tension"

15

a

83. Le Conscll de securite, pour sa part, peut aU-"si
conh'ibuer utilement a renforct'.r la paix et oR reduirc
la tension internationale en se prononr;ant en favcu\·
rie In prompte eonvocatioll d'une conference des cheis
de g<luvernement. C'est prccisement a quoi la delegation
de I'URSS invite le Conseil, en presentant son nouvcnu
projet de rl!.so]nt.inll, ains! conC,l
~ Le COIlsdl de sccurW,

([ Ayant examine la question proposee par I'Unioll
sovietique, inlitult~e Adoption de mesures urgent~s
pour faire cesser le.~ vols cl'aerone;s militaires d~g
Etats-Unis d' Arnerique, arrncs de bombes atomiques
et de bombes a l'hydrogcne, dans la direction UI'S
fronticrcs de "Union soviMiqut-' .'.
( Consideran! que la pratique de tels vols accrdt
la tens~OI1 dans ks rc1atior:s entre les Etats, cree une
menace a la seeurit6 des peuples et risque u'culraiiltr,
si elle se po:nsuit, une rupture de 1;: pni:x universeJe
et le declencherr;cl1t d'lIne gllc,re atolllique d'exterruination,
I( lmile
les Etats-Unis d'Amerique iJ. s'abstenir
u'envoyer leurs aeronch militfiires, charg<!'i de bombes
alomi~tlCs et de bombes a !'hydrogene, vers les
frontieres d'autri;s Et.'lts en vue de creer une menar.e
a leur securit~ Oll a des fln~ de demonstrations
militaires ;
(I

~ Consdent de la necessite de prendre aussitOt qlll'.
possib:e des mesures pour ecarter la menace d'une
guerre atomique et reduire la ten5iQn internationale,

.

"Notes with satisfaction that preliminary talks
are in progress between the interested States with
a view to the convening of a summit conference to
discuss a number of urgent problems, including the
question of drawing up measures to preclude the
danger of surprise attack;
" Expressts fhl. hop~ that the summit conference

will be held at the earliest possible date," [Sj3997)

• Note avec satisfaction que les Etats intcresscs ont
engage des pourparlers preliminaires en vue de la
convocation d'une conference des chefs. de gOllVt'.rnement chargee de discutcr certains problernes
urgents, notamment la question de l'elaboration de
rnesures destinees a prevenir le danger d'une attaque
par surprise; et
«Exprime l'espoir que la c.onference des chefs de
gouvernernent ~e tiendra a une date aussi rapprochCe
que possible. 11 (5103997.]

84. The Soviet delegation calls upon the Security
Cnuncil to take efIcctive measures to halt the flights
of United States bombers carrying atomic and hydrogen
bombs towards the frontiers of the Soviet Union. In
making this request, the Soviet Union is motivated
by the desire to preserve and consolidate peace.

84. La delegation de l'Union sovietique invite le
ConseB de securite a adopler des mesures efficaces pour
faire cesser les vals des bombardiers americains, charges
de bombes atomiques et de bombes a I'hydrogene, vers
les fronticres de l'Union SQvietique. Cette demande de
l'Unioll savietiqLLc est dietec par le desir de maintenir
et de consolider la paLx.

85. The preservation of peace and the prevention
of a new war are malters which concern not only the
people of the Soviet Union but also the people of the
United States, and the peoples of the entire world.

85. Le mnintien de la paix et la prevention d'une nuu~
vel1e guerre interessent non seulement le peuple de
l'Union sovietique, mais aussi celui des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique et taus les peuples du monde.

The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

La .seance est levee a13 h, 15.

I '

j

16

j

!i
,

'1

t

1

I
",.'

ANNI;X
Map.supplied by the delegation of the United States

Carte de la rliglon c10nt jJ est question dal'lS la deelllratkm

af America, of the area referred to in the statement Elt
the B14th meetIng of the Council by the representative
of the United States of America.

gation des Etats·Unls d'Amerique).

faite pat le rel?resentant des Etats·Unis d'Ameri~ue a la
S14e sl!iance Oil Conseil (carte communiQuee par la dele·

tI

1
1

r
,I

TERRITOIRI; POUVANT ETRE
COMPRIS DANS UNE ZONI;
ARCTIQUE D'INSPECTION
INTERNATIONALE

TERRITORY WHICH COULD BE
INCLUDED IN AN ARCTIC
INTERNATIONAL INSPECTION
ZONI;

L.--,..,.---....--------'''''cJ
.,.,J)
"\

I

o

;..f"

s. 1(,

i
,I
,
!

i'1'
I

"

"

'.,

,

f

'

I

I

f

I1
:l

r

,
"a..

&.o~ •• ~ .. "01 n«......Iu
~ lI.4 V.s. o-r,.. ,.,,~

'«"ll.I.'"

·t
ery

1

f

SALES AGENTS FOR UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNJES
ARGENT1NA_ARG~NnNE

Ed;,o,;ol Sodo",',]""oo SA. Alll"o 500,
100.0. Alro'.
AU5TRALtA-AUSTRA~IE

H. A. Gocldo'd. A.M.P. 8!d a., SO Mill.,
SI., Norih Syd"ey,
90 Qo,on 5'.. 101.1000'0••
M.lboo,no Uo;,."lty f'o", Co,ho" N.3,
Vi"o,io.
AUSTRIA_AUTRICHE
G"ohl &, Co., G,obo" 51. Wi.", 1.
a. Wiillofllo,lf. Morku. 5!tllku"I""'. 10,
S.I,b.'\I.
8ElGIUM·BE~GIQUE

Aso",. ei M",og.6.. d. la P..... S.A..
H·~2, 'uO do Po"ll, Bto.oll.,.
W. H. Smi'b &, ~o., 71·75, boule"",d

Adolph•.Mo', B,u,.lI•• ,
IOUVIA_SOI.IV1 E
Ub,.,la 5.1.,,1000', C"'Hlo 972, L.
8RAlll_BRESlL
L1vro,io A~it, ~io ~. J~"or,o, S50 Po.)o
..od 8.1. H.d,o.t••
CAMBODIA.CAMnODGE
POlOo..,I•. tlb,o;d, No.v.1l0, Alb.,t PO'·
loll, 14, ~" •••• Boullo<h•• Pnam·P.ob.
CANADA
~y."O" fro", 299 Quo.n SI. WOOl,
To'onlo.

f.'.

e~YlON_CElLAN

Lok. ~ ••,. Book,hop, Th. Anodol.d
1'0""10010'" .f C.ylo", Lld., P. O. Ba.
244, Cnlomba.
CHilE· CHILl
ldiloflol d.l Podfl,o, Ah.",ado 51,
$onlloso.
Lib,.,!o Ivon., Co'll1o ~05, h.,lago.
CHlNA·CHINIi
Th. Worlcl B.ok Co., Lld.. 99 Ch"ng
~i"g Rood, l,t So<lIon, T.lpoh, Tol",,,,,.
Th. Com",o,,;,,1 P.... Ud., 211 Ho.on
Rd., ShonS""!.
COLOMB1A.C010Mllli
llb,.do Am.,;,., Modotlr••
Ub,.cI. Bo,bh.!, 0.1",1", 8ogot6.
IIb,,,,lo Na<lonnl Ltd••, BoflaO~.Ul ••
(lOSTA RICA.COSTA.RICA
T,olo, Hormono., Ap"'lodo 1313, San
Jo,',
.
CUIA.
La Co,a 8.IS", O'R~IUy i55, La Hobo,,".
C~ECHOSlOV"KIA·TCHECOS\OV
AQUIE
~'i~o.ro".n.kf 5101'''''0101, N~rodnl T,I<lo
'1, f'oh. 1.
tlENMARIC-OANEMARK
11.0' M••tugoo,d, bd., Nomgod. ~,
K.be"h"", K.
DOMINICAN REPUIltc_
REPUBL!oUE DOMINICAINE
l.lb..,lo D"m;ol,ooo, Mo"od.. 49, Clu·
<lad T'.III".
IiCUAOOR·EOUATEUR
Uh,.,la CI."UIl,o, Gooyoqoil "nd Qoll •.
EL SALVADOR_SALVADOR
Monu.1 Novo' y cr•., 1•. I"ooldo .or
11, So. Solvodo,.
FINLAND·fINtANDE
Ako'o."ln.o KI'jok"opp'" 2 K.. k.,k"lo,
l1el.lokl.

FRANCE
fd;';on> A. Noon•• 13, ,uo SoOm"l,
Po,;, IV.l.
GE~MANY·ALlEMAGNE

R. EI,.n"b ..ldl, Ko'...,I,o", 49, f,ook·
1,,"(Moi".
elw"i &. Moo,.., Ho'p"'o'" 101, 8o,!!,,·
S,honobo,g,
!'J«ondo, Ho,., Spi,golg.,,,o 9, W;e.·
badon.
W. E. Soo'boch, G.,o"o,I,"'" 25.29,
Kol" (22<).
GP.l:ECE·GRECE
Ka"ffm"oo Bookshop, 2a Slodlon Sl,••t,

A'GUAIEMA1A
",.",.

Soc;edod E<oOQ""o Floood."" Edilld"
8,1" D.,p,,<!,o 207, 60 Avoold., 1-l-33,
Ion" I, Goot.molo City.
HAlT!
lIb,o;,I. "A 10 Co,ovoll.", a.lto po.I"I.
111-8, Po,l·go·PrI",".
HONDURAS
Lib'o,lo Pno~m.r1<ono, T'Buolgolpo.
HONG KONG·HONG.KONG
Th. Swlndo. Sook Co" 25 Nal~on Ro.,d,
l(ow)oon.
ICELANll·1SlANIlE
80kov3"lon 51910'0' Eym.od",,"a, H.
f., Ao"o"I'o.U la, Royklovlk.
IMIlIA_1NIlE
0,1.0' tunomon" Col,ollo, ao ..boy. Mod,o, ood N .... Dofhl.
O.fo,d Book &. Sla,;oo",y co., N.w
D.lhi and C"kollo,
P. V"'''dochary &. Co., Mad,o"
INDONESlA·INDONESIIi
'<,"boogo"o", Lld., Gunu"g 50horl 8i,
lli"~o'lo.

IRAN
"Goily", ~82. avOO"O Fo,do... ,I, l.ho,,,,,.
lRAQ·IRAI{
Ma,k.",lo'. Bookshop, 809hdod.
ISRAEl
11001"';"" 800~,10,0' tlcl., 35 Allo"by
Rood, Tol·A"',,.
ITAlY·1TAl.IE
llb'e,la Com",I"iooa'lo Soo'onl, VI"
Gloo Coppool 26, fl,.n,..
JAPAN·JAPON
M~,o ..o CO",pony, lid., 6 To,i.NI,no",.,
Nihonbo,hi, Tokyo.
UaA-NON·llnAN
l,b'oirio U"lv.".II., hyroul'.
U8ERIA
J. Momol" Ko",';,,,, Moo,ovlo.
tlJKEMBQURG
lib,ol,io J. S,humm.', t"."",bou,g.
MEX1CO_MEXIOUE
EJ;larlol H.,me' 5./1.., 11100,10 Mo,ls'ol
41. Mihl"" CH,
NETHER1ANDS.P AYS·M I
N.V. Ma''''.' Nllholf, Longo Voo'houl
9, ',.G,ovonbog•.
NEW IeAI.AND.NOUVnlE·Z~IANIlE
Uoi'.cl N,,!To.' A"oololion of Now loo·
land. C.P.O. 1011, W,llInglo".
NORWAY·NORVEGE
Johan G,und' Tonom fotlog, ~,. A,,·
go,l.gl. 1A, Odo.

0,<1." a"<I I"q.i,;e. I,om ,,,••J./•• whero ,01.. <>ge,,', 1,0".
00' yo' loo.. appoiol,d may bo ,""I 10, s.r., ""a Ci,,"'ol;on
S.dion, V.i,.cl Nolioo" N.... Yo,k, V.S."'., 0' S"I., S.,I;on,
Uollod Nalio'" Olli", Polol. J.. N"lIo"" Gooo.", s ...it,orlooa,

Printed in France

PAKISTAN
The Pokllloo Co·op.,o'iv. SMk Sodol)',
1)0«", &"1 P"ki!l<'. ("od o,Chlllosoog),
r"bll.h~fl Uoited Lld., Loh....
Thomo' & Thomo" Ko'o<hl, 3.
PANAMA
Jo,i Moobde., Plo", do A,oogo, P.00",6.

PARAGUAY
Agoo"" d" L1bmlo' do So!vodo, Ni".,
Colle PI•• f,oo'o No. 39-43, A,.ncloo.
PERIJ_PEHOU
Ub'ed" Inl.modo'ol del P.,~, S.A.•
Lima a"d A,eq.ipo.
PHILIPPINES
/1.1''''0''' BMk 510", 749 RI",I Avoo••,
Mooil".
PORTUGAL
L1v,,,,lo R"d';9aO', 186 Rao Aoroo, ti~
bo,,_
SINGAPORE-S1NGAPOUR
The CHy Book 5'0'., Ltd., W;ncho<l.'
Ho.,o. Colly., Q.oy.
5PAlN·E5PAGNE
llb,o,l" 80"h, 11 Roodo \lol",oIdod,
80'eolo"0.
L1b,.,r" M.odl.Preo'o, L"~o,,,,, 3B, Mod,id.
SWEDEN·SUEDE
C. E. Fr;I,.', K'"SI. H".bokho.dol A·a,
f,.d'lI"lon 2, SI",~hol",.
SWIlZERLAND·SUISSE
Lib'a;,io Poyot SA, La"'on." Gonho.
Hon. Ro.nh",dl, Klr<nso". 11, lo,;,h 1.
lHAI1AND.THAllANDE
f,omoon MIt Lld" SS ch"krowot Rood,
W"t To~, B"n9~.k.
TURKEY.TUROUI!
lib,,,I,1,, Hoch.'I., 469 I,tiklol Codd.,I,
8.yo~lo, hl,,~b,l.

UNION OF SOUTH AfRICA_
UNION SUD·AfRlCAINf
Vo" S'holk'. ~.o~"o'. (flY.), Lld., ~o~
124, P,nlorl".
UNlnD ARA!S R<fUltlC·
R~PU811QU~ ARM! UNU
Ub,,,lrle "L" Roool"o.,n d'EOypto", 9
Sh. Adly P,,'h", Col,o.
Llb,01rl. U.l".",!Io, 00",0••
UNlTED KINGDOM·ROYAU/.IE.UNl
H, M. Sloi;on"ry Offl,o, P.O. Bo~ 569,
Lo~d"o, S.E.l lond ot KM.S.O. ,hop.).
UI'lInD STATl:5 Of AM~RICA_
HATS_UNIS D'AMERIOUE
lot.,o",ionol 00'0"'001' So<vloo, C"lom.
bio Unl"o",ly P,..., 29~ S'o"d....y.
N"w Y",k 21, N. Y,
URUGUAY
R,p,o",0Iad6n do Edilo"ola" f'o/. If.
D'Wo, Av. 18 d. Jollo 1333, Mon•••

,,;d•••

VENEZUHA
IIb .. ,i" do! f,I., Av. Ml'ondo, No. 52,
Edf. G.II"60, Co,o'o.,
VIH_NAM
Po?olo".·lIb,,,.,I. No",oll., Albo,!
lail, Boil. po'lol. IB3, Solg.".
YUGOSLAVIA_YOlJGOSLAVIE
Cooh'I.'o ZaloTba, Liublia"., slo,""l...
l)"oVn"
p,.do'o""
Jogo.t"••n,k"
Koiis", Tt,o.ll. ~1!11, a.og,,,d.
(S8BZ)
I~, <o","""do'
clemo"d•• cle '.0";9.'''0.1' .",,,o,,of d.
p"r' 0'; II "'"~i,'" po' ,.CO," d& <l.~o';lol,&. p.U'.R! it,.
od,n,,~•• ~ /" So<Hon d&. vo"io, ., do 10 <li#dbo!i&R.
O,gaol,.lIoo
Noll&n> Uolo•• No",·yo,k (Elois-Un" d'A.. ~·
';qu.l, 0. ~ I" S.di"" d" <onl." O'Gool'a'/on do, Nollo'"
Unl0', P"lol' d., Nalion" G.",iv. (Soi".).

P.,-

a,

.I",

Price: SU.S. 0.20 ; 1/6 stg.; Sw. fr. 0.75
(or equivalent in other currencies)

19485-Novembcr 1958--1,800
