A /73/PV.28

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

28th plenary meeting

Monday, 29 October 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

In the absence of the President, Ms. Al-Thani
(Qatar), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 77 (continued)
Report of the International Criminal Court
Note by the Secretary-General (A/73/334)
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/73/333 and
A/73/335)
Draft resolution (A/73/L.8)
Ms. Brink (Australia): This year we celebrate
the twentieth anniversary of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). That treaty is a
remarkable achievement. It is the product of a common
resolve, forged by the horrors of the previous century,
to create a permanent international court to prosecute
and punish those responsible for the most egregious
international crimes.
We also mark another milestone this year, the
activation of the ICC’s jurisdiction over the crime
of aggression. The Court is now empowered to
exercise jurisdiction over the four core international
crimes — war crimes, crimes against humanity,
genocide and aggression. It is worth emphasizing that
the ICC does not operate in isolation. It is part of an
international criminal justice system, the Rome Statute
system. The ICC’s role is to step in only where national
jurisdictions are unable or unwilling to act.

As a strong supporter of accountability and a longstanding supporter of the ICC, Australia will continue
to work with all States parties to ensure that the Court
is as strong an institution as it needs to be to fulfil its
mandate. We encourage Member States not yet party to
the Rome Statute to consider ratifying it, particularly
non-parties in our own region of the Indo-Pacific.
At their core, the ICC and the United Nations
are striving to achieve the same goals. One of the
primary purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations — the maintenance of international peace
and security — aligns with those of the Rome Statute.
History has demonstrated clearly that sustainable peace
and impunity for serious international crimes rarely go
hand in hand. All too often, impunity catalyses conflict.
The interrelationship between the mandates of
the United Nations and the ICC makes the Court a
key partner for the United Nations, particularly as the
United Nations pivots to focus more on prevention. As
its key partner, it is critical to ensure that the United
Nations provides the ICC with the support it needs to
deliver on its mandate.
We welcome the efforts of the United Nations so
far and encourage the Secretary-General to continue to
enhance cooperation under the Relationship Agreement.
We have heard the Prosecutor’s repeated requests for
effective Security Council follow-up and support
with respect to situations referred to the Court by the
Council. It is essential that the Council not approach
ICC referrals in a set-and-forget frame of mind. Its
ongoing political support for the work of the ICC is

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-34919 (E)

*1834919*

A/73/PV.28

critical, particularly with respect to our cooperation
with the Court.
We must not neglect the critical role that consistent,
impartial justice plays in the international community’s
response to the trauma wrought by conflict. Indeed,
victims and the communities affected have been
consistently calling for justice as an essential component
of viable political outcomes and reconciliation. While
we are clear-eyed about the challenges ahead, the
international community simply must not tolerate
impunity. Those who are most responsible for serious
international crimes must be held to account. We call
on the Assembly to ensure that the Court receives full
and consistent support for that essential mandate.
Mr. Skinner-Kleé Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to thank Judge Chile Eboe-Osuji,
President of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for his briefing on his report (see A/73/334), updating
us on the important events in the proceedings of the
International Criminal Court during the past year. We
appreciate and take note of the information on the cases
filed, the final judgments pronounced in two cases
by the Appeals Chamber, the important decisions on
reparations to victims, the preliminary examinations,
and the new investigations conducted by the Office of
the Prosecutor.
Guatemala reaffirms its unequivocal support for the
ICC and its commitment to the fight against impunity.
My delegation values the support and cooperation
between the United Nations and the International
Criminal Court, not only because they strengthen the
dialogue and relationship between the two entities, but
also because they serve to give visibility to the hugely
important work of the International Criminal Court,
which provides us with an opportunity to strengthen its
authority and deepen our knowledge about its mandate
and the unquestionable importance of cooperation
among States.
Guatemala would like to reiterate its respect for
the principle of complementarity and for strengthening
national systems to ensure accountability. As we have said
before, the International Criminal Court does not replace
national courts. Moreover, an essential component of
the Rome Statute is the principle of complementarity,
whereby national criminal jurisdictions have primacy
in investigating and prosecuting those responsible for
the crimes contemplated when the Court was founded,
particularly the most serious crimes.
2/31

29/10/2018

For that reason, we believe it is necessary to improve
the cooperation between the Court and the Security
Council so as to join their efforts and help to prevent
crimes that undermine international peace and security
and fight impunity for such acts. It is also appropriate
to hold regular exchanges between the Council and the
Court independently of the informational meetings that
between the two.
Cooperation is one of the fundamental pillars of
the proper functioning of the International Criminal
Court. A firm commitment on the part of States parties
is therefore crucial to efforts to build the Court’s
capacity to ensure accountability, bring justice, provide
reparations to victims and contribute to the prevention
of future crimes, as the spirit of the Rome Statute
requires.
The States parties to the Rome Statute and the
membership of the United Nations must work to
strengthen their cooperation and continually reaffirm
the relevance and importance of international
criminal justice as we work to ensure the rule of law
and international peace and security. My delegation
urges that we redouble our efforts to achieve a
universal regime. Each step towards universality will
significantly reduce the risk of impunity and help to
strengthen States’ peace and stability. For that reason,
we must continue to promote the universal dimension
of the Rome Statute and maintain the momentum for
the ratification and accession processes.
Finally, on the twentieth anniversary of the Court,
I would like to reiterate my country’s commitment to
supporting the Court’s work, since it is more than an
institution based on a foundational document. Its work
is cross-cutting and lies at the heart of an international
justice system with worldwide impact. In recognition
of that, my delegation has chosen to be a sponsor of the
annual draft resolution (A/73/L.8) on the work of the
International Criminal Court.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The International
Criminal Court (ICC) is an independent organization
with a strong institutional connection to the United
Nations. The two are bound by a common purpose,
in that both the Charter of the United Nations and the
Rome Statute are founded on the principles of justice
and international law. They have had a fruitful and
productive relationship on the basis of the Relationship
Agreement governing their interaction. But while
that has been true in all the past years that we have
18-34919

29/10/2018

discussed the reports of the Court, today’s debate takes
on an additional dimension.
International organizations and treaties, and
indeed multilateral approaches as such, have been
increasingly under assault. Both the United Nations
and the ICC have been subject to political attacks,
and many of the achievements of the recent past are
in jeopardy. Other areas affected include trade, climate
change, disarmament and, of course, accountability
and human rights. It can therefore come as no surprise
that the International Criminal Court is yet again
under attack by those who feel threatened by the idea
of international criminal justice — an area in which
progress has been fast and steady over the past two
decades. It has never been more important than it is
today to express unequivocal political support for
the Court — the world’s first and only permanent,
international, independent judicial institution with
jurisdiction over the most serious crimes.
While our support for the Court must be unwavering,
we should not be uncritical. The Court faces significant
external challenges, but it also suffers from problems
within, problems that it cannot afford. It is therefore
time for the States parties to demonstrate leadership by
asserting ownership, while fully respecting the Court’s
judicial independence, which is an indispensable
element of any court of law. We look forward to an
honest and constructive dialogue with the Court to
address the challenges it is facing.
A landmark development — not just for the Court
but for international law more generally — occurred
on 17 July, the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of
the Rome Statute. That day also marked the activation
of the ICC’s jurisdiction over the crime of aggression,
the most serious form of the illegal use of force by
one State against another. For the first time since the
Nuremberg trials more than 70 years ago, we have
individual criminal accountability for illegal warmaking. That moment, based on a consensus decision
by the 123 States parties, could not be more opportune.
At a time when international norms are being dealt with
in an increasingly cavalier manner, with a growing
expectation of impunity for the most heinous crimes,
and when well-established international rules on the use
of force are being bent or violated, nothing can be more
important than making it clear that the commission of
crimes of aggression entails criminal accountability for
those responsible.

A/73/PV.28

It is also another important illustration of how
closely the mandates of the Court and the United
Nations are connected. The prohibition on the use of
force is at the very core of the Charter of the United
Nations, and it is the International Criminal Court that
now offers the necessary complement of individual
criminal responsibility. That is essential, although
not so much because the Court is likely to exercise its
newfound jurisdiction very soon. It is not going to do
so, and owing to the exemption of non-States parties
from its jurisdictional regime, its reach is limited.
It is, however, essential for States to have a legally
binding international definition of the act and crime of
aggression, both for their consideration as to whether
to add that crime to their national penal codes and for
possible decision-making processes, including in the
Security Council.
We have also recently witnessed the first referral
of a situation in a State that is party to the Court by a
number of other States parties. All the triggers foreseen
under the Rome Statute for the exercise of jurisdiction
have been applied. We welcome that development and
encourage reflection on a similar course of action with
respect to the crimes committed against the Rohingya
population. Since the Court has concluded that it has
jurisdiction with respect to the forced deportation of
the Rohingya population who have fled to Cox’s Bazar
in Bangladesh, we now have a direct path to justice.
We hope that there will be serious consideration of that
policy option, not only in the interest of justice, but
also in order to enable a forcibly displaced population
to return home.
Whenever there is a massive crisis of impunity,
whether in Myanmar, Syria or Yemen, we automatically
hear calls for the involvement of the ICC from civil
society, victims and policymakers. In many of those
instances, however, the Court does not have jurisdiction.
Working towards universality is a long and arduous
task. We must and can make progress — but we should
be under no illusion that a significant number of States
will join the ICC system in the coming years.
Hopes that the Security Council might step in
to fill impunity gaps have proven futile time and
again, and it would be naive to expect that to change
in the foreseeable future. It is therefore all the more
important that we understand the Court as it was
designed to be understood, not just as an institution
working in isolation in The Hague, but rather as
the centrepiece of an international criminal justice

18-349193/31

A/73/PV.28

system. In that regard, strengthening the capacities of
national judiciaries can play an important role, as can
the exercise of universal jurisdiction. As evidenced
in the creation of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, there is
room for innovation, which is a far better policy option
than inaction. Engagement to fight impunity where the
ICC does not have competence complements the very
mission for which the Court was created.
Finally, I have the honour to deliver the following
message on behalf of Austria, Belgium, Costa Rica,
the Czech Republic, Cyprus, Estonia, the Netherlands,
Portugal, Slovenia, Switzerland and my own country,
Liechtenstein, which are all Member States that are
strong supporters of the ICC and its mission to end
impunity for the worst crimes known to humankind.
We would like to thank the facilitator from
Mexico for his work on the draft resolution before us
(A/73/L.8), and we appreciate his intentions to deliver a
consensus outcome.
Our delegations have joined the consensus on that
draft resolution because we strongly believe in the
work of the Court. We have also decided to become a
sponsor of it because it includes many important points
and because we want to express our commitment to the
Court. However, we would also like to point out what
we consider to be a significant deficiency in the present
text. We want to underline that the draft resolutions that
the Assembly is asked to adopt should always include,
as a bare minimum, technical and factual updates. We
find it necessary to make this statement in order to
highlight the fact that a number of major international
law developments in the past year have been omitted
from the draft resolution before us. They include the
landmark twentieth anniversary of the Rome Statute,
the historic activation of the ICC’s jurisdiction over the
crime of aggression and the adoption of amendments
adding three new war crimes to the Rome Statute.
The historic significance of those developments
cannot be overstated. The Court is a central
achievement of multilateral diplomacy and a true
milestone in the development of international law. In
July, the international community marked the twentieth
anniversary of the Rome Statute, an occasion that many
States used in order to reaffirm their commitment to the
4/31

29/10/2018

Court and the broader rules-based international order.
Also in July, the ICC’s jurisdiction over the crime of
aggression went into effect. Never has humankind
had a permanent independent international court with
the authority to hold individuals accountable for their
decisions to commit aggression, the worst form of the
illegal use of force. Now we do. The Court will thus help
to enforce a fundamental provision of the Charter of the
United Nations, the prohibition on the use of force.
Finally, last year, during its sixteenth session,
the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute
adopted three new amendments to article 8 of the
Statute, expanding the Court’s jurisdiction. Those
three amendments criminalize the use of microbial,
biological or toxin weapons, weapons that injure through
fragments that are undetectable by X-rays, and blinding
laser weapons, both in international armed conflicts
and armed conflicts not of an international character.
The omissions in this year’s text happen to be
very significant. But even if the developments were
of more limited relevance, we would still want to see
a General Assembly draft resolution reflect them. We
must not allow the Assembly — whether on the topic
of international justice or indeed any other area — to
adopt texts that are outdated. We are confident that we
will do better next year.
Mr. Favre (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks the President of the International
Criminal Court, Judge Eboe-Osuji, for the presentation
of his report (see A/73/334).
Switzerland aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Liechtenstein on
behalf of a number of countries, including Switzerland.
I would like to add the following remarks in my national
capacity.
We States adopted the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) 20 years ago. Today,
more than ever, we need the Court to ensure a rulesbased international order, and the ICC needs us. Its
critics argue that the world would be better off without
it, and no one would deny that in a perfect world the
ICC would have no reason to exist. Unfortunately, we
do not live in an ideal world. War and violence are still
very much with us. States often fail to fight impunity
vigorously or do not have the financial and institutional
resources to do so at the national level.
18-34919

29/10/2018

The need for effective criminal justice — in
other words, for an ICC that holds actors accountable,
contributes to the maintenance of sustainable peace and
serves victims — remains unchanged. What has changed
in recent years is the context. Nationalism is on the rise,
and the fight against impunity at the international level
is often misrepresented as an obstacle to peace rather
than as one of its building blocks. The fact that one
State has recently withdrawn from the Rome Statute
and that another withdrawal is about to take effect is a
reflection of that regrettable development. The same is
true for the political attacks against the Court.
Against that backdrop, firm signals are needed.
We must reaffirm that we stand behind international
criminal justice and the ICC as a vital, independent
and impartial part of it. During the high-level week of
the General Assembly, 35 foreign ministers, including
Switzerland’s, issued a public statement reaffirming
their commitment to the Court. Equally, we consider
the referral by six States of a situation to the Court, the
first collective referral in its history, to be a sign of trust
in and support for the Court. Looking ahead, we must
maintain and strengthen our political and diplomatic
support for the ICC. We invite Member States that have
not yet done so to investigate atrocity crimes, prosecute
their perpetrators through their national authorities and
ratify the Rome Statute.
The collaboration between the ICC and the organs
of the United Nations is intense, and for good reasons.
Their mandates and goals are mutually reinforcing.
The Court’s jurisdiction over the crime of aggression
is in the fundamental interest of the United Nations
and its Member States. The Security Council can refer
aggressive war-making to the ICC, not to mention
the dissuasive and thereby protective effect that the
possibility of referring perpetrators of aggression to
the Court provides.
The commemoration of the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of the Rome Statute reminds us of the
historic progress that the establishment of the ICC
represents. Today, notwithstanding the numerous
challenges that we face, we must reaffirm our collective
commitment to ending impunity for the perpetrators of
the most horrific crimes and bringing justice to victims.
Our support in that regard must not falter.
Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): The Statute
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) celebrated
its twentieth anniversary on 17 July. In addition to

A/73/PV.28

providing us with an opportunity to reflect on the many
achievements of the past two decades in that regard, that
date represented a milestone for international justice. It
marked the activation of the ICC’s jurisdiction over the
crime of aggression and thus finally, and consensually,
completing the Statute as originally envisaged. The
fact that the ICC now has jurisdiction over the crime of
aggression gives additional meaning to the prohibition
of the use of force, fostering a more stable, just and
democratic world order.
As a proud founder of the ICC, Brazil is pleased that
it has firmly established itself as the first permanent
tribunal for fighting impunity for the most serious
international crimes. In ensuring that those accused
and brought before it are judged with fairness and full
respect for their rights, the Court is an instrument for
justice and peace.
I am pleased to be able to point out that not only
are all South American countries parties to the Rome
Statute, but also that Latin American and Caribbean
States represent the second largest regional group among
the States parties, behind only the Group of African
States. Any misperception of the existence of bias or
selectivity in the ICC’s activity can be definitively
dispelled only by increasing the universality of the
Statute and thereby expanding the space within which
the Court can operate. That is particularly relevant
when we bear in mind that a number of important actors
are still not parties to the Statute. Brazil reiterates that
international criminal justice is a central element of the
rule of law and should apply to all.
In the general debate of this session of the General
Assembly, Brazil drew attention (see A/73/PV.6) to the
fact that in order to improve our rules-based order, we
now have an additional task before us, that of defending
its very integrity. Like all socially constructed systems,
international law cannot sustain itself. It must be
nurtured, developed and protected. The mandate of the
Court requires that it speak law to power. At a time
when multilateralism is under fire and political attacks
on the ICC are increasing, Brazil underscores our
policy, namely, that we will always respect the Court’s
integrity and independence, indispensable features of
any court of law.
I want to take this opportunity to thank the
President of the ICC for presenting the Court’s report
(see A/73/334), which gives a clear indication of
its significant workload. Since its establishment 20

18-349195/31

A/73/PV.28

years ago, the Court has opened 26 cases involving 41
suspects or accused and conducted investigations into
11 situations. Against that backdrop, Brazil reiterates its
long-standing concern about the financing of Security
Council referrals. That is a structural issue that goes
to the very core of the relationship between the Court
and the United Nations, and the General Assembly in
particular.
Once again, we reiterate our call for the
implementation of article 13 of the Relationship
Agreement and article 115 (b) of the Rome Statute,
which provide clear guidance to the effect that such
costs should be met, at least partially, by funds provided
by the United Nations and should not fall solely on the
parties to the Statute. It is equally important to stress
that as laid out in Article 17 of the Charter of the United
Nations, the General Assembly has the exclusive
responsibility to consider and approve the budget of
the Organization. The proper funding of Security
Council referrals would enhance the credibility of both
the Court and the United Nations. To date, the budget
allocated within the Court in relation to those referrals
amounts to more than €60 million. The current situation
is neither fair nor sustainable.
The report contains a number of suggestions
aimed at improving the relationship between the
Security Council and the Court. Brazil concurs with
the assessment that a more structured dialogue between
them on issues of mutual interest, both thematic and
situation-specific, would be beneficial. Through the
case law that it has developed over the past two decades,
the ICC has accumulated significant knowledge on
issues such as children and armed conflict, women
and peace and security, and the protection of cultural
property. The discussion in the context of the Council’s
Arria Formula meeting on 6 July convened by the
States parties that sit on the Security Council, provided
food for thought in that regard. From a very practical
perspective, there is significant room for improvement
in the cooperation between the Security Council
Sanctions Committees and the ICC, especially with
regard to travel bans and assets freezes.
Increased cooperation remains one of the best
ways to enhance the Court’s effectiveness. While the
execution of its outstanding arrest warrants regrettably
continues to be the most visible challenge in this area,
it will also be critical to diversify witness-relocation
agreements and strengthen financial investigations.
Asset recovery could even contribute to securing funds
6/31

29/10/2018

for reparations to victims and covering the costs of
legal aid.
Seeking to reconcile retributive and restorative
justice, the Rome Statute contains a sophisticated set
of provisions on victims’ rights that seeks not only to
protect victims but also to enable them to participate in
the proceedings and apply for reparations. Victims of
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and the
crime of aggression have rights, and their voices must
be heard. Over the past 20 years, more than 22,000
victims have applied to participate in proceedings, and
thousands more have applied to make submissions at the
investigation stage or during reparations proceedings.
Brazil notes with appreciation that providing justice
for victims continues to be an essential component
of the Court’s daily work. We welcome the fact that
reparations procedures are ongoing in various cases and
that the Trust Fund for Victims has assisted more than
450,000 individuals with physical and psychological
rehabilitation, as well as material support. We commend
the efforts being made to enhance witness protection,
including through relocation agreements, and we stress
the role of the positive dimensions of cooperation
through the strengthening of national capacities.
The quest for peace and justice is always challenging,
and that challenge is inherent in the search for a more
just and collaborative world order. Let us not fall into
the trap of operating with dichotomies that oppose
peace to justice and sovereignty to accountability. We
should rather focus on the shared values that bring the
General Assembly together and that have made the
first permanent and treaty-based international criminal
court a reality. Brazil remains firm in its commitment
to the Rome Statute system and to the cause of justice
that motivated its creation.
Ms. Durney (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
appreciates the full report of the President of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) (see A/73/334),
covering the period from 1 August 2017 to 31 July 2018,
which reflects the workload of the Court, 20 years
after the adoption of the Rome Statute. We take note
of the account of its judicial activities in that period,
as well as those of the Office of the Prosecutor and the
Registry, in the areas of preliminary examinations,
investigations and judicial proceedings, including final
judgments in two cases, and decisions on reparations to
victims and their implementation in fulfilment of the
Court’s mandate. Our appreciation also goes to the new
18-34919

29/10/2018

President of the Assembly of States Parties, who led our
work during this period.
Chile has actively supported the Court since
the beginning of the process that led to the adoption
of the Rome Statute, as we stated at the anniversary
ceremonies that took place in The Hague and New
York. One of the concrete ways we showed our support
was by ratifying the amendments to article 8 of the
Rome Statute, as well as the amendments to the Statute
relating to the crime of aggression. We are aware of
the progress that has been made and of the challenges
that the Court faces on a daily basis and that make it
urgent to ensure that States continue to work together
in a coordinated manner.
The celebrations commemorating the anniversary
gave us an opportunity to highlight the importance
of the relationship between the States parties and the
Court, which makes it possible to address through a
comprehensive dialogue issues that demand that the
criminal proceedings’ effectiveness and efficiency be
strengthened and the challenges of cooperation and
complementarity addressed. We reiterate the value of
both concepts, and the importance of mechanisms to
hold those responsible for crimes within the jurisdiction
of the Court accountable for their actions. We therefore
call on all States to cooperate fully with the Court and
work together to deal with one of its greatest challenges.
Consideration of the issue of the complementarity
and cooperation of national, regional and international
courts, in which the International Criminal Court plays
a key role, should continue, both within the Assembly
of States Parties and within individual States in
conjunction with their domestic bodies with judicial
and investigative functions. My country would like
to reiterate its commitment to that effort, as we have
done regularly in the working groups in The Hague and
New York, and we hope to make progress in drafting
legislation on cooperation with the Court that takes into
account the various areas where that cooperation must
be implemented.
We recognize the crucial work of the Court’s
Trust Fund for Victims, which must have the means
to fulfil its task of contributing to the physical and
psychological rehabilitation of victims and providing
material support to survivors of the crimes governed
by the Statute. In that regard, we would like to recall
the visit of the President of the Assembly of States
Parties to Uganda, along with representatives of 10

A/73/PV.28

States, including Chile. There they monitored the
activities of the Trust Fund and received information
in the field and the testimonies of community leaders
and survivors. We thank the Government of Ireland and
the Trust Fund for chairing that initiative. The ICC’s
digital exhibit “Trauma, healing and hope” reminds
us that the international community’s efforts to assist
victims must not cease. We therefore call for voluntary
contributions to the Trust Fund for the benefit of victims
and their families.
My delegation believes that the communication
between the International Criminal Court and the
United Nations must be intensified, and we support
the Court’s efforts in that regard to ensure the Security
Council’s effective follow-up of situations that it
refers to the Court. We also very much hope that the
issues before States and the Court will be receive due
cooperation, as should issues raised by the Council’s
follow-up to referrals.
We also want to place on record our appreciation
to the Secretary-General for the services and facilities
that he provided in accordance with the Relationship
Agreement between the Court and the United Nations
during the sixteenth session of the Assembly of States
Parties, held at United Nations Headquarters from 4 to
14 December 2017. It was important not only because of
the election of six judges, whose admission to the Court
we have celebrated, but also because of the historic
agreement reached on activating the jurisdiction of the
Court over the crime of aggression.
We would also like to express our appreciation
for the work of the secretariat of the Assembly of
States Parties, which provided substantive support
during the sixteenth session. We view its functional
independence and structural integrity in meeting the
needs of States parties to the Statute as fundamental
and therefore particularly wanted to highlight its work
on this occasion.
We reiterate our commitment to achieving the
universality of the Rome Statute and our confidence
in the role played by the International Criminal Court
within the architecture of international justice in
effectively combating impunity for the crimes that
international community considers most serious. The
regrettable withdrawal of some States from the Statute,
which we hope can be reversed, as well as the failure of
some to ratify or accede to the Statute, should not stop
us from seeking to maximize the Court’s effectiveness

18-349197/31

A/73/PV.28

and presence within the framework of the international
legal system.
Mr. Guillermet-Fernández (Costa Rica) (spoke
in Spanish): My delegation thanks Judge Eboe-Osuji
for presenting the reports of the Secretary-General on
the activities of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
during the period from 2017 to 2018. I would also like
to congratulate him on his appointment in March as
President of the International Criminal Court.
The International Criminal Court is undoubtedly
the most important achievement of the international
justice system. It is a product of the desire of the
international community to put an end to impunity for
the most serious crimes against humanity and to bring
justice to its victims. Its essence and main strength lie
in the fact that the desire for justice is global. For that
reason, we appreciate the trend towards universality of
the Rome Statute and its amendments.
In that regard, we congratulate Panama, Guyana
and Ireland on ratifying the Kampala amendments on
the crime of aggression, bringing the number of States
that have ratified them to 37. In addition, Costa Rica
urges all States parties to continue working to achieve
universality and to continue their efforts to ratify the
latest amendments to article 8 of the Statute, approved
by the Assembly of States Parties in December 2017.
Costa Rica welcomes the addition on 17 July to
the Court’s jurisdiction of the capacity to cover the
crime of aggression and the celebration of the twentieth
anniversary of the Rome Statute on the same date. The
International Criminal Court was an aspiration of the
international community for many years. Just over 20
years after the adoption of the Rome Statute, we can
now say that the Court has fulfilled expectations,
bringing justice to victims of the crime of aggression
and laying the foundations for a solid and innovative
jurisprudence on international criminal law.
With regard to victims, my delegation recognizes
the importance of the fact that a total of 12,509
victims participated in cases before the Court during
the reporting period, and we were pleased that during
the reporting period the Court received a total of
384 new applications from victims for participation
or reparations. That is a reflection of the Court’s
importance and the central role it plays for the victims
of the most egregious crimes under international law.
8/31

29/10/2018

Nor should we forget that the Court inquestionably
operates on the principle of complementarity and was
not created to replace the functions of national courts.
In that regard, we should reaffirm that the primary
obligation to end impunity for the most heinous crimes
rests with States in the responsible exercise of their
sovereignty. State sovereignty imposes obligations for
the investigation and prosecution of crimes committed
under the jurisdiction of the State concerned.
Only when a State party “is unwilling or unable to
carry out an investigation or prosecution”, as established
in article 17, paragraph (a), of the Statute, should those
crimes be brought to the attention of the International
Criminal Court. For that reason, complementarity
is an essential part of the machinery of international
criminal justice. However, it is essential to make it
clear that when the Court’s jurisdiction is activated,
States parties must comply with the inalienable
responsibilities outlined in the Rome Statute. Failure
to comply with those responsibilities is particularly
serious when non-compliance translates into a refusal
to provide the required support for the investigations of
the Office of the Prosecutor or into the prevention or
hindering of access to evidence, which could ruin an
investigation and the associated case and open up the
possibility for impunity.
Similarly, the fight against impunity is hindered
every time a State party fails in its obligation to execute
current arrest warrants. A lack of cooperation with
the Court in fulfilling its orders also prevents it from
providing victims with the justice they seek and deserve.
Refusing to cooperate with the Court under the pretext
that it is not impartial or because a high percentage of
its cases refer to alleged violations occurring in the
same region is not acceptable.
It is time to change the narrative. Those who make
such arguments ignore the fact that the situations in
Mali, Côte d’Ivoire, Uganda, the Democratic Republic
of Congo and the two situations in the Central African
Republic were referred to the Court by the Governments
of those countries, while the situations in Libya and the
Sudan were referred to the Court by the Security Council.
Only three out of 11 situations — in Kenya, Georgia
and Burundi — have been initiated motu proprio by the
Office of the Prosecutor. It would therefore be absurd
to expect the Office of the Prosecutor to reject referrals
from States parties in order to maintain a geographical
balance in its cases.
18-34919

29/10/2018

During the period covered by the report, the
Court had a large volume of work. It issued new
arrest warrants against two individuals, one of whom
was transferred to the Court, and continued with
three trials. It pronounced final judgments in two
cases before the Appeals Chamber and made several
important decisions regarding reparations to victims.
The Prosecutor opened a new investigation, and another
10 situations remained open. Since its inception, the
Court has initiated a total of 26 cases and conducted
investigations of 11 situations.
In order to continue fulfilling its mandate, the
Court requires the support and cooperation of the
entire international community, particularly the
United Nations, with which it shares the ideals of
accountability, the protection of human rights, and
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We were pleased to hear that the Court received the
valuable cooperation of the United Nations on various
matters, such as operational assistance in the field, the
provision of United Nations personnel for interviews
and testimony, when needed, and the dissemination
of information generated by the United Nations and
provided under the reimbursement model.
However, my delegation reiterates the need for the
United Nations to participate in financing the referrals
made to the ICC by the Security Council. The Charter
of the United Nations holds the Security Council
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security, and therefore, in undertaking those
referrals, the Court is helping the Council to fulfil its
mandate. In such cases of cooperation, article 13 of
the Relationship Agreement between the Court and
the United Nations must be applied, providing for an
economic contribution from our Organization.
In the 20 years since the adoption of the Statute, we
have witnessed the evolution of an institution that has
little by little transformed into reality the objectives set
by the delegations that came to Rome in the summer
of 1998. Today only the most experienced could name
all the cases that have been before the Court or that the
Office of the Prosecutor has investigated. The Court’s
jurisprudence speaks for itself. Nevertheless, 20 years
is not a long time, if we take into account the fact that
we want this Court to be permanent and to transcend
our children’s generation as well as our own. There is
much that remains to be done, and States have the main
responsibility to ensure that the Court has the necessary
tools to deliver on its mandate.

A/73/PV.28

Costa Rica would like to emphasize its full
support for the International Criminal Court. We are
committed to continuing to support its universalization,
independence and integrity so that together with other
States parties, and with the support of the community
of nations, we can ensure that international justice is
respected and achieved, including by acknowledging
the immunity of its judges and its legitimacy as a
legal body.
The International Criminal Court has filled a legal
vacuum that existed for many decades in the progressive
development of international law. It is not dead or on its
deathbed. On the contrary, we predict that it will enjoy
a long life in its efforts to ensure the rights of victims
and attain justice.
Mrs. Leega Piiskop (Estonia): We thank Judge
Eboe-Osuji, President of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for his presentation of the latest annual
report of the Court (see A/73/334) and his ongoing
service to it. We welcome this debate today to discuss
the contributions of the Court and the international
community to international criminal justice.
Estonia fully aligns itself with the statement made
this morning by the observer of the European Union
(see A/73/PV.27).
Estonia firmly believes that the ICC is an essential
tool for fighting impunity and thus contributes to
peaceful societies. It has played a crucial role in the
maintenance of a rules- and values-based world order.
It is unfortunate that the rules-based international
system, the foundation of the international community,
is increasingly being challenged and questioned.
International criminal justice needs greater political
support. In that context, we would like to mention the
particular role played by the Security Council. We call
on all States, and the Council, to take appropriate action
to fully cooperate with the Court so that perpetrators can
be brought to justice and we can put an end to impunity.
We would like to recall that it is the primary
duty of States to prevent and respond to international
crimes, and we stress that the ICC complements rather
than replaces national courts. Its complementary
role in cooperation with national justice systems and
its assistance in strengthening them are particularly
important to efforts to combat impunity. The ICC’s
effectiveness and efficiency in fulfilling its mandate
inevitably depend on States’ full cooperation with it,

18-349199/31

A/73/PV.28

irrespective of whether they are parties to the Rome
Statute or not.
We share the concern of the President of the
Court about the fact that the prompt and unconditional
execution of arrest warrants of the ICC remains a
challenge today. When States parties do not comply,
the ICC must be able to rely on the Security Council to
intervene with its full support. We need to strengthen
our common efforts to bring an end to conflicts and
make perpetrators accountable. We must also do more
to offer important protection to victims and witnesses
who have suffered from or witnessed crimes. Here
we would like to stress the Court’s important role in
delivering justice to the victims of atrocious crimes by
providing assistance and awarding reparations.
The Court is currently dealing with more cases and
situations than ever, covering most of the regions of the
world. We note that there have been significant judicial
developments at all stages of the proceedings before
the Court. We also note that the ICC has continued to
expand its tasks relating to preliminary examination
activities and that two new preliminary examinations
were opened this year. The increasing number of cases
and situations also demonstrates that there is wide
trust in the ICC and testifies to the good work it has
done. However, its increasing workload also creates
challenges for the Court in terms of its ability to remain
efficient and effective.
This year we celebrated the twentieth anniversary
of the Rome Statute and witnessed the activation of the
Court’s jurisdiction over the crime of aggression this
past summer. It is up to us to further strengthen the
Court so that it can fulfil its mandate effectively.
Estonia is committed to continuing to work together
with all partners to further the work of the ICC and
strengthen the system of international criminal justice.
We call on all Governments that have not yet ratified
the Rome Statute to do so.
Ms. Ioannou (Cyprus): I would like to add some
remarks to the statement delivered this morning by the
observer of the European Union (see A/73/PV.27), with
which my delegation fully aligns itself.
Let me start by thanking Judge Eboe-Osuji,
President of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for his presentation. It is Cyprus’s firm belief that the
ICC is an indispensable pillar of the international rulesbased order that humankind has struggled so hard to
10/31

29/10/2018

build over the past few decades, with the United Nations
at its core. The Court stands for every lofty purpose
that the United Nations was created to serve, that is,
to ensure that there is no impunity for the most serious
crimes, establish accountability and thereby deter the
commission of such crimes, highlight restorative justice
as an essential component in achieving sustainable
peace and support the victims of such crimes.
In order to effectively serve those objectives, the
Court must have a global mandate. However, as we
commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of the Rome Statute and the seventieth anniversary of the
Nuremberg trials, the ICC is not as close to universality
as we would like. Universal ratification of the Rome
Statute remains the only realistic way of effectively
addressing jurisdictional gaps and thereby dealing with
current challenges and shortcomings. It is also crucial
to the application of the principle of equality before the
law and the effective deterrence of the most serious
crimes under international law. We would therefore like
to take this opportunity to call on all States that are not
yet parties to the Rome Statute to ratify it.
Cyprus reiterates its commitment and unfailing
support to the Court, which we have given it since its
inception, as well as to full cooperation between the
Court, the United Nations and its States Members. We
are pleased that during the reporting period Cyprus
made its first symbolic contribution to the Trust Fund
for Victims, which must be commended for its work.
We should not forget that we collectively created
the Court to provide justice to millions of victims of
unimaginable atrocities that deeply shock humankind.
As reflected in its report (see A/73/334), the
Court had another very full year in terms of judicial
proceedings, including investigations, preliminary
examinations and institutional developments. It
continued three of its trials, pronounced final
judgments on two cases before the Appeals Chamber
and issued several important decisions on reparations
to victims. The Prosecutor is also engaged in ongoing
investigations relating to 11 situations.
It was significant that on 6 September, the Court
issued for the first time a decision on the Prosecution’s
Request for a Ruling on Jurisdiction under Article 19
(3) of the Statute, finding that the Court has jurisdiction
with respect to the alleged deportation of a population
from a State that is not party to the Rome Statute to
the territory of a State party. In so holding, the Court
18-34919

29/10/2018

A/73/PV.28

emphasized that the rationale for its determination
on the Court’s jurisdiction in relation to the crime
of deportation may apply to other crimes within the
jurisdiction of the Court as well, in circumstances
where an element of a crime occurs on the territory of
a State party.

As a sponsor of draft resolution A/73/L.8, I
would like once again to emphasize the importance of
cooperation with the ICC on the part of States that are
not party to the Statute, as well as the United Nations
and other international and regional stakeholders, in
order to enable it to carry out its activities.

One of my country’s foreign-policy priorities is
preventing the destruction of cultural heritage and
illicit trafficking in it. We therefore recognize the great
significance of the Al Mahdi case, the first in which
the ICC found an individual guilty of the war crime of
attacking historic and religious buildings in Timbuktu,
Mali. We welcome the progress regarding reparations in
that case. We also welcome the active engagement of the
Court’s Prosecutor in discussions on the responsibility
to protect cultural heritage and the signing of a letter of
intent between the Prosecutor and the Director-General
of UNESCO, enhancing their cooperation in line with
their mandates.

Ukraine supports the International Criminal Court,
which has proved its effectiveness in promoting the
rule of law and combating impunity. It is important
to highlight the fact that Ukraine was among the
first States to support the idea of establishing the
first permanent treaty-based international tribunal to
deal with individual criminal responsibility for the
most serious crimes under international law. Ukraine
actively participated in the Preparatory Committee
on the Establishment of an International Criminal
Court. In 2000, I had the honour of personally signing
the Rome Statute. Ukraine was also among the first
non-States parties to ratify the Agreement on Privileges
and Immunities of the International Criminal Court.

Lastly, Cyprus is particularly pleased with the longawaited activation of the amendments to the Court’s
jurisdiction over the crime of aggression, which is
the worst form of the illegal use of force. The historic
significance of the decision to activate the Kampala
amendments to the Rome Statute cannot be overstated.
We anticipate the application of the law contained
in those amendments by the Court in exercising its
jurisdiction over the crime of aggression, and we
look forward to the universal acceptance of those
amendments, so that the international community can
be assured that no one will be immune from prosecution
for the commission of that supreme international crime.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine aligns itself with
the statement delivered this morning by the observer of
the European Union (see A/73/PV.27), and we would
like to add a few remarks in our national capacity.
We welcome the President of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and thank him for his
comprehensive presentation of the Court’s annual
activities (see A/73/334). This year has been significant
for the ICC, not only because of its marking of the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Rome
Statute, but also thanks to the activation of its jurisdiction
over the crime of aggression on 17 July. That represents
a huge step forward for the international criminal
justice system and for strengthening the preventive
role of the Court, as well as further contributing to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

At the same time, Ukraine is not yet a party to
the Rome Statute. However, on 17 April 2014, the
Government of Ukraine lodged a declaration under
article 12 (3) of the Statute, accepting the jurisdiction
of the ICC over crimes committed on its territory
between 21 November 2013 and 22 February 2014.
Furthermore, on 8 September 2015, the Government of
Ukraine lodged a second declaration under article 12
(3) of the Statute, accepting the jurisdiction of the ICC
in relation to crimes committed on its territory from
20 February 2014, that is, since the beginning of the
military aggression of the Russian Federation against
Ukraine. Those declarations have been made for an
indefinite duration. The ICC will therefore be able to
exercise its jurisdiction over such crimes, regardless
of the nationality of the persons who have committed
them, even if they are citizens of a third State.
During the reporting period, the Court continued
to engage actively with Ukrainian authorities and
non-governmental organizations with regard to the
preliminary examination of the situation in Ukraine,
both through consultations at the Court and during
its missions to Ukraine, the most recent of which took
place in June.
In particular, Ukrainian law-enforcement agencies,
in cooperation with civil-society organizations and
human rights defenders, have continued to document
and provide the Court with additional information,

18-3491911/31

A/73/PV.28

facts and evidence related to the nature of the existing
armed conflict in Ukraine as an international armed
conflict caused by the armed aggression of the Russian
Federation against Ukraine, as well as information
related to the numerous war crimes committed by the
aggressor State’s armed forces, occupation authorities,
personnel and proxies in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine.
We appreciate the work done by the Office of the
Prosecutor and look forward to the ICC report on its
preliminary examination activities in 2018.
It is a priority for the Ukrainian authorities and a
strong demand on the part of the people of Ukraine that
the organizers, supporters and perpetrators of the grave
crimes committed in Ukraine be held to account and
prosecuted. In that regard, I would like to emphasize
Ukraine’s commitment to the fight against impunity
and reiterate that my country will spare no effort to
ensure that justice is done.
Mr. Oña Garcés (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation thanks the President of the International
Criminal Court, Judge Chile Eboe-Osuji, for presenting
the report of the International Criminal Court on
its work carried out in 2017 and 2018, contained in
document A/73/334. We also welcome draft resolution
A/73/L.8, submitted today by Mexico, on the report
of the Court, of which we are a sponsor and which we
hope will be adopted by consensus.
Ecuador has consistently defended the role of the
International Criminal Court in the maintenance of
international peace and justice and the defence of the
rule of law, and its function as an essential component
in conflict prevention and reparations to the victims
of the most serious crimes. Today we reiterate our
support for the Court as a mechanism with unique
characteristics that enable it to fight impunity. We urge
all States present here today to lend their support to the
Court so that it can effectively and concretely exercise
its jurisdiction over the most serious crimes of concern
to the international community.
An irrevocable objective for Ecuador is to make
progress on universalizing the Rome Statute and the
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court. We
must move beyond short-term political considerations
towards a genuine universal criminal justice system
that combats impunity and enables those responsible
to be punished. Crimes of genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and crimes of aggression, which
12/31

29/10/2018

are subject to the complementary jurisdiction of the
Court, can be best prosecuted if States universally
accede to the Statute and provide the necessary
cooperation to the Court. However, as we have already
pointed out, that universality does not just concern the
universal accession by States to the Rome Statute; it
pertains to every part of the world and to all the crimes
against humanity that are taking place in the world at
this very moment. It does not have double standards,
and it extends beyond political or economic interests,
which could otherwise lead us to evaluate similar
situations with different criteria.
In that regard, we recognize and support the ongoing
work of the Court, which, since its establishment, has
opened a total of 26 cases involving 41 suspects or
accused. We also give our full support to Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the Court, whose work has
contributed to the Court’s recent historical achievements
and enabled it to issue new arrest warrants against two
persons and continue three trials in the reporting period.
We support the Office of the Prosecutor’s ongoing
investigations into 11 situations and its willingness to
open new preliminary investigations and examinations
in all parts of the world where necessary. Those
landmark actions undercut the misguided criticism
that has been voiced of selectivity and bias in the
Court’s investigations. We deplore States’ withdrawal
or notifications of withdrawal from the Rome Statute.
We support all efforts to achieve the universality of the
Statute, provided that they do not require concessions
or weaken the Court’s scope or jurisdiction.
Ecuador incorporated into its 2008 Constitution
and domestic criminal legislation the mandatory nature
of measures and penalties against the crime of genocide,
crimes against humanity, war crimes, the enforced
disappearance of persons and the crime of aggression.
In our country, no amnesties or statutes of limitation
can be applied to those crimes. That fully coincides
with the Rome Statute, whose very raison d’être is the
fight against impunity. We therefore welcome the fact
that the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute
decided by consensus to activate the Court’s jurisdiction
over the crime of aggression, which entered into force
on 17 July. Ecuador is in the process of ratifying the
Kampala amendments, and we call on everyone to work
together to achieve their universality.
I want to take this opportunity to reiterate our
position with regard to the principle of complementarity
as it concerns the Court and its jurisdiction. We
18-34919

29/10/2018

attach particular importance to complementarity, as
a mechanism that enables States to cooperate in the
fight against impunity and involves national capacitybuilding, which is critical. Through complementarity,
the International Criminal Court supports national
legislations. It is not a substitute for them.
Ecuador supports any initiative aimed at
strengthening the fight against impunity. That is why
in June we successfully hosted a high-level regional
seminar with the International Criminal Court, during
which 11 Latin American Governments signed the
Quito Declaration on the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. In that same spirit of commitment, I
am pleased to announce that in the coming days the
Government of Ecuador will sign the code of conduct
regarding Security Council action against genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes.
My delegation also believes that it is essential for the
Court to have the necessary funding to enable it to meet
the objectives set out in the Rome Statute, especially at
a time when the judges’ caseloads, the investigations in
the Office of the Prosecutor and the general workload
of the Court have increased. In addition, we believe it
is essential to strengthen the mechanisms for obtaining
resources and improving the international community’s
cooperation with regard to the Trust Fund for Victims,
given the fact that the Fund assists the work of the
Court with regard to a fundamental element of justice,
the protection of victims and reparations for the crimes
dealt with in the Rome Statute.
My delegation would also like to express its
support for the efforts of the United Nations system to
improve the channels of cooperation with the Office of
the Prosecutor and other organs of the Court. We call
on Member States to provide every possible support
to the fulfilment and execution of the orders issued by
the relevant authorities of the International Criminal
Court. We welcome all the activities undertaken during
the year to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of
the Rome Statute. They send a powerful message of
support for the Court, highlighting the importance of
that unique judicial institution’s mandate and the need
for a more vigorous and effective Court in the face of
the alarming proliferation of the most serious crimes
around the world.
Last but not least, my delegation would like to
express special appreciation for the work of the Registry

A/73/PV.28

of the Court and the secretariat of the Assembly of States
Parties, whose efficiency and effective coordination and
support have made it possible to achieve these results.
Ms. Telalian (Greece): Greece aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the European Union,
and I would now like to make some further comments
in my national capacity.
First, we want to thank the President of the
International Criminal Court, Judge Chile Eboe-Osuji,
for his comprehensive briefing. We also thank the
International Criminal Court for its annual report to
the United Nations (see A/73/334), which gives us an
opportunity to take stock of the achievements and the
progress made by the Court during the reporting period
in the fight against impunity and also to reflect on the
challenges that it faces.
This year we are celebrating the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Rome Statute. On
17 July 1998 in Rome, the international community
took a crucial step towards the establishment of a
permanent international criminal court that would
be able potentially to intervene as a complementary
mechanism in any situation involving serious
international crimes, while also serving as a powerful
deterrent to the commission of such crimes.
Having from the very beginning wholeheartedly
supported the establishment of the International
Criminal Court, on the occasion of this anniversary
Greece would like to reiterate its support for the Court
and its legitimacy, as well as to express its commitment
to the Court’s independence and to the integrity of
the Rome Statute. In that respect, we regret the recent
withdrawals from the Statute and call on all States that
have not yet joined it to do so in order to expand its reach
and deepen its work so as to ensure that the most heinous
international crimes do not go unpunished. We are also
ready to continue assisting the Court in fulfilling its
mandate in an increasingly complicated international
environment, radically different from that of 20 years
ago, when its Statute was adopted. We firmly believe
that the Court must be able to act without hindrance
within the legal parameters defined by its founding
treaty. We also encourage the Court to continue to
review its judicial and administrative processes in order
to enhance its effectiveness, maximize the impact of its
work and live up to the expectations of the international
community and of the victims of crimes falling within
its jurisdiction.

18-3491913/31

A/73/PV.28

As the report of the Court demonstrates, effective
cooperation with the Court remains a key challenge
to its fulfilment of its mandate. Furthermore, while
Security Council referrals may help expand the reach
of the Court to areas not falling within the scope of
its jurisdiction, it is crucial to have active follow-up
for such referrals in order to ensure cooperation with
the Court and make full use of the possibilities that the
Rome Statute offers in the fight against impunity. We
therefore share the view expressed in the report that a
structured dialogue between the Court and the Security
Council could improve the implementation of referral
resolutions and enhance accountability.
Last but not least, Greece welcomes the historic
activation during the reporting period of the Court’s
jurisdiction over the crime of aggression, which
completes the regulatory framework of the Rome
Statute and reinforces the prohibition and prevention
of the illegal use of force in international relations,
thereby help to strengthen the relevant purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): Ireland associates
itself with the statement made earlier by the observer
of the European Union on behalf of its member States
(see A/73/PV.27).
I want to take this opportunity to thank the
International Criminal Court for its annual report
(see A/73/334) to the United Nations and to thank its
President, Judge Eboe-Osuji, for his presentation today
(see A/73/PV.27), which outlines a year of significant
developments in relation to many aspects of the
Court’s work.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of the Rome Statute and provides an
opportunity to reflect on the achievement that is the
International Criminal Court. Twenty years ago, the
international community set up the first permanent
International Criminal Court with jurisdiction to
prosecute individuals for the most serious crimes of
concern to the international community when States
are unwilling or unable to do so. In so doing, we made
it clear that there are certain lines that should not be
crossed and that if they are crossed, there must be
accountability for the perpetrators and justice for
the victims. The victims must be a central focus of
our concerns.
My country, Ireland, sees the International
Criminal Court as the cornerstone of international
14/31

29/10/2018

criminal justice. The annual report, outlining as it
does the range of situations under examination, the
various ongoing investigations and the cases being
processed, demonstrates how very necessary the Court
is, in our view. Over its lifetime, it has been subject
to much criticism, some of which may be justified, of
course, because no institution is perfect. Constructive
criticism is both warranted and helpful. However,
some of the harshest criticism directed at the Court is
not motivated by some failure of the Court to fulfil its
mandate but precisely because it is doing its duty to
combat impunity for the most serious crimes of concern
to the international community. Echoing the words
of Simon Coveney, Ireland’s Tánaiste-Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade
with responsibility for Brexit, in his address to the
Assembly last month (see A/73/PV.13), I want to take
this opportunity today to reaffirm Ireland’s continuing
commitment to working to ensure that the Court can
fulfil the mandate that it has been given.
This year we also witnessed a further significant and
historic development whereby the Court’s jurisdiction
over the crime of aggression was activated as of 17 July.
Ireland welcomes that important development, which
sends a clear signal about the fundamental importance
of the prohibition of the use of force and the overriding
imperative of preserving world peace. Ireland took the
step of ratifying the amendment to the Rome Statute
on the crime of aggression just a few weeks ago, on
27 September.
It is always important to recall that the Court
does not operate in a vacuum. It is very much a key
element in the system of international criminal justice.
As is clear from the annual report, the Court has a
network of relationships with the United Nations, other
international organizations, States and civil society.
Cooperation on the part of the international community
as a whole is essential for its success. In this debate,
we believe that it is particularly relevant to reflect on
the relationship that the Court has with the United
Nations. Justice and peace are at the very core of why
both organizations exist. Ireland very much shares
the view that the Court and the United Nations, while
clearly having differing mandates, can and should
reinforce one another in fulfilling those mandates. It
is encouraging to see a reference in paragraph 65 of
the report to ongoing cooperation between the United
Nations and the Court, including crucial support for
18-34919

29/10/2018

the Court on the part of the United Nations senior
leadership, up to and including the Secretary-General.
The report also references the importance of
cooperation between the Court and the Security
Council. Ireland was pleased that on 6 July the States
parties to the Court serving on the Security Council,
led by the Netherlands, convened an Arria Formula
meeting to discuss relations between the Court and the
Council. Many helpful suggestions were put forward at
that meeting about how to strengthen the interaction
and cooperation between the Security Council and
the Court, and we believe they deserve further
consideration. In particular, Ireland would welcome the
further exploration of possible mechanisms to improve
the support that the Council can provide to the Court in
relation to the Court’s work on situations referred to it
by the Council pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations.
A key issue that the Security Council should address
is cases of non-cooperation by States in relation to such
referrals. Fifteen such cases have been referred to it,
with no substantive response, according to the report.
Furthermore, we believe that the Court must receive
adequate financial support when situations are referred
to it. Those issues are undoubtedly challenging, but it is
necessary to address them so as to enable the Court to
do what the Council mandates it to do when referring
such situations to it — delivering justice in situations
of grave concern with a potential to destabilize
international peace and security.
I also take this opportunity to reiterate Ireland’s
firm view that there must be unity of purpose within the
international community in prosecuting mass crimes
through the international criminal justice system.
There should be consistency in the referral of situations
to the Court. Ireland supports the reform of the Security
Council veto power and believes that at a minimum, the
use of the veto must be restricted in accordance with
the French-Mexican initiative and the cross-regional
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group’s
code of conduct regarding Security Council action on
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.
I also want to highlight the emphasis given to victims
by the Rome Statute. One of the welcome innovations
in the Statute was the manner in which that document
sought to address the needs of victims. One of those
innovations was the establishment of the Trust Fund
for Victims. The focus of the Trust Fund’s critically

A/73/PV.28

important work is to deliver tangible reparative justice
to victims and their families and communities. It is
important to remember that the Trust Fund depends on
voluntary contributions for its work and that without
active support from States parties, its vital work would
stall. Ireland is, therefore, pleased to make a regular
annual contribution to the Trust Fund, and this year we
have increased our contribution. Also, as members will
see in the annual report, in February Ireland undertook
a joint initiative with the Trust Fund and conducted a
monitoring mission in northern Uganda. The purpose of
the mission was to assess the impact of the Trust Fund’s
work and promote it. The President of the Assembly of
States Parties and representatives of 10 States parties
took part in that mission. We firmly believe that
delivering on real and effective reparative justice is
critical to the implementation of the Rome Statute. We
echo the Trust Fund’s call ton States parties and others
to consider making new and increased contributions.
In conclusion, Ireland, like others, is fully aware
that, in order to implement the principles of the Rome
Statute, it is absolutely essential that we work together.
We are committed to the universality of the Rome
Statute. The greater the reach of the International
Criminal Court, the greater the chance that the core
principles underlying the Statute will be respected.
We encourage all States that have not yet done so to
consider becoming party to the Statute.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): The delegation of Uruguay is grateful for
the full report on the activities of the International
Criminal Court covering the period from 1 August
2017 to 31 July 2018 (see A/73/334).
Important events have taken place during that
period, particularly the activation of the Court’s
jurisdiction over the crime of aggression by the
Assembly of States Parties, which met in December
2017. The jurisdiction entered into force on 17 July,
which coincided with the twentieth anniversary of the
Rome Statute. That activation of the Court’s jurisdiction
over the crime of aggression is a cause for celebration,
as it is a victory for the ideal of justice and law. Despite
the opposition of several States, which had no legal
grounds, consensus was finally reached.
Despite its shortcomings and the need for
improvement, we need an independent Court for
prosecuting the most atrocious crimes, detailed in article
5 of the Rome Statute. The International Criminal Court

18-3491915/31

A/73/PV.28

has been a milestone in the international community’s
struggle against impunity and the most serious crimes
against human beings and their integrity and rights. It
was made possible because we prioritized international
human rights law and international humanitarian law
with a focus on the victims of such crimes.
Attacks on women and children, slavery and the
use and recruitment of children, for example, are some
of the cases that may now be subject to the Court’s
judgment. Uruguay has always prioritized the defence
of human rights, both domestically and internationally.
That is why we helped to set up the Court and were part
of the negotiation process that led to its establishment.
We were one of the first countries to ratify the Rome
Statute, through our adoption in 2006 of Law No.
18026, on cooperation with the International Criminal
Court. We were also the first country in Latin America
to ratify the Kampala amendments, in September 2013.
The importance of the Court and its mission impels us
to support any action aimed at improving its operation.
We would like to remind the States parties to the Rome
Statute of the need to cooperate with the Court to ensure
its ability to fulfil its mandate. We also believe that it
is important to raise awareness about the importance of
the Court and therefore about the importance of States
acceding to the Rome Statute by ratifying the Statute
and its amendments.
Uruguay believes that cooperation between States
and the International Criminal Court is essential if the
Court is to achieve its objectives and enable us to put
an end to impunity for perpetrators of the cruel acts
detailed in the Rome Statute. We must bear in mind
the work, independence and impartiality of the judges,
which applies to the Court as a whole, and the difficult
work that they do in carrying out their duties.
For Uruguay, combating crimes against humanity,
war crimes, genocide and crimes of aggression
perpetrated against the rights of men, women, children
and groups is vital. It is important, above all, in the
current difficult context when there is a lack of
cooperation on maintaining maximum support for the
Court’s work, which is essential if we wish to ensure
that human rights, human dignity and the rule of law
are respected at the international level.
Mr. Arriola Ramírez (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): The delegation of the Republic of Paraguay
thanks the President of the International Criminal
Court, Judge Eboe-Osuji, for presenting the annual
16/31

29/10/2018

report of the Court (see A/73/334) and commends the
Court and the Office of the Prosecutor for their work in
the period from 2017 to 2018.
The delegation of Paraguay is a sponsor of draft
resolution A/73/L.8, which is under consideration by
the General Assembly today.
For Paraguay, the establishment of an International
Criminal Court was a very important milestone in the
history of humankind, as the international community
sought to address and overcome impunity for the most
atrocious crimes, ensure justice and reparations for
victims of international crimes within the framework
of international law, and realize the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Paraguay reaffirms its commitment to international
criminal justice and advocates the universalization
of the Rome Statute, to which it is a party, and of
the Kampala amendments, which are currently
under legislative review by our National Congress, a
procedure required by our Constitution prior to their
approval and ratification.
In its Constitution, Paraguay acknowledges
international law and is governed by the principles that
flow from it. We acknowledge a supranational legal
order that among other things provides guarantees for
human rights, and we prohibit and declare genocide,
torture, the forced disappearance of persons and
kidnapping and homicide for political reasons to be
crimes that are not subject to any statute of limitations.
The law regarding the national implementation of
the Rome Statute categorizes and establishes a gradation
of penalties for genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes, distinguishes between national and
universal jurisdiction, and specifies the limitations
of national jurisdiction, which are provisions that are
complemented by general criminal legislation.
Through their jurisprudence, Paraguay’s courts have
also implemented the principle of universal jurisdiction.
One notable example is Judgment No. 195/2008 of the
Supreme Court of Justice of the Republic of Paraguay,
which established the irrevocability of horrendous and
repudiated crimes, such as torture, thereby enshrining
a high standard of protection of human rights and
reaffirming that violations of fundamental human
rights must not go unpunished.
The Republic of Paraguay offers a legal framework
that concerts with international criminal justice, and
18-34919

29/10/2018

since 2003 we have extended a standing invitation
to international organizations that wish to observe
the efforts undertaken in Paraguay by Government
agencies and civil-society organizations in relation to
the promotion of human rights.
Paraguay considers that in its exercise of universal
jurisdiction and under the principle of complementarity,
in situations of serious and systematic violations against
humanity, the Court may represent a light of hope and
justice for a people oppressed by authoritarian regimes,
by holding those responsible for such violations to
account before international criminal justice. Paraguay
therefore calls on all States, regardless of their status
as parties to the Rome Statute and its amendments,
and on all actors in the international community, to
cooperate with the International Criminal Court so as
to ensure its independence and impartiality, facilitate
its investigations and execute its decisions, with a view
to trying the defendants, with full respect for their
fundamental human rights, thereby bringing to account
those who have committed heinous crimes and securing
reparations to their victims.
Finally, Paraguay strives to bring together other
existing institutions and mechanisms for the realization
of international criminal justice with the International
Criminal Court. We trust in the efforts of international,
global, regional and subregional bodies to monitor
human rights situations around the world and document
possible cases of atrocity crimes. We emphasize the
importance of optimizing the cooperative relations
between the International Criminal Court and the
Security Council in the follow-up to the cases referred
by the Council to the Court and in the execution of
the Court’s decisions by the Council. We believe that
the discussion of issues of mutual interest by the two
bodies, and in particular with regard to the relevance
of the work of the Council’s Sanctions Committees
to the enforcement of the Court’s decisions, will be
productive to that end. We also appreciate the work
of non-governmental organizations, civil society and
academia aimed at achieving the universalization of
the Rome Statute and its amendments and at raising
awareness of the virtues of the multilateral system of
international criminal justice.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Georgia aligns itself
with the statement made earlier by the observer of the
European Union (see A/73/PV.27), and in addition, I
would like to make a few remarks in my national capacity.

A/73/PV.28

At the outset, I would like to thank the President
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Judge
Eboe-Osuji, for his comprehensive presentation, and
we welcome the report of the Court (see A/73/334).
The strengthening of universality and cooperation
with the Court are key factors enabling the ICC to
work effectively to end impunity for the perpetrators
of the most egregious crimes that threaten international
peace, security and well-being. We believe that the role
of the ICC is to complement rather than replace existing
national judicial systems. The primary responsibility
for investigating and prosecuting crimes still remains
with individual States.
As we mark the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of the Rome Statute, the international community must
take a collective stance on the fight against impunity.
We welcome the milestone achievement represented
by the activation of the Court’s jurisdiction over the
crime of aggression on 17 July of this year, the Day of
International Criminal Justice. In the volatile world we
all live in, it is vital that we all unequivocally support
the international justice system. The Rome Statute
essentially created a permanent and global institution
that embodies the Nuremberg principles aimed at
fighting impunity and preventing the most heinous
crimes. It is time to reflect on the challenges, take
stock of the achievements and unite in echoing the call
of “Never again”.
Since the ratification of the Rome Statute in 2003,
Georgia has been cooperating effectively with the
International Criminal Court. As an enabling factor in
our fully fledged cooperation with the ICC, we have
put in place legislation to implement the Statute at the
national level. Furthermore, in December 2017 an ICC
field office was opened in Georgia to support various
organs of the Court and cooperate with stakeholders
on the ground and relevant United Nations agencies.
In that connection, I would like to underline that just
a few days ago Georgia hosted a high-level regional
ICC conference designed to promote and enhance
cooperation between the Court and countries from
Eastern Europe and Western Asia.
In conclusion, let me stress Georgia’s support
for the recommendations in the current report of the
Court regarding the necessity of investigating crimes
committed in Georgia during the Russian aggression of
2008, and in that context, we support the Prosecutor’s
call on the Russian Federation to cooperate with
the Court on its investigations. I want to once again

18-3491917/31

A/73/PV.28

reiterate my country’s unwavering support for the ICC
as an important tool in the international community’s
fight against impunity and a significant contribution to
the maintenance of peaceful societies.
Ms. Stresiná (Romania): We would like to thank
the President of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Judge Eboe-Osuji, for his eloquent presentation of the
Court’s annual report (see A/73/334).
Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered
this morning by the observer of the European Union
(see A/73/PV.27).
Twenty years ago, more than 120 States made a
collective commitment to ending impunity for the
most serious crimes. The adoption of the Rome Statute
changed the paradigm of international criminal justice,
sending a strong signal that perpetrators of such horrific
crimes can and must be held accountable.
This year’s anniversary offered us a good
opportunity to reflect on the achievements and the
lessons learned in the functioning of the world’s only
permanent international criminal judicial institution.
The ICC has made significant progress in developing
itself further. With active cases that are in all stages
of proceedings, the Court has developed its own body
of jurisprudence, including standards that may set
benchmarks for the future. In that context, we should
underscore its contribution to the establishment of
sexual violence in conflict and the destruction of
cultural heritage and property as international crimes.
The growing deterrent effect of the ICC is
increasingly evident. The investigation of mass crimes
is now the expected norm, and the input of the Court to
that end cannot be ignored. The harsher tone of its critics
is merely a reflection of its relevance. As an independent
body working in a tense political landscape, the
resolve of the Court should not be affected by volatile
relationships with States and the implicit challenges of
securing cooperation and resources.
While we have confidence in the non-discriminatory
application of the relevant criteria in selecting cases and
situations, the Prosecutor’s role is extremely difficult
and unavoidably prone to controversy. However, it is up
to the Court to ensure fair proceedings so as to protect
the credibility and effectiveness of the ICC. From that
point of view, we would like to salute the ongoing
efforts of the Court to implement the necessary reforms
aimed at improving its effectiveness.
18/31

29/10/2018

At the same time, we would like to emphasize the
victim-centred approach to criminal justice as one of
the innovations brought in by the ICC. We therefore
further encourage the Court and States to focus on
the components of victim participation and effective
representation by tackling existing challenges in that
field. Victims’ confidence in the Court will remain a
strong indicator of its legitimacy.
The ICC is not free of problems. It is obviously
important to discuss the various concerns about its
performance constructively. However, any criticism
should take into consideration the limitations imposed
by the Court’s treaty-bound competence, its reliance
on State support and its external financial constraints.
From that point of view, we should remind ourselves
that the ICC is an essential piece of the Rome Statute
system, but not the only one. It is a court of last
resort that was not meant to, and cannot, solve every
international crime committed in this world. The
strength of the system should actually rest on the work
of the national courts, which serve as the first line of
accountability for the most egregious crimes.
As a co-focal point for this topic since 2017,
Romania strongly supports the implementation of
the complementarity principle, which represents the
cornerstone of the ICC machinery. Our aim f or the long
run should be to reduce the number of cases submitted
to the Court as more Member States are willing and
able to investigate and prosecute crimes within their
jurisdictions. We therefore echo the Court in its plea
to the relevant actors to include capacity-building
elements for judicial reform in assistance programmes
devoted to the development of the rule of law.
Furthermore, we must be constantly aware that the
Court depends on State cooperation in order to function
effectively. In that context, we would like to reiterate
Romania’s support for the Court and add our voice
to the calls for enhanced cooperation between States
parties and the ICC, in accordance with the obligations
set forth in the Rome Statute.
The potential for improving relations between the
Security Council and the Court in support of dealing
better with the gravest crimes that threaten international
peace and security remains unaddressed. After the
Arria Formula meeting of the Council in July this year,
we encourage the continuation of a more structured and
action-oriented dialogue on the matter.
18-34919

29/10/2018

Romania welcomes last year’s historic consensus
decision to activate the Court’s jurisdiction over the
crime of aggression, which reinforces the prohibition
of the illegal use of force as enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations. While we can continue the
discussion about potentially burdening the ICC with
more expectations, in our view the main added value
of that decision lies, in its symbolic power, by forcing
both policymakers and citizens to focus on the question
of the legality of wars, and more specifically, on the
responsibility of individuals for them.
In conclusion, Romania shares the view that the
adoption of the ICC Statute constitutes one of the most
important achievements in the fight against impunity.
Achieving the universality of the Rome Statute
would be a powerful tool for preventing violations of
international criminal law and, at the same time, a
significant contribution to establishing lasting peace
and healthier societies, in accordance with the core
principles and values of the United Nations.
Mr. Escalante Hasbún (El Salvador) (spoke
in Spanish): We would like to begin, as every other
speaker has done, by thanking the President of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), Judge Eboe-Osuji,
for his briefing on the report of the Court (see A/73/334),
which details the conduct of both administrative and
judicial activities and has been transmitted to the
General Assembly in accordance with article 6 of the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations
and the International Criminal Court and paragraph 28
of resolution 72/3.

A/73/PV.28

In that regard, while we are aware that in recent
years the International Criminal Court has achieved a
lot, we also recognize that much remains to be done.
The road ahead is full of challenges and opportunities
for the Court’s efforts to prosecute serious human
rights violations and bring to justice those who have
committed crimes under the Rome Statute. It also
serves as a deterrent to those crimes.
In view of the above, our country calls on States
to ratify the Kampala amendments, and we especially
welcome the activation in July of the Court’s jurisdiction
over the crime of aggression, in line with the decision
adopted by the Assembly of States Parties in New York
in December 2017. That step reinforces the jurisdiction
and competence of the International Criminal Court.
As part of our commitment to the international
community and the International Criminal Court to
strengthening the Court’s normative and operational
structure, we have initiated domestic efforts under
our national legislation to ratify the Agreement on the
Privileges and Immunities of the International Criminal
Court as soon as possible, as we are convinced that
such an instrument will facilitate its fulfilment of its
purposes as well as its functions.
Finally, I want to conclude by reiterating my
country’s deep support and commitment to the work
of the International Criminal Court, and we urge
those who have not yet ratified the Rome Statute and
its amendments to do so, with a view to ensuring the
full universality of the Statute in the near future and
promoting justice and accountability at the global level.

My delegation welcomes the commemoration on
17 July of the twentieth anniversary of the Court’s
founding treaty, the Rome Statute, and we stress the
importance of the Court’s mandate for the international
community, as well as the need to strengthen the
international criminal justice system.

Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
Judge Chile Eboe-Osuji on his election as President of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) and thank him
for presenting his report (see A/73/334) on the activities
of the Court over the past year.

We were pleased to read that in the past year the
International Criminal Court has continued to maintain
a heavy workload with the issuance of new warrants
of arrest against two persons, the continuation of three
trials and the delivery of final judgments in two cases
before the Appeals Chamber, as well as a number of
important decisions on reparations to victims, a focus
of the Court’s activities that represents one of its
greatest strengths. In addition, the Prosecutor opened a
new investigation, and there are 10 other situations that
remain open.

I would also like to express our gratitude for the
presentation of the reports of the Secretary-General
(A/73/333 and A/73/335) on the implementation of
article 3 of the Relationship Agreement between the
United Nations and the International Criminal Court
and on the expenses incurred and reimbursements
received in connection with the assistance provided
to the International Criminal Court. Argentina also
supports the adoption of this year’s draft resolution
(A/73/L.8) on the report of the International Criminal
Court, which coincides with the presentation of

18-3491919/31

A/73/PV.28

the report by its President and today’s debate on the
agenda item.
In its remarkable activity since the presentation
of the previous report (see A/72/PV.36), the Court has
once again demonstrated that it is in fact a fundamental
tool in the fight against impunity, the promotion of
human rights and the consolidation of the rule of law at
the international level.
Within the framework of the twentieth anniversary
of the Rome Statute, Argentina renews its ongoing
commitment to the Court by remaining actively
involved in the mechanisms envisaged by the Assembly
of States Parties and through its support for the goal of
achieving the universality of the Statute.
Argentina has demonstrated its support in various
ways, but we are particularly proud to have been the
first State party to conclude the four cooperation
agreements suggested by the Court. Similarly,
Argentina has also ratified the Kampala amendments
on the crime of aggression and therefore welcomes the
activation of the Court’s jurisdiction over that crime.
That activation completes the legal edifice that is the
Court, reaffirming the prevalence of law and justice
over the use of force in international relations.
I would now like to discuss the relationship between
the Court and the United Nations. The relationship
between our Organization and the Court is crucial, while
it must always respect the judicial independence of the
Court. In that context, we reiterate some of the concerns
that Argentina has regarding the referral of situations
by the Security Council to the Court, particularly in
terms of their financial cost. That cost has so far been
borne exclusively by States parties to the Statute of the
Court, despite the clear rules contained in the Rome
Statute and the Relationship Agreement between the
International Criminal Court and the United Nations,
which state that the costs of such referrals must be
borne by the United Nations.
The fight against impunity is an objective shared
by the States parties to the Rome Statute and the United
Nations, but that objective must be accompanied by a
commitment to providing the Court with the resources
necessary to fulfil its functions. Lack of action in
that regard could jeopardize the sustainability of the
Court’s investigations and damage the Organization’s
credibility. We also believe that there is scope for a
closer and better relationship between the Court and
the Security Council, especially with regard to the
20/31

29/10/2018

work of its subsidiary bodies, such as the Sanctions
Committees and the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict.
In conclusion, Argentina wants to emphasize the
International Criminal Court’s contribution to the
objectives of this Organization in its fight against
impunity for the most serious crimes of international
concern. Indeed, the Court’s contribution to the
configuration of a multilateral system that aims to
promote respect for human rights and achieve a lasting
peace, in accordance with international law and the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, is unquestionable.
The suffering of the victims of the most atrocious
crimes is humankind’s greatest shame. We cannot
allow this century to pass without providing concrete
responses to those violations. That will enable us to
work together to build a more just world under the
primacy of international law.
Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): Bangladesh thanks
the President of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) for his comprehensive report with its valuable
insights (see A/73/334). We commend his observations
concerning the standing of the ICC vis-à-vis national
sovereignty, a relationship worthy of the attention of all
Member States.
Bangladesh is pleased once again to be a sponsor
of draft resolution A/73/L.8, entitled “Report of the
International Criminal Court”. We have taken due
note of the updates on the judicial and prosecutorial
activities of the Court, as well as on the status of
preliminary examinations.
During the reporting period, we followed the ruling
by the Pre-trial Chamber of the ICC on the issue of the
forced deportation of the Rohingya population from
Myanmar’s Rakhine state to Bangladesh with particular
interest, in our capacity as a State party to the Rome
Statute. We acknowledge the sua moto initiative by the
Office of the Prosecutor to seek the Pre-trial Chamber’s
ruling in that regard, especially at a time when the Court
itself faces challenges on multiple fronts. Bangladesh
considered it a solemn responsibility as a State party
to respond to the letter sent by the Pre-trial Chamber
within the set deadline. Against the backdrop of our
bilateral efforts with Myanmar to ensure the safe,
dignified and sustainable return of the Rohingya people
to Rakhine state, we consider the Pre-trial Chamber’s
18-34919

29/10/2018

ruling concerning the possible denial of their right to
return to be an important development.
Bangladesh will continue to cooperate with the
Court in the wake of the Pre-trial Chamber’s ruling,
while we want to underscore the need for ensuring
accountability for the entire spectrum of atrocity crimes
committed against the Rohingya by the Myanmar
security forces and the non-State actors concerned. In
that context, we recall the responsibility of the Security
Council in the face of the authoritative evidence of
the gravest crimes under international law committed
against the Rohingya, which has been furnished by the
United Nations Independent International Fact-finding
Mission on Myanmar. We acknowledge the Human
Rights Council’s decision to act on the Fact-finding
Mission’s report (A/HRC/39/64) and to establish an
ongoing independent mechanism to collate, analyse and
preserve evidence for facilitating the prosecution of
crimes through the appropriate national or international
judicial mechanisms. It is crucial to the restoration of
confidence among the forcibly displaced Rohingya
with regard to the prospects for their voluntary return
that the atrocity crimes that they have been subjected
to are duly accounted for and the perpetrators brought
to justice.
Bangladesh welcomes the decision by the Assembly
of State Parties to activate the Court’s jurisdiction over
the crime of aggression as of 17 July. We also support
the three amendments to article 8 of the Rome Statute
and take note of further proposals brought before the
Working Group on Amendments.
We stress that the cooperation, assistance and
support of State parties to the Rome Statute, as well as
other States, remain critical to ensuring that the mandate
of the ICC is discharged in a sustained and meaningful
manner. We reiterate the importance of recognizing
the Court’s mandate and competence throughout the
United Nations system with a view to acknowledging
its valuable contribution to international peace and
security, the rule of law and the creation of peaceful,
just and inclusive societies. We take positive note of
the collaboration pursued between UNESCO and the
Office of the Prosecutor to protect cultural heritage
from attack during armed conflicts.
We underscore the need for the Security Council’s
continued support for the effective functioning of
the Court, including in the cases referred to it by the
Council. There is clear merit in the suggestion for

A/73/PV.28

a structured dialogue between the Council and the
Court on issues of mutual interest, notably in relation
to States’ non-cooperation, sanctions, travel bans and
asset freezes. For our part, we shall continue to extend
all necessary cooperation to the Court in mission
areas where our peacekeepers and military observers
are deployed.
Bangladesh reaffirms the primary responsibility of
national jurisdictions to investigate and prosecute the
crimes defined in the Rome Statute. We fully endorse
the recommendation for the possible inclusion of issues
related to the Rome Statute in legal and judicial reform
programmes supported by the United Nations in the
context of development assistance for the rule of law.
That would be particularly crucial for States that are
not party to the Rome Statute.
As a State party, Bangladesh remains committed
to promoting the universality and full implementation
of the Rome Statute. We would hope that the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Rome Statute,
which was observed last year, will help create the
necessary impetus for the eventual universalization
of the Statute. ICC cooperation seminars and other
cooperation arrangements with relevant international
and regional organizations should also contribute to the
universalization agenda.
Bangladesh underscores the need for appropriate
capacity-building support for the national jurisdictions
of States parties, pursuant to the principle of
complementarity. In that context, we reiterate the
importance of considering budgetary support for
internships and visiting professional programmes
for applicants from States parties representing the
developing and least-developed countries. We have
circulated a working paper on that subject for favourable
consideration by all States parties and the Court. We
reiterate that due attention must be given to ensuring
the equitable geographical representation of the staff at
the Court, especially at the professional level.
We consider it important to enhance voluntary
contributions to the Trust Fund for Victims so that
the Court can deliver on its reparations and assistance
mandates. As the designated facilitator, Bangladesh
is making efforts to engage with the States parties
concerned to settle their outstanding arrears. We
also look forward to discharging our responsibilities
as a member of the ICC Bureau during the next twoyear period.

18-3491921/31

A/73/PV.28

In conclusion, we want to emphasize the importance
of upholding solidarity among States parties, as well as
the integrity and credibility of the ICC as a court of last
resort, in the overarching interest of fighting impunity
for the gravest crimes under international law that are
under its jurisdiction.
Ms. Roopnarine (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad
and Tobago is grateful to the Secretary-General for
the annual report of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) contained in document A/73/334 and supporting
documents on the activities of the Court in 2017
and 2018. We view those documents as important
instruments that convey essential information on the
activities of the Court to the wider membership of the
United Nations as well as States parties. We also want
to take this opportunity to congratulate the President of
the ICC, Judge Chile Eboe-Osuji, on his presentation
of the report.
Trinidad and Tobago was a participant in the
trenches during the genesis of the Rome Statute,
through the work of our late former Prime Minister
and subsequent President of the Republic of Trinidad
and Tobago. We are therefore pleased to join others in
celebrating the twentieth anniversary of the founding
document of the ICC. The praise of the international
community is well placed and well merited.
We submit that the ICC is both an international
guardian and guarantor of the rule of law. Indeed,
Trinidad and Tobago’s unwavering commitment to the
ICC is informed by its recognition of the importance
of ending impunity for perpetrators of the most serious
crimes of concern to the international community as
outlined in article 5 of the Rome Statute, that is, the
crime of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes
and crimes of aggression.
We welcome the activation of the Court’s jurisdiction
over the crime of aggression as of 17 July. Trinidad and
Tobago ratified the amendments concerning the crime
of aggression in November 2012, following the Review
Conference of the Rome Statute in Kampala in 2010.
We view that development as a means to ensure that the
Court is able to exercise wider jurisdiction, including
over crimes of aggression, thereby preventing impunity.
Notwithstanding the many challenges facing the
Court, it cannot be denied that the ICC continues to be
a beacon of hope to the victims of grave crimes within
its jurisdiction who are seeking justice. They include
the most vulnerable, such as thousands of women and
22/31

29/10/2018

children, who are often the ones most affected by the
actions of criminals who show blatant disregard for
the sanctity of human life by violating international
humanitarian and human rights law.
We nonetheless remain deeply concerned about
the recent withdrawals and notifications of withdrawal
from the Rome Statute, as highlighted in the current
report. While respecting the sovereign right of States to
act as they deem appropriate, Trinidad and Tobago is of
the view that engagement, not disengagement, should
be the prevailing approach to the ICC.
We recognize that the ICC has been perceived by
some as a threat to national sovereignty. However, we
want to demystify that notion and remind Member States
that consistent with the principle of complementarity as
enshrined in the Rome Statute, the Court’s jurisdiction
is invoked only when States are unable or unwilling to
prosecute those alleged to have committed grave crimes.
No individual or State need fear the ICC, therefore, as it
is a court of last resort.
Trinidad and Tobago reaffirms that the success of
the Court is fundamentally linked to the universality
of the Rome Statute. To that end, we reiterate our
commitment to promoting the universality of the Rome
Statute, and we urge all States that have not yet done so
to ratify and fully implement it.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Relationship
Agreement, which provides for close cooperation
between the Court and the United Nations in discharging
their respective responsibilities, we are satisfied that
during the current reporting period, the United Nations
cooperated extensively with the Court with a view to
further strengthening the relationship and ensuring
the effective implementation of the Agreement. In
accordance with the report of the Secretary-General on
this item, we would like to recall that the capacity of
the Security Council to refer a situation to the Court
is crucial to our efforts to promote accountability, but
active follow-up on referrals, ensuring that there will
be cooperation, is necessary in order to ensure that
justice is delivered. We therefore welcome the dialogue
on 6 July between the States parties to the Court that
are members of the Council through the convening of
an Arria Formula meeting, the first of that nature.
Finally, Trinidad and Tobago commends the efforts
of the Court to ensure that justice can prevail and that
criminals are not allowed to continue their actions
with impunity. We remain satisfied with the steadfast
18-34919

29/10/2018

commitment and hard work on the part of the Court’s
Prosecutor, who continues to discharge her mandate in
line with the provisions of the Rome Statute of the ICC.
Mr. Suan (Myanmar): Paragraphs 43 and 44 of
the report of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
(see A/73/334) mention the Prosecutor’s submission of
a request for a ruling of the Pre-trial Chamber as to
whether the Court might exercise jurisdiction on the
alleged deportation of the so-called Rohingya from
Myanmar to Bangladesh. Consequently, on 6 September,
Pre-trial Chamber 1 ruled by a majority decision that
the Court may exercise jurisdiction over Myanmar.
Myanmar resolutely rejects that decision, which
results from faulty procedure and is of dubious legal
merit. I would like to reiterate my Government’s
position that since Myanmar is not a party to the Rome
Statute, it is under no obligation to respect the findings
of the Court. The decision was the result of manifest
bad faith, procedural irregularities and a general lack of
transparency. Permission was given to organizations to
file amicus curiae submissions without consideration of
their identity or of the beneficial scope of their proposed
contributions. Several of the briefs submitted did not
address legal issues, in fact. Furthermore, allegations
consisting of emotionally charged narratives of
harrowing personal tragedies, which have nothing to do
with the legal arguments in question, were permitted,
putting emotional pressure on the Court. Submissions
of observations by those groups had the intended effect
of placing the Court in an emotional bind.

A/73/PV.28

whereby both countries agreed on a short time frame for
the voluntary return of all those who fled Rakhine state
as a result of hostilities in the region. Myanmar and
Bangladesh also signed the terms of reference for the
joint working group and the physical arrangement for
the repatriation of displaced Myanmar residents from
Bangladesh. All of those bilateral agreements are aimed
at facilitating the repatriation of verified residents of
Rakhine state who crossed over to Bangladesh following
the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army terrorist attacks
in October 2016 and August 2017. There was no cap
on the number to be repatriated, and the process was
intended to begin on 23 January 2018.
Moreover, the Myanmar Government also signed a
memorandum of understanding with the United Nations
Development Programme and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on 6 June 2018.
The memorandum seeks United Nations participation
in coordinating and harmonizing humanitarian and
development action in Rakhine state and in assisting
the Government of Myanmar in the voluntary, safe and
dignified return of displaced persons from Rakhine
state who have been duly verified as residents of
Myanmar, in line with the physical arrangement. In
accordance with the memorandum of understanding,
the United Nations team has already completed the first
phase of its field assessment in 23 villages in northern
Rakhine. It is now undertaking the second phase of the
field assessment in an additional 26 villages.

The Prosecutor incorrectly applied article 19 (3) of
the Statute in her request for a ruling from the Court on
jurisdiction at a time when the Court was not properly
seized of the matter. In that respect, Judge Marc Perrin
de Brichambaut shared his view that articles 19 (3) and
119 (1) of the Rome Statute are inapplicable and that
the competence-competence doctrine cannot serve
as an alternative basis for the Chamber to provide a
ruling. Myanmar also disagrees with the Prosecutor’s
assertion that population displacement across a
national boundary is an essential objective element of
the crime of deportation, as set out in article 7 (1) (d)
of the Statute.

The Government of Myanmar is aware of
accusations regarding human rights violations in the
aftermath of the August 2017 terrorist attacks. In line
with the Government’s commitment to the rule of law,
an Independent Commission of Inquiry was established
on 30 July. The Commission consists of two prominent
international personalities and two national members.
The Commission will investigate allegations of human
rights violations and related issues following the terror
attacks by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army.
The Government of Myanmar is committed to taking
necessary action based on the Commission’s findings.
We are willing and able to take on the accountability
issues for any alleged human rights violation where
there is sufficient evidence.

Furthermore, there is no organizational policy of
the kind required for proving crimes against humanity
under the Rome Statute. Such a policy would be hard
to reconcile with the repatriation agreement signed
between Myanmar and Bangladesh in November 2017,

The Government of Myanmar is now undertaking in
earnest the preparation of the necessary conditions that
would be conducive to the safe, voluntary and dignified
repatriation of the people who fled to Bangladesh.
In accordance with the bilateral agreements and

18-3491923/31

A/73/PV.28

arrangements concluded with Bangladesh, Myanmar
has been ready to receive the first batch of verified
returnees since January.
During the high-level week of the current session
of the General Assembly, an informal meeting was
held between China, Myanmar and Bangladesh with
the presence of the Secretary-General, Mr. Guterres. It
reached a three-point consensus on resolving the issue of
displaced persons in a friendly and expeditious manner.
As a result, a third meeting of the Joint Working Group
will be held on 29 and 30 October in Dhaka to work
out detailed arrangements for the first repatriation as
soon as possible. I can assure the Assembly that the
first group of verified displaced persons will be able to
return to Rakhine state very soon.
The Court’s overextended application of
jurisdiction challenges the fundamental principle of
legal certainty and is contrary to the accepted principles
of public international law. It has created a dangerous
precedent and erodes the moral authority of the Court.
Nowhere in the Rome Statue of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) does it say that the Court has
jurisdiction over States that have not accepted that
jurisdiction. Furthermore, the 1969 Vienna Convention
on the Law of Treaties between States and International
Organizations or between International Organizations
states that no treaty can be imposed on a country that has
not ratified it. What the Prosecutor is attempting to do
is to override the principles of national sovereignty and
non-interference in the internal affairs of other States,
contrary to the principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations and recalled in the preamble to
the Rome Statute. I would also like to state that we
strongly deplore and reject attempts made by some
States Members of the United Nations to refer this case
involving Myanmar to the ICC. We will never recognize
discriminatory, selective, biased, politically motivated
and illegitimate ICC jurisdiction over Myanmar.

29/10/2018

to help end impunity for perpetrators of the most serious
crimes of concern to the international community.
After the successful ceremony this past summer
celebrating the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of the Rome Statute, now is the time for the United
Nations and the International Criminal Court to work
more closely together and to reassert the relevance and
importance of international criminal justice in securing
the rule of law and international peace and security.
We cannot overemphasize the significant role that
the ICC has played in sustaining the three pillars of
the United Nations — peace and security, development
and human rights. Securing criminal justice for the
perpetrators of heinous crimes that shock the conscience
of humanity is a cornerstone of the rule of law that
provides a solid basis for the successful implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It is
for that reason that we support the ongoing cooperation
between the ICC and the United Nations at various
levels, as described in the report.
While the progress that the ICC has made on its
path to ending impunity is quite remarkable, it has also
been facing some harsh realities on various fronts. We
hope that with the help of its stakeholders, the Court
will rise above those considerable challenges to firmly
establish itself as a robust and reliable institution for
international criminal justice.

Finally, my delegation dissociates itself from the
draft resolution (A/73/L.8) to be adopted this afternoon.

First, as an international court, the ICC cannot
sustain itself without active cooperation at each and
every step from multiple stakeholders, especially
States parties and the United Nations. In order to
enhance cooperation with States, it is crucial that the
Court also reach out to interested regions, States and
relevant organizations. Since the cooperation between
the ICC and the United Nations, especially the Security
Council, is vital to the proper functioning of the system,
it was notable that on 6 July the Security Council
held an Arria Formula meeting on relations between
the Council and the ICC in which both the President
of the Assembly of States Parties and the Prosecutor
participated as briefers.

Mr. Hwang Woo Jin (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere appreciation
to the President of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), Judge Eboe-Osuji, for his comprehensive
presentation of the report (see A/73/334). My delegation
also commends the joint efforts by the presidency, the
Chambers, the Office of the Prosecutor and the Registry

Secondly, the success of our fight against impunity
hinges not only on adequate cooperation but also on the
universal application of the Rome Statute. The number of
States parties to the Statute has more than doubled since
its entry into force in 2002, a remarkable achievement
indeed. Nevertheless, the number still falls short of two
thirds of the States Members of the United Nations.

24/31

18-34919

29/10/2018

Wider participation by States in the Statute would
undoubtedly lead to stronger support for the Court. And
the States newly joining the ICC would be investing not
only in the protection of their territories and peoples
but also in the protection of future generations and the
creation of a more just world. We should be aware that
the ratification of the Rome Statute by a State does not
equate to a concession of that State’s sovereignty, given
the principle of complementarity.
The Republic of Korea has been a staunch supporter
of the ICC since its inception. We will continue to
be an important part of the concerted efforts of the
international community to establish the ICC as a
responsible, universal and efficient institution working
to end impunity for perpetrators of the most serious
crimes against humanity. In that regard, we have full
confidence in the leadership of the incumbent President
of the Assembly of States Parties, Mr. O-Gon Kwon,
and will continue to provide adequate assistance to him
as he discharges his important duty.
Let me conclude by reiterating the Republic of
Korea’s strong support for the ICC.
Mr. Ly (Senegal) (spoke in French): Like other
speakers before me, on behalf of my country I would
like to congratulate the President of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Judge Chile Eboe-Osuji, for
his election to lead that important institution. I would
also like to thank him for his presentation of the
report on the Court’s activities (see A/73/334), which
demonstrates its importance in our universal fight
against impunity and for respect for the rule of law. His
presentation is taking place in the context of a general
erosion of the international legal order and multifaceted
criticism of the ICC. But it is also taking place at a time
of accountability, in which demands for justice and
reparations for the wrongs suffered by victims cannot
be ignored.
Senegal has always supported the path of dialogue
in promoting peaceful and mutually trusting relations
between States and the Court, because we believe
that the fight against impunity and for the rule of law
must be a universal struggle on the part of the entire
international community. In that respect, we are of
the view that dialogue and cooperation are the most
effective ways to deal with the concerns of others and
change the negative, if unjustified, perceptions of the
Court. That is why we have consistently urged all States
to engage in a consensual, unified and interdependent

A/73/PV.28

dynamic and in a spirit of wisdom and discernment,
so that the trust and enthusiasm that the peoples and
leaders of the world placed in the Court when it was
created 20 years ago can be restored.
We must listen to one another and constructively
discuss and deal with the concerns expressed by States,
all while ensuring the integrity of the Court. The
Security Council must act with care and objectivity in
exercising its right to refer matters to the Court, so as
to avoid the perception that it is using the Court as a
political tool. As for the Court, in order to avoid the
risk of tarnishing its credibility, it must continue to
apply the highest trial standards, respecting the rights
of both the defence and the prosecution and protecting
the integrity of witnesses unfailingly.
The review of the report before the General
Assembly today is a convincing barometer of the first
and only permanent international court in charge of
prosecuting mass crimes. The Court has demonstrated
remarkable resilience in the face of adversity, and it
will undoubtedly prevail. Since its creation, the Court
has received a total of 26 cases, involving 41 suspects
or defendants, and has investigated 11 cases. During
the reporting period it issued new arrest warrants for
two persons, one of whom has appeared before it. It
conducted three trials, rendered final judgments in two
cases before the Appeals Chamber and handed down
several important decisions concerning reparation for
victims. Preliminary examinations by the Office of the
Prosecutor, involving 11 cases around the world, as well
as the opening of a new investigation, support our belief
that international criminal justice is slowly but surely
and irreversibly progressing on a path to universality.
Let us acknowledge that today the ICC, despite its
shortcomings, remains the only recourse for victims
of serious crimes when the right to justice cannot be
exercised in situ. Since the Court is a complementary
mechanism of last resort, it remains crucial for us to
make every effort to strengthen the capacity of States
to investigate and prosecute crimes committed on a
large scale and to prosecute their perpetrators. When
all is said and done, since the Rome Statute establishes
only a court of last resort that targets neither States nor
regions but rather aims to protect victims, the primary
responsibility of States to investigate and try the
atrocious crimes defined in the Statute remains.
Let us also acknowledge that the Court, despite its
relative youth, is recognized today as a major institution

18-3491925/31

A/73/PV.28

in a functioning and maturing international criminal
justice system. In that respect, it deserves the support
of the international community in a world where
massive violations continue to strike innocent people
before our eyes and where in many cases such crimes
go unpunished at the State level or are even erased from
people’s memory.
The universal ratification of the Rome Statute
and the integration of those norms into the domestic
laws of States must be made a reality if we want all
victims across the globe, wherever they live, to have an
equal and fair chance to obtain justice, and if we want
to enhance the effectiveness, legitimacy and capacity
of the Court to contribute to the rule of law, justice,
peace and sustainable development. All Member States
should always remember that the prevention of conflicts
and the pursuit of peace and effective universal justice,
which is the deepest aspiration of all peoples, require
that all countries around the world work together within
the framework of the Rome Statute.
I would like to conclude by saying that justice for
those victims must remain a priority for the international
community. Our daily action should be based only on
protecting those victims so that the tree of hope planted
20 years ago in Rome continues to flourish forever
between the dunes of The Hague and the North Sea.
May it be so.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, I would like to welcome and thank
the President of the International Criminal Court,
Mr. Chile Eboe-Osuji, for his extensive, valuable,
detailed and enlightening report on the judicial
activities of the Court (see A/73/334), as well as for
highlighting the many ways in which the United Nations
and States have cooperated with the International
Criminal Court during the period under review. I also
want to congratulate him on his brilliant election to the
presidency of that body.
On the whole, we note and agree that the Court has
carried out actions of special relevance. In that regard
we welcome the consensus decision to activate the
Court’s jurisdiction over the crime of aggression, as
well as the continued cooperation and support of the
United Nations for the Court.
As we have reiterated on many occasions in this
Hall, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea supports
respect for international law and international
humanitarian law, which is why we commend the great
26/31

29/10/2018

efforts by States and the United Nations, especially the
Security Council, as well as the Court, in ensuring its
ongoing work on holding accountable all perpetrators
of war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity,
among others. We also commend the Court for its
extraordinary zeal in establishing institutions and
methods to combat pervasive impunity. However, we
believe that if the Court is to be able to comply with
its mandate, it requires strong cooperation from States
parties and other States, a cooperation that is being
eroded owing to the lack of credibility of the Court,
which results from its failure to execute its duties
effectively, honestly and transparently in several cases.
While it is true that the United Nations and the
International Criminal Court are closely linked,
their respective aims show that they are independent
organizations with different mandates. It is therefore
vital to preserve the difference between the Security
Council and the International Criminal Court.
Nevertheless, the international community expects
both organizations to perform their functions in their
respective areas of competence with objectivity,
credibility and impartiality, and to avoid politicizing the
Court. In that context, we are very concerned about the
selectivity with which the competent institutions of the
United Nations have referred lawsuits under article 16
of the Rome Statute, owing to political considerations
that apparently play a major role in such referrals. That
also raises questions about the independence of the
International Criminal Court.
In those circumstances, we encourage the
institutions of the United Nations to examine the
referral of new cases to the Court in application of
the possibility offered by article 13 of the Rome
Statute extremely carefully. We believe that one of
the important factors that should be evaluated when
considering the eventual referral of a situation to the
International Criminal Court is the existence or lack of
legal norms and judicial institutions in the country in
question, and therefore whether it will be appropriate
to file an objection with the Court at a later date,
based on whether the principle of complementarity has
been observed.
With regard to the International Criminal Court
proceedings concerning Mr. Omar Al-Bashir, President
of the Sudan, we would like to point out that Equatorial
Guinea adheres to all the declarations and resolutions
issued by the African Union regarding the manner in
which the Court has dealt with some African issues,
18-34919

29/10/2018

and especially with regard to the proceedings against
the President of the Sudan. We are of the view that
the Court does not have jurisdiction to indict a Head
of State, since, as the symbol of national sovereignty,
he enjoys full immunity. Besides that, the Court is
expected to act only in countries that are party to it,
unless a non-party State requests its cooperation in
criminal matters and deems it necessary to cooperate
with the Court.
In conclusion, we would like to urge the United
Nations and the Court to devote more of their efforts
to assisting and training national judicial institutions
in order to achieve closer and more effective
cooperation between the Court and States that request
such assistance.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): We have
heard the last speaker on this agenda item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/73/L.8.
Before giving the floor to delegations that wish to
speak in explanation of position before the adoption of
the draft resolution, I would like to remind speakers
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Palau-Hernandez (United States of America):
The United States recently announced a change in its
policy regarding the International Criminal Court (ICC).
The reasons for that change in policy have been made
public, including in the speech delivered 10 September
by our National Security Advisor, Mr. John Bolton, and
are widely available. We will therefore not repeat them
at length here.
The United States reiterates its continuing and
long-standing principled objection to any assertion of
ICC jurisdiction over nationals of States that are not
party to the Rome Statute, including the United States
and Israel, without a Security Council referral or the
consent of such a State.
We also wish to reiterate our serious and
fundamental concerns about the ICC Prosecutor’s
proposed investigation of United States personnel in
the context of the conflict in Afghanistan. The United
States remains a leader in the fight to end impunity and
supports justice and accountability for international
crimes, including war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide. The United States respects the decisions
of nations that have chosen to join the ICC, and in turn

A/73/PV.28

we expect that our decision not to join and not to place
our citizens under the Court’s jurisdiction will also be
respected. Accordingly, the United States dissociates
itself from the consensus on draft resolution A/73/L.8.
Mr. Ahmed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): The
politicization of international justice in order to attain
specific goals or serve specific narrow interests does not
consort with the efforts of the international community
to achieve justice and remain faithful to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Such politicization violates established principles of
international law and foments tension in international
relations rather than promoting their improvement
as one of the primary objectives underlying the
establishment of the United Nations.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) has clearly
demonstrated that it is merely a tool used in international
struggles and a political instrument. That is why
the Sudan reiterates its clear and steadfast position
rejecting the Court and its practices, since it represents
a platform that seeks to politicize international justice,
target African leaders and threaten peace and stability
in African countries.
My delegation reiterates the importance of
combating impunity and achieving justice through
national judicial bodies that are authorized and capable
of exercising national competence and achieving justice.
National judicial bodies are supposed to do that without
foreign intervention or guardianship. My country
possesses its own national judicial system capable of
establishing national jurisdiction and achieving justice.
The continued attempts to turn the General
Assembly into an assembly for States parties to the
ICC represent a violation of the Charter and contradict
established principles enshrined in international law.
The Sudan reiterates its full and unequivocal refusal
to deal with the Court. We are not a State party to the
Rome Statute, and we have made no commitments to it.
In that connection, the relevant provisions of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties, international law
and international customary law should be borne in
mind. The continued attempts to make the General
Assembly an assembly for States parties to the Court
will always constitute a violation of the Charter and run
counter to the principles I have mentioned.
The ICC is a separate entity that has no organic
relationship with the United Nations. There are no
commitments with regard to it incumbent on States

18-3491927/31

A/73/PV.28

29/10/2018

other than those assumed by parties to the Court.
On that basis, the draft resolution that is about to be
adopted (A/73/L.8) is of no relevance to the Sudan, and
we will attach no weight to it. We dissociate ourselves
from it and would like our position on it to be reflected
in the meeting record.

manner, as well as those who treat the concepts of
justice, accountability and the prevention of impunity
in a politicized, partial and unbalanced way. Such an
approach serves only to undermine State sovereignty
and infringe on the mandates of national legal and
judicial institutions.

The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote before the
voting.

Syria was one of the first countries to actively
contribute to the negotiations on the Rome Statute,
which established the International Criminal Court
(ICC). Syria was also one of the first countries to become
a signatory to the Statute. However, when we look back
after all these years at the nature of the work of the
ICC, we see a politicized and manipulated body that is
capable of acting only against weak countries. Even the
recent Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute on
the crime of aggression are a dead letter. Everyone here
today knows that it will be impossible to implement
the amendments, because the Court’s activities are
subjected to political arrangements and deals.

The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/73/L.8, entitled “Report of the
International Criminal Court”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
A/73/L.8: Andorra, Australia, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belgium, Botswana, Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, Croatia,
the Czech Republic, El Salvador, France, Germany,
Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malta,
Norway, Panama, Peru, Poland, Portugal, the Republic
of Korea, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and
Tobago, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Uruguay and Vanuatu.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): May I
take it that the General Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/73/L.8?
Draft resolution
(resolution 73/7).

A/73/L.8

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): Before
giving the floor for explanations of vote after the voting,
I would like to remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to stress that my
delegation dissociates itself from any consensus on
resolution 73/7, which has just been adopted. The
Syrian Arab Republic has been and remains opposed to
suspicious and unfounded attempts by the Governments
of certain Member States to expand the scope of
universal jurisdiction in a distorted and illegitimate
28/31

The representatives of certain delegations continue
to insist in this Hall on cheap political exploitation of the
situation in my country, Syria. They have shamelessly,
hypocritically and deceitfully called for the situation in
Syria to be referred to the ICC. Frankly, I find it strange
that the Permanent Representative of one such State
has issued a call from this very rostrum for referring
the situation to the ICC. Perhaps he knows, or perhaps
he does not know, that his country’s Government has
signed a bilateral memorandum with another State to
ensure impunity for its soldiers and officers so that they
cannot be prosecuted by the ICC.
There are also certain States that continue to insist
in this Hall on promoting the so-called International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011. They remain responsible for limiting the mandate
of the ICC to certain countries and cases and are now
seeking to cover up the genuine and fundamental
reasons that led various States to withdraw from the
Court and its Rome Statute. While I did not want to
delve into that issue or its details, some States have
pushed me to do just that.
On the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism, I would like to emphasize to the political
hypocrites that the majority of Member States no
longer want to hear from biased parties who attempt
18-34919

29/10/2018

to use the General Assembly to promote it. It has been
demonstrated to all that it is an illegitimate entity that
has been dead since its inception. It was merely the
consequence of the General Assembly’s adoption of
a resolution without consensus, where the Assembly
went beyond its specific mandates under Articles 10,
11, 12 and 22 of the Charter. The Mechanism has also
grossly overstepped the Security Council’s mandates as
provided for in Article 12 of the Charter.
I do not want to take up the time and effort of the
Assembly by focusing too much on the Mechanism. I
therefore invite delegations to read the letters addressed
to the Secretary-General and the President of the General
Assembly submitted by our delegation and those of a
number of Member States, which give conclusive proof
of its significant legal defects. I would like to refer
in particular to our two letters issued as documents
A/71/799 and A/72/106. I once again stress to the
Assembly that the parties that continue to promote the
so-called Mechanism cannot refute the legal arguments
that we presented against its establishment. Our legal
arguments were based on the Charter and international
law, not on a politically biased perspective.
In conclusion, I call on those who continue to
promote the ICC to bring their words into line with
their actions. They must dissociate themselves from the
harsh and unbalanced political reality that the world is
encountering. They should start by holding accountable
the Governments of States that have supported and
funded the extremist Salafi jihadi organizations that
are responsible for killing tens of thousands of innocent
Syrians. They should hold accountable Governments
of States that were implicated in the rise and spread
of the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters. Only
then will we be able to listen to them about achieving
abstract international justice not based on the law of
power, political considerations and narrow interests.
Mr. Musikhin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation is committed to the
rule of law at the international level and to combating
impunity. We are adapting our national criminal legal
system in response to current threats and challenges, as
well as making active use of the applicable mechanisms
for international cooperation on these issues, while
being guided, where applicable, by the principle of
extradite or prosecute.
The contribution of the current bodies of
international justice to the fight against impunity are

A/73/PV.28

not uniform. The International Criminal Court (ICC)
is perhaps the least effective among them. We are
disappointed that the text of resolution 73/7, on the
report of the ICC (see A/73/PV.334), has once again
been merely technically updated. First, that does not
reflect the real state of affairs in and around the Court,
and secondly, it does not take into account the positions
of States that are not party to the Rome Statute of the
ICC. There is little sense, if any, in the adoption of such
a resolution.
We have repeatedly detailed our views on the
activities of the ICC. Unfortunately, the past year
has given grounds for an even more pessimistic
assessment. Huge resources have been squandered on
three convictions throughout the ICC’s 16 years of
existence. The Court continues to interpret the norms
of international law, including on the immunity of State
officials, very loosely and often unprofessionally. That
has resulted in the well-known concerns of a number
of States in Africa and of the African Union, which we
share. It is symbolic that this year the States of that
region have initiated the introduction of an item into
the agenda of the General Assembly on a request for
an advisory opinion from the International Court of
Justice on those issues.
We are also concerned about the ICC’s desire to
unjustifiably expand its jurisdiction, attempting to draw
into its orbit States that are not party to the Statute.
That was particularly clear in the Court’s approach at
the beginning of the preliminary investigation of the
alleged Rohingya deportations.
The reputation of the ICC is deteriorating year by
year. Incidentally, in October 2017, the Office of the
Prosecutor of the Court announced the launching of a
full-fledged investigation by the Independent Oversight
Mechanism into accusations of misconduct on the part
of the Court’s staff, which is alleged to have taken
place during the investigation of the Libya case. It was
also reported that a former Prosecutor of the ICC was
embroiled in dubious schemes. However, nothing has
been heard about the results of that investigation.
In sum, the Court has many problems and we will
not list them all. Yet another State recently announced
its withdrawal from the Rome Statute. We cannot help
noting that it does not seem that the Court’s activities
have been able to genuinely help to stabilize situations,
halt violence or alleviate the plight of civilian populations
in any of the situations under its consideration. In that

18-3491929/31

A/73/PV.28

regard, the outcomes of the ICC’s years of work on
situations referred to it by the Security Council are
particularly indicative. Given the circumstances I have
outlined, our delegation cannot support this technical
update to the text and we dissociate ourselves from the
consensus on the resolution.
Ms. Ponce (Philippines): The Philippines has
dissociated itself from the consensus resolution 73/7.
The withdrawal of the Philippines from the International
Criminal Court takes effect on 17 March 2019. Our
decision to withdraw is based on our principled stand
against those who politicize human rights, while our
country’s independent and well-functioning organs
and agencies continue to exercise jurisdiction over
complaints, issues, problems and concerns arising
from the Government’s efforts to protect its people. It
is true that as in all democracies, the wheels of justice
grind slowly and not always exceedingly well, but they
do turn. We wish that we were able to, but we cannot
give assurances to well-intentioned critics that we
will bypass justice so as to give plaintiffs immediate
retribution. That would undermine the rule of law.
We affirm our commitment to fighting impunity for
atrocity crimes, despite our withdrawal from the
Rome Statute, especially given that the Philippines has
national legislation punishing atrocity crimes.
Mrs. Weiss (Israel): Israel has decided to
dissociate itself from the consensus resolution 73/7, not
because we do not support the noble goals for which
the International Criminal Court (ICC) was founded
but rather because we do. Israel was among the first
supporters of the establishment of a permanent criminal
institution, and we continue to believe in the critical
importance of combating impunity for mass atrocities.
Our position today is a way to give voice to the growing
concerns that we know are shared by many, including
both States that are parties and non-parties to the ICC,
on the increasing gap that appears to be developing,
even in the view of many of its supporters, between the
original mandate of the Court and the way in which the
mandate is being implemented in practice.
The ICC is a relatively young institution, and those
who seek to ensure its integrity and effectiveness as a
legal body have an interest in ensuring that it operates
and is seen to be operating not on the basis of what
may be politically popular, but on the straightforward,
impartial and independent application of the terms of
its own Statute. Unfortunately, too many decisions
and actions emanating from the ICC have given
30/31

29/10/2018

cause for concern in that regard. In the final analysis,
the credibility, legitimacy and standing of any legal
institution is earned, not given. It must be built
incrementally on firm jurisdictional ground, and it
is only as strong as the quality of its legal decisions,
the integrity of its processes over time and the choices
that it makes regarding the allocation of its time
and resources.
While States parties are called on to respect the
principles of independence and impartiality on which
the Court was founded, we believe that the ICC’s core
mission is harmed rather than advanced when the
international community gives it uncritical support
rather than the serious review that is warranted. We
urge States, especially those that are strong supporters
of the Court, as well as other key stakeholders, to be
sensitive to the serious concerns that are being voiced
and to become partners in an effort to better align the
functioning of the ICC with its founding principles
and objectives.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote after
the voting.
Several speakers have requested to speak in
exercise of the right of reply. I would like to remind
members that statements in the exercise of the right of
reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first statement
and five minutes for the second and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Today the delegation of
Peru, speaking on behalf of Argentina, Canada, Chile,
Colombia and Paraguay, spoke out against Venezuela
without any legal basis and with the sole purpose
of inflicting political damage. If today’s common
objective is strengthening multilateral institutions
dedicated to the administration of justice, that will not
be accomplished by turning the International Criminal
Court into a battleground for ideological, economic and
geopolitical interests in the service of a minority group
of countries. The International Criminal Court already
has enough enemies who have publicly declared their
intention to weaken its international prestige, integrity
and autonomy. The last thing we need is the work of a
new, now covert group of enemies of the Court trying
to convert it into a tool for carrying out aggression
against third countries. They are not strengthening the
Court that way but rather destroying it.
18-34919

29/10/2018

A/73/PV.28

We call on the international community to reject
all manipulations that masquerade as expressions of
concern about justice but that are actually coordinated
political aggression without a basis in reality. They are
in violation of international law and run counter to the
spirit and purpose of the International Criminal Court.

of accountability would be hard to reconcile with the
bilateral agreements between Bangladesh and Myanmar
on the question of the safe, dignified and voluntary
return of the Rohingya. We have always maintained
that accountability is a critical aspect in restoring
confidence among the Rohingya for their return.

Venezuela reiterates its support for the International
Criminal Court and its independence, integrity and
transparency with a view to ensuring that those
responsible for the most serious crimes are brought
to justice. Finally, we call on the Member States of
the United Nations to adhere strictly to the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the
rules of international law.

Bangladesh remains committed to working together
with Myanmar and any interested Member States
in facilitating the Rohingya repatriation. We expect
Myanmar to initiate the necessary national judicial
mechanisms to prosecute the gravest crimes under
international law, including those committed against
the Rohingya. However, in the face of the repeated
unwillingness of the State concerned to do so, the
international community has a responsibility to take
action against impunity. In that regard, the ICC’s role
as the court of last resort can in no way be discounted.

Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): I am exercising the right
of reply in reference to the statement made by the
representative of Myanmar.
The Pre-Trial Chamber’s ruling in the International
Criminal Court (ICC) confirms the jurisdiction of the
Court over the forced deportation from Myanmar to
Bangladesh, which is a State party to the Rome Statute.
The Myanmar delegation appears to have conflated
the issue of jurisdiction. We do not agree that the issue

The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 77?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

18-3491931/31
