United Nations

S/PV.6088

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6088th meeting
Friday, 27 February 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Takasu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Koudougou
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Jurica
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Rugunda
Sir John Sawers
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-25140 (E)

*0925140*

S/PV.6088

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Dora
Bakoyannis, Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Greece.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I extend the warmest
possible welcome to Her Excellency Ms. Dora
Bakoyannis and invite her to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in the course of its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Her Excellency Ms. Dora Bakoyannis,
Chairperson-in-Office of the OSCE and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Greece. I now have the honour to
give her the floor.
Ms. Bakoyannis: It is a pleasure and an honour
to speak before the Security Council. The Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) is the
largest and most inclusive regional arrangement under
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. When
times are as challenging as they are, close cooperation
between the Security Council and a key regional player
such as the OSCE becomes all the more indispensable.
In my statement today, I will outline the priorities of
the Greek OSCE chairmanship for 2009 and address
some of the key issues common to the agendas of both
of our organizations.
Our first priority is to strengthen the OSCE in the
field. Unfortunately, 2008 saw a serious crisis in the
Caucasus. The crisis in Georgia is a reminder that we
must do more to translate the principles of the United

2

Nations Charter and the Helsinki Final Act into durable
reality on the ground.
We have devoted great attention to ongoing
discussions on the future OSCE presence in Georgia. In
the absence of a consensus, the OSCE Mission to
Georgia has found itself since 1 January in a phase of
technical closure. Our position is clear: the OSCE
should do more in Georgia, and not less, and the Greek
chairmanship intends to play an active role to that end,
as an honest broker. The OSCE’s experience, its
diverse toolbox and its comprehensive approach to
security are unparalleled assets.
On 12 February, OSCE participating States
extended the military monitoring activities of the
Mission until 30 June. We also followed closely the
agreement on the extension, until 15 June, of the
United Nations Mission in Abkhazia. I see both
decisions as recognition of the need for the United
Nations and the OSCE on the ground. Much more is
needed.
The Greek OSCE chairmanship will continue
consultations on a more comprehensive OSCE
presence in Georgia. In the meantime, we are
committed to the Geneva framework, which is
co-chaired by the United Nations, the OSCE and the
European Union (EU). The Geneva platform
demonstrates the importance of cooperation between
these three major actors. This is the only framework
where all the parties to the conflict meet. Despite steep
challenges, we are making progress. Last week,
agreement was reached in Geneva on mechanisms for
incident management. This is a vital first step towards
confidence-building and eventual conflict-settlement.
We must now make these mechanisms work in
practice.
Humanitarian issues in the region remain a major
focus for the OSCE. To illustrate, the Organization was
asked to address the disruption in the delivery of gas to
South Ossetia. The OSCE assisted both sides in
identifying the cause for the disruption and taking
corrective measures. On 25 January, gas deliveries
resumed. The Greek chairmanship is equally dedicated
to resolving the disruption in the supply of water in the
region, and also to addressing the issue of detainees
and missing persons at the request of the parties.
While the situation in Georgia has drawn much of
our attention, it is not the only common challenge we
face. The situation in Kosovo and the restructuring of

09-25140

S/PV.6088

the international presence there is also high on the
OSCE agenda. We welcome the endorsement by the
Security Council of the Secretary-General’s report of
24 November 2008 (S/2008/692), which underscored
the importance of the OSCE’s role in building and
monitoring Kosovo’s institutions and in supporting its
minority communities. The OSCE Mission in Kosovo
will continue to implement its mandate based on
resolution 1244 (1999).
My recent visit to Pristina strengthened my
conviction that the OSCE Mission remains a stabilizing
factor in Kosovo, ensuring the continuity of the
international presence and maintaining good working
relationships with all communities. May I also
underline here the excellent cooperation that our
Mission enjoys with the rest of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, and in
particular with Special Representative Lamberto
Zannier.
The Greek OSCE chairmanship is dedicated also
to taking the OSCE further in the field of border
security and policing. In this respect, deepening the
OSCE’s engagement with Afghanistan will remain a
priority in 2009 and beyond. Afghanistan has been an
OSCE partner for cooperation since 2003. I should say
that it is a special partner that has expressed an interest
in practical cooperation to address concrete problems.
In this respect, a multi-million-euro package of
assistance and capacity-building projects was prepared,
in consultation with the Afghan authorities as well as
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and other international actors. Most of
those projects are entering the operational phase. As a
result, the OSCE will provide training, including
through our field operations in Central Asia, to Afghan
experts on issues such as border management and
security, border patrolling, counter-narcotics policing,
customs management and travel-document security.
In addition, the OSCE has been working closely
with Afghanistan’s Independent Electoral Commission,
in consultation with the United Nations Electoral
Assistance Division, UNAMA and the United Nations
Development Programme. Our Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights has been providing
targeted assistance to the Commission’s efforts in
election observation and other election-related issues,
following up on recommendations made as a result of
OSCE election support missions to Afghanistan in
2004 and 2005.

09-25140

I am convinced that the OSCE, with its expertise
in police training and border management and its long
experience in Central Asia, can make a meaningful
contribution to the security of Afghanistan and its
neighbourhood. We should stand ready to consider
further assistance to the country, as required, while
recognizing the coordinating role of the United Nations.
Other new avenues of OSCE-United Nations
cooperation have also opened up in Central Asia. For
instance, I believe that the OSCE’s long experience on
the ground can be of benefit to the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia.
The priorities of the Greek chairmanship span the
three OSCE dimensions. The OSCE will continue to
play a key role in the fight against terrorism. The thrust
of the OSCE’s anti-terrorism work aims to support the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001). The ratification of universal anti-terrorism
conventions and protocols is of special importance, as
is our work to enhance legal cooperation in criminal
matters related to terrorism, to counter the financing of
terrorism and to improve travel-document security.
Cooperation with the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime is intensive, as is our collaboration
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate. The OSCE will continue to support the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
This
year,
the
OSCE
Economic
and
Environmental Forum, which will take place in Athens,
will examine cross-dimensional aspects of the
migration phenomenon. Uncontrolled migratory
movements represent a significant challenge to OSCE
participating States. I believe that there is great
potential for cooperation with the United Nations in
that important field.
The OSCE should also play a role in helping to
address the long-term threat of climate change. We will
initiate a multilevel dialogue on this issue, aimed at
underpinning the work of the United Nations.
The start of this year highlighted the challenge of
ensuring the security of energy supplies. The 2003
OSCE strategy document for the economic and
environmental dimension can provide a starting point
to initiate a working-level dialogue that includes
energy producers, consumers and transit countries.

3

S/PV.6088

In the human dimension, the Greek chairmanship
will seek to strengthen the broad thematic area of the
rule of law. Gender equality is also a priority. Dialogue
and exchange of experience with the United Nations
system will be particularly beneficial in this area. The
Greek chairmanship will devote attention to the
situation of the Roma and Sinti and to the fight against
hate crimes. Freedom of religion and human rights
education will also be given prominence.
Greece is also determined to maintain the highest
standards for OSCE election observation activities.
This year will see important elections throughout the
OSCE region. Election observation must remain a
flagship activity of the Organization.
Finally, let me draw the Council’s attention to the
adoption by the Helsinki Ministerial Council of a
declaration on the occasion of the sixtieth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The
participating States reaffirmed their strong commitment
to the declaration and recommitted themselves to act in
conformity with its purposes and principles.
The OSCE was designed as an inclusive forum
for political and security dialogue. It should be no
surprise that the first high-level multilateral discussion
of the proposals by President Medvedev and others for
a renewed European security dialogue took place
within the OSCE, during the Helsinki Ministerial
Council. Those exchanges confirmed the OSCE as a
unique platform. Its inclusive composition and
signature concept of comprehensive security remain
unparalleled across the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian
landscapes. OSCE participating States are currently
discussing how to take this process forward. Certainly,
OSCE experience is flexible and can be drawn on in
many different ways. Greece stands ready to organize
meetings at any level to facilitate further dialogue.

Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): May I be
the first to thank Minister Bakoyannis for her full
briefing today and for taking the trouble to come to us
and for setting out the priorities of the Greek
Chairperson-in-Office throughout 2009. She is
welcome with the Council here today.
As one of a number of countries around the table
which was a founding member of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and before
that the Conference on Security and Co-operation in
Europe, we hold the work of the OSCE in very high
regard and importance, both in terms of the security
work that the OSCE does and the human dimension,
including through the work of the Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights, that the Minister has set
out for the Council.
We have also seen the OSCE play a very valuable
operational role across the Balkans. It continues to play
a very important role in Kosovo, less so these days in
Bosnia but still an important role in the Balkan region,
and we are encouraged by the growing cooperation of
the OSCE in Afghanistan, where support for elections
and other issues in which the OSCE is involved is very
welcome.
The Minister mentioned Georgia as a priority for
the OSCE at the moment. The United Kingdom
welcomes the agreement that the Chairperson-in-Office
secured to extend the presence of the 20 additional
military monitors until June. Obviously, our goal is to
find a basis for renewing the mission’s mandate that
will allow access throughout the areas of concern,
including inside South Ossetia. We welcome the
Chairperson-in-Office’s efforts to find a compromise
based on OSCE principles and we encourage all the
participating States to cooperate in that process.

Times are not easy for our States or for our
societies. The global economic crisis casts a long
shadow and will affect us in ways that are still
unpredictable. In such circumstances, it is our
responsibility to consolidate the pillars of a rules-based
international order. It is vital to strengthen further the
partnership between the OSCE and the United Nations
across the three dimensions and in all the regions
where we operate. This will be consistently on the
agenda of the OSCE Greek chairmanship in 2009.

We also believe that there is an important role for
the OSCE in what has been called the unresolved
conflicts — in Nagorny-Karabakh and MoldovaTransdniestria — and the idea of the Chairperson-inOffice to appoint a special representative for them is
helpful. If we could entice the Chairperson-in-Office to
say a few more words at the end of this discussion
about the prospects in those two regions, I think that
would be helpful. I apologize if I am not here to listen
to the answers, but my delegation will certainly be
interested in them.

The President: I thank Ms. Bakoyannis for her
very important briefing.

The Chairperson-in-Office mentioned Russian
ideas to enhance European security. We are studying

4

09-25140

S/PV.6088

those carefully. My minister made clear at the OSCE
Ministerial Meeting in December that we are open to
further discussions. The security relationship between
Russia and Europe is very important to us all. We look
to further information and analysis from our Russian
friends as to why a new treaty is needed to enhance
security. We do not exclude that, but we are studying
the idea and are willing to consider participating in a
high-level meeting once there has been fuller
discussion and preparation on that issue.
May I close just by saying that we are fortunate
in Europe to have strong multilateral institutions. The
OSCE is a crucial member of that grouping, together
with NATO, the European Union and other transEuropean institutions, and they help provide real
security on our continent. It is vital that we consider all
the elements of our security as enshrined in the
Helsinki Final Act and in subsequent OSCE
commitments. They include human rights, good
governance and the rule of law as the fundamental
elements of European security.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset to welcome the presence in the Council of
Ms. Bakoyannis, Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece. I
thank her for her thorough briefing and assure her that
France shares her vision for a strengthened OSCE.
European security has been heavily challenged
during the past year. In the summer of 2008, the war in
Georgia marked the beginning of a conflict between
two member States of the OSCE, and the gas crisis of
this winter led to a further sense of insecurity
throughout the continent. But the days of the cold war
have passed. The current reality is no longer one of two
blocs opposing each other. Europe and Russia have
changed and together we must build a safe space. For
that reason, France believes it is essential to restore
trust and to reflect together on questions of security in
Europe.
In the summer of 2008, President Medvedev
made proposals for European security. President
Sarkozy set out the position of France on several
occasions. He provided the most comprehensive
elaboration of that position in his statement at the
Evian conference on 8 October 2008, and at the
Munich conference on security on 7 February he
reiterated that France is prepared to participate in a

09-25140

discussion of those issues and will support the efforts
of the OSCE Greek chairmanship in pursuing a highlevel dialogue along those lines.
Any discussion on renewing and improving
security in Europe must be carried out in full respect
for the principles on which security in Europe is based;
the transatlantic connection, the preservation of
existing institutions; a broad concept of security,
including its political, military, human and
environmental dimensions; and respect for the Helsinki
Final Act and the Charter of Paris of 1990. The OSCE,
in the framework of its three baskets, is the appropriate
forum for carrying out such discussions, which must be
an opportunity to reaffirm our common interests as
outlined in the Helsinki Final Act and the Charter of
Paris, in particular respect for territorial integrity, the
peaceful settlement of disputes, the non-use of force
and the right to freely choose security arrangements
and alliances.
Preserving and renewing conventional arms
control instruments is an indispensable element of the
discussion. The conventional forces regime in Europe
is in fact the cornerstone of security in Europe;
restoring its viability is therefore essential. Moreover,
resolving the remaining conflicts in Europe, in
Transdniestria and Nagorny-Karabakh, and the
continuation of the process in Geneva on Georgia will
certainly facilitate the discussion. In that context, I
reiterate our conviction that the OSCE must continue
to play an important role in Georgia, including with
regard to conflicts.
France is committed to the OSCE. It is the only
organization within which all the countries of Europe
and Central Asia, as well as the United States and
Canada, can carry out a dialogue. It is a unique model
of cooperation based on the conviction that Europe’s
security goes hand in hand with the promotion of
human rights, democracy and the rule of law. The
OSCE has helped to strengthen international stability
and security, in particular by making it possible to
build a foundation of shared values.
It is within that comprehensive concept of
security and cooperation that the OSCE finds its full
value. In that regard, I welcome the essential role of
the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
Rights, particularly in the area of election monitoring.
Its autonomy is its strength and must be preserved.

5

S/PV.6088

Finally, the OSCE must work in close
coordination with other international and regional
organizations. In that connection, the presence of the
Greek chairmanship in the Security Council is a
demonstration of the vitality of the cooperation
between the OSCE and the United Nations, and we
welcome it.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): I would like to thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece for coming to
the Council to present an informative and
comprehensive briefing. I welcome her.
The priorities identified by Greece for its
chairmanship-in-office are indeed important and
pertinent. In the current security environment, in which
we are increasingly faced with various threats and
risks, the need for a multidimensional approach to
security is evident. In that respect, the comprehensive
concept of security of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) responds
effectively to that need.
As the largest regional security organization in
the Eurasian-Atlantic space, the OSCE brings much
added value to our common quest for international
peace and stability. The activities of the OSCE, as a
regional organization cooperating closely with the
United Nations system, complement those of the
United Nations. The fact that their security agendas
overlap necessitates cooperation between the two
organizations. The OSCE has been making important
contributions to the efforts of the United Nations, and
we strongly support the continuation of that close
cooperation.
That having been said, one of the pressing issues
that require close cooperation between the United
Nations and the OSCE is the situation in Georgia. We
very much hope that the parallel efforts of the two
organizations will contribute concretely to the
resolution of that important issue.
The OSCE can continue to have a unique and
exclusive role to play in the European security
dialogue. In that respect, we need to carry out our
commitments, effectively implement the existing
mechanisms and, wherever needed, overcome
deficiencies. At a time when difficult security issues
are starting to prevail in the European agenda, it is the
duty of the OSCE to make the Treaty on Conventional
Armed Forces in Europe relevant and responsive to the
current requirements.

6

We wish Minister Bakoyannis every success in
tackling the priorities that she has set. I assure her that
she can count on our assistance and cooperation in
discharging her important duties.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I, too,
would like to welcome Minister Dora Bakoyannis,
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), to the Council
today. I would like to thank her for her overview of the
priorities of the OSCE under Greece’s leadership. As a
member of the OSCE, the United States appreciates the
creative and assertive role that she has taken upon
assuming the chairmanship.
The strengthened effectiveness of the OSCE
comes from its comprehensive definition of security,
which encompasses human, economic, military and
political dimensions. In that regard, we acknowledge
the full range of OSCE activities, including the
important role played by the OSCE in promoting the
peaceful resolution of conflicts in South-Eastern
Europe and the Caucasus.
We also acknowledge the important role that the
OSCE has played in building strong democratic
institutions, which form the backbone of security in the
OSCE region. That work includes the strengthening of
the rule of law through border management projects,
the development of legislative transparency, assistance
in the reform of criminal justice systems and the
provision of election-related assistance.
The United Nations and the OSCE already enjoy
fruitful cooperation in a number of areas. The United
States welcomes opportunities to broaden United
Nations-OSCE cooperation and dialogue. The
Chairperson-in-Office has described OSCE efforts in
Central Asia, particularly with regard to border
management projects. We believe that there may be
opportunities to strengthen United Nations-OSCE
efforts in that area.
We welcome the OSCE’s work in Afghanistan.
The Government of Afghanistan has requested OSCE
technical assistance to fulfil unmet border security
needs. We hope that the OSCE will be able to
implement fully and expeditiously two critical border
security projects planned for Afghanistan.
The Chairperson has also noted OSCE work in
elections in Afghanistan, and we might consider how
the OSCE, in close consultation with the United

09-25140

S/PV.6088

Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, could play
a role in the upcoming presidential elections in that
country.
United Nations-OSCE cooperation has been very
effective when both organizations have had missions in
the field. The OSCE’s efforts in Kosovo merit special
attention. Kosovo continues to prosper since its
declaration of independence last year. The OSCE,
working with the United Nations, has played a pivotal
role in Kosovo’s development through capacitybuilding, elections assistance and support for minority
communities. We hope that the OSCE’s important work
in Kosovo will continue as Kosovo continues to
strengthen its democratic institutions and as the
European Union assumes a greater role.
In Georgia, there is a need for close coordination
and cooperation among all international organizations
in order to promote security and stability there. Despite
a diminished presence and persistent challenges in
effectively carrying out its mandate, the OSCE mission
is a component crucial to the establishment of a
durable and lasting resolution to the conflict in
Georgia. We believe that, in order to properly address
key security and humanitarian concerns on the ground,
the current OSCE presence in Georgia must, however,
be bolstered with additional military monitors
empowered to patrol and investigate incidents
throughout Georgia, including the South Ossetia region
of Georgia. We strongly commend the efforts of the
Chairperson-in-Office to find a compromise approach
that would create a framework for the OSCE to
continue its important work in Georgia.
Finally, we support the co-chairs of the Geneva
discussions — the OSCE, the United Nations and the
European Union — in calling for another round of
talks to discuss urgent security issues, including the
non-use of force, in March or April. The security
situation in Georgia remains unstable, so we must not
delay.
Again, I would like to thank Minister Bakoyannis
for all her efforts and offer her the full support of the
United States.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative of
organizing this debate. I would also like to thank
Minister Bakoyannis for briefing us on the work of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). Her presence here today is a sign of the vital

09-25140

cooperation between our two organizations, and I do
not have to tell her that we, as a seat of the
organization and a participating State, fully share the
priorities she just outlined. We can assure her of our
full support in her efforts to promote the agenda of the
OSCE.
The cooperation of the United Nations — and of
the Security Council in particular — with regional and
subregional organizations under Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter remains an important asset for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We believe that this cooperation must be mutually
reinforcing and complementary.
Over the years, the OSCE has also played an
active role by supporting the implementation of United
Nations principles with regard to various horizontal
issues — which the Chairperson mentioned — such as
counter-terrorism, small arms and light weapons, and
trafficking in human beings. We welcome her emphasis
on the rule of law and gender equality, with a particular
focus on women and security and violence against
women. Both issues are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing with human rights and democracy.
We fully support the Chairperson’s determination
to promote the peaceful resolution of protracted
conflicts in the OSCE region. Any sign of progress in
resolving them will be a strong impetus for renewing
trust and bolstering dialogue.
An example of the complementarity of the United
Nations, the OSCE and the European Union is the
recent crisis management in Georgia. We therefore
support the common efforts to find a lasting solution
that will guarantee stability and security in Georgia.
Any solution to the crisis in Georgia must serve the
aim of achieving sustainable peace and stability in the
region and — as we have repeatedly said — has to be
firmly grounded on the principles of international law,
fully respecting Georgia’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We congratulate the Chairperson on the
agreement reached on extending the mandate of the
OSCE military observer mission. At the same time,
however, we would also like to see a greater OSCE
presence in Georgia. We fully support her attempt to
resolve the question of a comprehensive OSCE
presence in the whole of Georgia which would also
allow international monitors access to the region of
South Ossetia. In parallel, we support the ongoing talks
in Geneva co-chaired by the United Nations, the OSCE

7

S/PV.6088

and the European Union. We are encouraged by the
recent agreement on the joint incident prevention and
response mechanisms and hope that this will lead to
further tangible results in the near future.
As we and others have said, the OSCE continues
to play a crucial role in Kosovo; its work there under
Ambassador Almhofer has our full support. The OSCE
Mission in Kosovo fulfils an important role in
guaranteeing a democratic and multi-ethnic future for
Kosovo, in particular in building and monitoring
Kosovo’s democratic institutions and in its support for
human rights and the preservation of minority rights.
Stability in the Balkans is a goal that the United
Nations, the European Union and the OSCE share. We
welcome the complementary and mutually reinforcing
efforts carried out with other organizations on the
ground, in particular with the European Union. We are
looking forward to continued OSCE engagement there.
We also fully support Foreign Minister
Bakoyannis’s commitment to carrying forward the
ongoing debate on the future of security in Europe. The
OSCE is the right forum for that debate. For us, it is
crucial to bear in mind the comprehensive security
approach developed over the years by the OSCE and to
focus on how we can further sharpen existing
instruments and confidence- and security-building
mechanisms. As a practical contribution to the efforts
of the Chairperson-in-Office and to further stimulate
the debate, Austria plans to invite security policy
experts from think tanks and international
organizations to a brainstorming meeting in Vienna on
8 May. We hope that this will also reinforce the
synergies among Vienna-based organizations.
Mr. Jurica (Croatia): I should like to join others
in warmly welcoming to this Chamber Her Excellency
Ms. Dora Bakoyannis, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Greece and the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for 2009.
My delegation thanks the Foreign Minister for
her informative briefing, which serves as further proof
that our collective security and defence mechanisms
need to be not only maintained but further strengthened
and invigorated if we are to successfully address the
challenges facing us.
The tools and expertise of the OSCE have been
effectively utilized by many Central and Eastern

8

European States, as well as States in the Caucasus and
Central Asia. The OSCE’s unique role, based on its
comprehensive security definition that includes
military, political and economic dimensions, is based
firmly on transatlantic cooperation and on the OSCE’s
well-known democratic credentials. Furthermore, the
OSCE’s economic and environmental dimensions is
again becoming increasingly relevant to us, due not
only to the important topic of climate change but also
to the various and visible problems of energy delivery
that were felt once more this winter in Europe. The
comprehensive approach that the OSCE takes is clearly
the logical one to pursue, as we are reminded at this
moment by the dark clouds of global recession.
As a participating State of the organization,
Croatia sees and supports the OSCE’s beneficial role in
the further democratization of its entire area, as well as
the benefit it brings to the people caught in conflict in
its area, in Kosovo and in Georgia. We echo the words
of the Foreign Minister and encourage the OSCE to
export its rich expertise to Afghanistan and to
cooperate with other international organizations,
including the United Nations and its missions.
We also see the issues of terrorism, cross-border
migration and climate change as other areas in which
United Nations-OSCE cooperation could be further
strengthened. In tackling these issues, the resources
and experience of both organizations should be pooled
in order to help ensure the greatest degree of success.
We thank Her Excellency once again for her
statement and wish Greece a successful and efficient
chairmanship.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to welcome Her
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece
and to thank her for her update on the work of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and on the priorities that organization will
pursue under the chairmanship of Greece. We wish
Greece every success in conducting the affairs of the
OSCE in the coming months.
What I have to say in no way belittles the
importance and value of the briefing just made by the
Foreign Minister of Greece. However, I would like to
put on the record that this is the second time that we
have heard a representative of the OSCE in an official
meeting in the course of four months.

09-25140

S/PV.6088

The OSCE, as we all know, is a regional
arrangement under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, as mentioned by the Minister. In that
respect, it is no different from a number of other
regional organizations. Yet in the course of this month
the Council refused to respond to requests by two other
regional organizations, the League of Arab States and
the African Union, to make their voices heard before
the Council. After prolonged discussion, and after
insistence by some members of the Council, we were
able to hear representatives of those two organizations
in informal meetings, of which no record exists.
My delegation — and I believe that my
colleagues from Burkina Faso and Uganda share this
view — would therefore like to put on record our hope
that the Council’s double standard in dealing with
regional organizations will come to an end. We also
hope that in the future the Council will be prepared to
hear all regional organizations in official meetings —
in particular those organizations that are inextricably
linked with the United Nations in the field of the
maintenance of international peace and security, such
as the African Union.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are gratified to welcome Ms. Dora
Bakoyannis, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Greece,
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE); we are grateful for
her briefing.
The Russian Federation has consistently
championed the multilateral development and stepping
up of cooperation between the United Nations and the
Security Council and regional and subregional
mechanisms. This cooperation should be based on the
sound foundation of the Charter of the United Nations,
including its Chapter VIII, with due attention paid to
the comparative advantages of this universal
Organization and of those mechanisms. What must not
be forgotten here is respect for the fact that the
Security Council bears primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. Such
interaction would bolster the collective potential of the
international community to confront crises.
As a regional mechanism, the OSCE has on the
whole established fruitful cooperation with the United
Nations in a number of key areas. Here I am referring
first and foremost to security and the settlement of
regional conflicts. Unfortunately, however, in the

09-25140

context of the August events referred to by
Ms. Bakoyannis, the OSCE clearly did not fulfil its
role or live up to its responsibility as an important
instrument for ensuring security in the Euro-Atlantic
region. It was not able either to prevent the Georgian
attack on South Ossetia or to appropriately assess the
actions of the Saakashvili regime. The information
from the OSCE military observers in the former
Georgian South Ossetia conflict zone on the
preparation and launching of the aggression by Tbilisi
on South Ossetia was not brought to the attention of all
the OSCE participating States or its collective
decision-making bodies. That only became known
much later from an interview given to Western media
by former personnel of the OSCE mission to Georgia.
Let us be candid. The lack of the aforementioned
key information from OSCE military observers had a
negative effect on the Security Council’s consideration
of the situation that emerged as a result of Georgian
aggression against South Ossetia. That is far from the
best possible example of cooperation between the two
organizations. We cherish the hope that the necessary
lessons will be learnt by our partners of this panEuropean organization.
The mandate of the OSCE mission in Georgia,
which is no longer in step with reality, expired on
31 December 2008. From 1 January, the mission
started to wind up its activities. The Russian Federation
is ready to back an extension of the OSCE’s field
activity both in Georgia and in South Ossetia, taking
into account the new political and legal realities in the
region with the establishment of two separate OSCE
missions to Georgia and South Ossetia.
On 12 February, the OSCE’s Permanent Council
decided to extend the work of the 20 OSCE observers
deployed in the areas of Georgia adjacent to South
Ossetia in line with the Medvedev-Sarkozy plan. That
decision of the Permanent Council did not mention
other OSCE decisions, or the lack thereof, with regard
to the region.
We believe that the key task of those 20 observers
is to prevent further Georgian aggression in South
Ossetia by monitoring and informing participating
States of the OSCE on the security situation in the
border areas between South Ossetia and Georgia, as
well as Georgia’s implementation of its commitments
to withdraw its troops and military equipment to their
cantonments.

9

S/PV.6088

We expect that the OSCE mechanism for
preventing and responding to incidents — relevant
agreements on which were reached during a regular
round of the Geneva negotiations on 17 and
18 February — will increase trust between South
Ossetia and Georgia and generally contribute to
strengthening stability and security in the region.
The timely conclusion of that organization’s
institutional capacity-building process would help it to
carry out its functions in the prevention and peaceful
settlement of conflicts more effectively. That would
contribute to strengthening cooperation between the
OSCE and the United Nations.
The main task of the OSCE is to ensure equal and
indivisible security for all participating States. No one
should strengthen their security at the expense of the
security of others. However, that key tenet of the
European security charter remains unfulfilled. There is
an increasing lack of trust throughout the OSCE space.
The August crisis in the southern Caucuses
demonstrated yet again the shortcomings in the
effectiveness of existing mechanisms to ensure security
in the Euro-Atlantic area. Improving the situation is the
aim of the initiative of the President Medvedev of the
Russian Federation in drawing up a comprehensive
legally binding document on European security that
would enable us to set up a common area of collective
security for all States of the Euro-Atlantic region,
which would certainly also strengthen international
security on the whole.
Currently, the Russian initiative is being actively
discussed, including within the framework of the
OSCE. We expect that there will be close cooperation
with the Greek Chairperson-in-Office in the further
discussion of our initiative. We hope that the
philosophy of work of the Greek chairmanship, as
described by Minister Bakoyannis, will help to
overcome the crisis situation within the OSCE of
recent years and to adapt it to the new global realities.
We anticipate that, by the end of the year, the Greek
chairmanship will hand over a stronger and more
effective OSCE to the incoming Chair.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I join my colleagues in
welcoming the statement made by the Foreign Minister
of Greece. I am happy that the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has been
working closely with the United Nations system and
would like to see that regional organization also

10

working more closely with organizations such as the
African Union, because regional organizations should
share experiences.
I would like to join my colleague, the
representative of Libya, in stating that the Security
Council, in particular, should not have double
standards. It is true that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Uganda and Burkina Faso made vigorous attempts to
have the delegations of the League of Arab States and
African Union meet with the Security Council to
express their views and raise issues of concern to the
Arab League and to Africa. To our surprise, there was
resistance in the Council. Definitely, the Council
should be ready to listen to different regional
organizations when there are matters that concern those
regions. Otherwise, the Council’s standing will begin
to be doubted when we easily give access to a regional
organization in Europe but when regional organizations
such as the League of Arab States and the African
Union cannot easily gain access to the Council to
express their views on issues of concern.
It does not matter whether Council members
agree or not. What is important is that there should be
free communication between different regional
organizations and the Security Council, especially on
human rights or security issues. I believe that the
Council will become stronger and more respected if
that channel of communication remains open.
Nevertheless, I welcome the Greek Foreign
Minister, and I think that this was a good opportunity
for the Council to listen to her and gain from the
experiences of the organization that she leads and learn
from its work, not only with the Council but also other
regional organizations in Africa and beyond.
The President: I will now make a statement in
my national capacity.
I would like to join my colleagues in
congratulating Foreign Minister Bakoyannis for her
very valuable briefing to the Council this morning. We
admire her tireless efforts as Chairperson in leading the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) to ensure security not only in Europe but in
the broader Eurasian region. Japan highly appreciates
the Greek chairmanship this year and welcomes the
recent agreement to extend the mandate of the OSCE
Mission to Georgia, one of the high priorities of the
OSCE’s agenda.

09-25140

S/PV.6088

Peace and security are indivisible geographically.
We need global solutions to global issues. Regional
organizations such as the OSCE can make great
contributions to the global work undertaken by the
United Nations.
Japan, as a partner country of the OSCE, shares
fundamental values of peace and stability, sustainable
development and human rights and has been actively
participating in a wide range of OSCE activities for
many years. We have exchanged knowledge and
experience with the OSCE by sending experts and
officials to field operations, participating in election
monitoring missions and providing financial support
for seminars and other activities. Through that longterm cooperation with the OSCE, Japan finds it
beneficial to tackle together a wide range of global
problems with member countries of the OSCE.
First, Japan has actively collaborated in assisting
the democratization process through OSCE election
monitoring missions. We sent a significant number of
monitors, and made financial contributions to election
support in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Albania and
Kosovo. Last year, we took part in OSCE election
monitoring missions in Armenia, Georgia and Belarus.
Secondly, Afghanistan is one of the areas to
which both Japan and OSCE attach great importance.
Japan intends to contribute to the OSCE Afghan border
security reinforcement project. Japan will extend the
utmost support to stabilization and reconstruction,
especially as the presidential election is scheduled for
this year, which is an important milestone in the Statebuilding of the country.
Thirdly,
Japan
believes
that
OSCE’s
comprehensive, cross-dimensional and integrated
approach to security could be effectively addressed by
promoting the concept of human security. Japan and
OSCE have closely cooperated on issues of human
security in the areas of refugee assistance, internally
displaced persons, ethnic reconciliation, human
trafficking and environmental degradation through
various activities, including workshops and conferences.
We are convinced that the human security
approach will provide a strong focus on the activities
of OSCE. As stated in the concept paper proposed by
the Greek chairmanship, it will create a model case of
symmetry, synergy and strategy. We believe that the
Greek chairmanship, having organized an international

09-25140

conference on human security and climate change last
year, will continue to promote such an approach.
In conclusion, in June this year it was Japan’s
turn to host the annual OSCE-Asian Partners
Conference in Tokyo. We would like to share our views
and experience, together with our fellow Asian partners
of OSCE — the Republic of Korea, Thailand,
Afghanistan and Mongolia — in order to deepen
cooperation with OSCE. I should like to reaffirm
Japan’s close collaboration with OSCE.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of France has asked for the
floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I simply
wish to say that I listened with close attention both to
the statements made by Ms. Bakoyannis and our
colleagues on the substance of the issue before us, and
to those made by our colleagues from the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and Uganda on our working procedures,
and I was deeply puzzled by them.
We all recognize and are well aware of the
importance attached to regional cooperation under
Chapter VIII of the Charter. It is a fundamental issue
and a guiding principle of the recent initiative of
France and the United Kingdom to review, with the
Council’s support, the modalities of peacekeeping
operations. It is true that, once or twice a year, we hear
a briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) on the organization’s programme and the
status of cooperation between it and the United
Nations. The invitation extended to the Chairperson is
generally the result of a unanimous decision taken in
the context of the Security Council’s working group.
Thus, if there are double standards, they are collective.
I was especially puzzled to hear that we do not
afford the same opportunity to the African Union or the
League of Arab States. It seems to me that there is very
little debate touching on crises or items on the Security
Council’s agenda that do not fall within the purview of
those organizations. In the year and a half that I have
represented my country in this Chamber, I cannot recall
a single instance in which the Council has rejected
such a request.
I reiterate that as the format is decided by
consensus, any rejection would be a collective one and

11

S/PV.6088

that those who today complain of alleged discrimination
would be accomplices to it. I recall that, in the month of
January alone, when France held the presidency and the
Council held a great many debates on the Middle East,
the peace process and the crisis in Gaza, the Council
held no meetings in this Chamber at which the Arab
League did not have an opportunity to take the floor. I
do not recall ever having rejected a request to speak.
With respect to the issue of conflicts in Africa, I believe
that our colleague the Ambassador of the African Union
has had numerous opportunities to intervene. In just a
few weeks, we will probably travel to Addis Ababa to
hold a joint meeting of the African Union Peace and
Security Council and the Security Council.

request, whether it has been made in respect of a broad
range of issues or to a specific case of such importance
to that regional organization that the Council is called
on to consider it carefully and act on it. That is all I
wished to stress, and I hope that there will be consensus
in the future among all members of the Council.

Thus, to be frank, I fail to understand why we are
being criticized, but as it has been done publicly in this
Chamber, I am compelled to point out that I would
happily study, alongside my colleagues from Libya and
Uganda, any information prepared by the Secretariat
regarding the participation in 2008 of the OSCE, the
African Union, the League of Arab States and any
other regional organization in the Security Council’s
debates. I think it would be useful indeed to speak on
the basis of statistics.

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): It seems to me that the exchange of views
that we have just heard between our French, Libyan
and Ugandan colleagues demonstrates that cooperation
between the Security Council and regional
organizations requires some fine-tuning.

I believe it important to note that the Council has
no desire to discriminate against any organization, and
certainly not the League of Arab States or the African
Union, which play essential roles. France has always
supported all initiatives, especially those of the Arab
League, with respect to the peace process. With regard
to conflicts in Africa, we are particularly attached to
our cooperation with the African Union. I believe that
we all recognize that fact.
The President: The representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): I should like to thank my friend, the
representative of France, for his second statement
emphasizing the need for cooperation between the
Council and regional organizations. However, I do not
wish to enter into a public debate on all the issues he
raised. Many of those issues made perfect sense to me,
but we differ on certain others concerning which I do
not want to enter into a public debate.
I wish merely to say that, in the future, when a
regional organization asks to brief the Security Council,
I hope that the Council will accept and respond to that

12

Not all members of the Council have been
opposed to such briefings in the past. Only some have
objected, and we hope that in the future no member
will raise such an objection.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.

With all due respect to the initiative proposed by
our French colleague, I do not believe that this is an
issue that should be left to the consideration of the
troika of France, Libya and Uganda alone. In the near
future, the Russian delegation will develop some
considerations on this issue, possibly to be shared in
the context of the Russian presidency of the Security
Council in May.
The President: I now give the floor to
Ms. Bakoyannis to respond to the comments made and
questions raised by members.
Ms. Bakoyannis: I would just like to thank all
the members of the Security Council for their
encouraging words and their support. The year 2009
will be a difficult and challenging one for the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. I
can only promise that the Chairperson-in-Office will
spare no effort to act as an honest broker and will count
on members’ goodwill and support as we make
decisions and seek agreements. As members know, we
need to work by consensus, so we will really need all
the Council’s support.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

09-25140
