III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

ward to its report thereon in accordance with the relevant General Assembly resolutions;
12. Requests the specialized agencies to provide
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
with progress reports on their work, including particular
problems in the fields within their competence relating
to the peaceful uses of outer space;
13. Requests the Secretary-General, in the light of
paragraph 73 of the report of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, to consider strengthening
the Outer Space Affairs Division of the Secretariat;
14. Notes the invitation extended by the Government of Austria to hold the twentieth session of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space at
Vienna in 1977 and accepts that invitation with appreciation;
15. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space to continue its work, as set out in the
present and previous resolutions of the General Assembly, and to report to the Assembly at its thirty-second session.
57th plenary meeting
8 November 1976
31/9.

Conclusion of a world treaty on the non•
use of force in international relations7

The General Assembly,
Recalling the principle proclaimed in the Charter of
the United Nations that States shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force,
Noting with satisfaction that the principle of the nonuse of force or the threat of force has been incorporated
into a number of bilateral and multilateral international
instruments, treaties, agreements and declarations, including resolutions adopted by the United Nations,
Noting the need for universal and effective application
of this principle in international relations and for assistance by the United Nations in this endeavour,
Having considered the item entitled "Conclusion of
a world treaty on the non-use of force in international
relations",
Taking note of the draft World Treaty on the NonUse of Force in International Relations 8 submitted by
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
1. Invites Member States to examine further the
above-mentioned draft World Treaty on the Non-Use
of Force in International Relations as well as other
proposals and statements made during the consideration
of the item entitled "Conclusion of a world treaty on
the non-use of force in international relations";
2. Requests Member States to communicate to the
Secretary-General their views and suggestions on this
subject not later than 1 June 1977;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session on the
communications received by him pursuant to paragraph 2 above;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Conclusion
7 See also sect.

I above, foot-note 11, and sect. X.B.7 below,

decision 311410.
B Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 124, document A/31/243, annex.

31

of a world treaty on the non-use of force in international
relations".
57th plenary meeting
8 November 1976
31/64.

Incendiary and other specific conventional weapons which may he the subject
of prohibitions or restrictions of use for
humanitarian reasons

The General Assembly,
Convinced that the suffering of civilian populations
and combatants could be significantly reduced if general agreement can be attained on the prohibition or
restriction for humanitarian reasons of the use of specific
conventional weapons, including any which may be
deemed to be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects,
Mindful that positive results as regards the non-use
or restriction of use for humanitarian reasons of specific
conventional weapons would serve, in addition, as encouragement in the broader field of disarmament and
might facilitate subsequent agreement on the elimination of such weapons which were completely banned
for use,
Recalling that the issue of prohibitions or restrictions
for humanitarian reasons of the use of specific conventional weapons has been the subject of serious and
substantive discussion for a number of years, notably
at the sessions of the Conference of Government Experts on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
held, under the auspices of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, at Lucerne from 24 September to
18 October 19749 and at Lugano from 28 January
to 26 February 1976, 10 and at three sessions of the
Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable
in Armed Conflicts and in the General Assembly since
1971,
Noting that the discussions and proposals regarding
the prohibition or restriction for humanitarian reasons of
the use of certain weapons have focused on napalm and
other incendiary weapons, on indiscriminate methods
of using land mines, on perfidious weapons and weapons
which rely for their effect upon fragments invisible on
X-ray, on certain types of small calibre projectile which
may be especially injurious and on certain blast and
fragmentation weapons,
Noting that the issue will come before the fourth
session of the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian
Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts, to be held at
Geneva from 17 March to 10 June 1977,
Convinced that the work of the fourth session of the
Diplomatic Conference should be inspired by a sense
of urgency and the wish to attain concrete results which
was stressed in the appeal by the Fifth Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to 19 August 1976,11
9 For the report of the first session, see Conference of Government Experts on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
(International Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva, 1975).
1 For the report of the second session, see Conference of
Government Experts on the Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons (International Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva,
1976).
11 See A/31/197, annex IV, sect. A, resolution 12.

°
