S/PV.8394

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8394th meeting

Thursday, 8 November 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Woldegerima
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Tenya
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Libya

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-36821 (E)
*1836821*

S/PV.8394

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Salamé is joining the meeting via video
tele-conference from Tripoli.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Salamé.
Mr. Salamé: Allow me to congratulate the People’s
Republic of China on its presidency of the Security
Council this month. I am grateful for this opportunity
to brief the Council on our work in Libya.
Since my previous briefing, in early September
(see S/PV.8341), the violence in Tripoli finally ended.
In the one month of fighting, over 120 lives were lost,
including those of 34 women and children. As a result
of the ceasefire agreement brokered by the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), the
parties agreed to stop the violence. On 25 September,
most of the attackers from outside the city withdrew.
Since then, we have sought to transform a challenge
into an opportunity. We have dedicated ourselves to the
consolidation of the ceasefire — on the ground and at the
political level — to minimize the prospect of a similar
crisis. The new security arrangements committee for
greater Tripoli crafted a comprehensive security plan
for the capital that has received the endorsement of
the Presidency Council. Armed group elements will
withdraw from key installations and official buildings,
while reserve forces will be deployed on the edge of the
city. A joint operations centre has been working well to
coordinate that process to move forward.
2/21

08/11/2018

The implementation has indeed started. Several
armed groups have withdrawn from positions in
ministries and indicated a readiness to hand over
the port and civilian terminal of Mitiga airport to
State control. There is a fragile but palpable sense of
improvement across the capital. The concept that we
have been working on is clear and balanced. While
armed groups from outside the city should not attempt to
invade it again, armed groups operating within the city
must stop using their position to penetrate, intimidate
or control the sovereign institutions. Looking forward,
the city should be protected by disciplined, regular
police forces. Success in the capital is crucial, not only
because it houses most of the Government institutions
and 30 per cent of the Libyan population, but also
because what works in Tripoli can be a model to be
repeated in other cities across the country.
Among the drivers of conflict are the appalling
conditions in the prisons. Hundreds of Libyans and
foreigners are illegally and inhumanely detained and
used to extract ransoms. Some prisons have become
incubators for extremist ideology and terrorist groups.
While the crisis prompted the issuance of a decree
ordering the judiciary to review the files of the
thousands of prisoners who have been languishing in
jail, only 255 of those prisoners have been released.
That process needs to be expedited and the armed
groups must return control of the detention facilities
to the authorities. Prisons that have effectively become
for-profit private enterprises operated by armed groups
under State cover should be immediately shuttered.
The Mission has established a special task force on
prison reform.
The unity of the Council was invaluable in its
support of our efforts to broker the ceasefire. The
threat and application of sanctions to those involved in
violent or criminal action appear to have had a tangible
effect in altering the behaviour of many armed actors.
Impunity must end. The phenomena of armed men
assaulting medical facilities and personnel, extorting
money from financial institutions and women waiting
in line for banking services are immoral, illegal and
criminal. That must cease immediately. That was my
message on Tuesday when I visited Al-Jalaa Hospital
for Women and Childbirth to express the solidarity of
the United Nations with staff, after health workers there
were assaulted by members of an armed gang.
The appointment of a new Minister of the Interior
signalled a decision to seriously engage on security in
18-36821

08/11/2018

The situation in Libya

S/PV. 8394

a robust and more determined manner. I am pleased to
report that the Minister’s first decree was to establish
a human rights unit within the Ministry. There is now
a window of opportunity to address the tremendous
challenges that Libyan security institutions have faced
since 2011, and UNSMIL has seized it. The forthcoming
conference on Libya, to be hosted by the Government
of Italy in Palermo, is an occasion for Member States
to offer tangible support for the training of professional
security forces. I thank the Member States that have
already offered assistance. Libyans should be helped
to turn the page on their reliance on armed groups for
their protection. In the medium term, we should also
contribute to unifying and restructuring a professional
national army and contribute to the Egyptian-led process.

One of the country’s underlying dysfunctions is the
division of its main financial institutions. To promote
reunification and financial accountability, UNSMIL
proceeded with the request made by the Presidency
Council to the Security Council on 10 July for a financial
review of the Central Bank of Libya and its parallel
branch in the east. Yesterday, I hosted the second
meeting between Central Bank Governor Al-Kabir and
Deputy Governor Al-Hebri, at which an agreement was
reached on the terms of reference and the way ahead.
Here too, the upcoming Palermo conference could
provide an opportunity to gain more practical support
for establishing a system for redistributing national
wealth to the benefit not of overnight millionaires but
of the entire population.

The violence in September reflects the underlying
fragility in the country. The Libyan conflict is in
large part a conflict over resources, and until that is
resolved, stability will remain elusive. Libya is wealthy.
Oil production reaches up to 1.3 million barrels of oil
per day. This country of 6.5 million people has seen
revenues of over $13 billion in the first half of the year
alone. However, those figures obfuscate the truth.
Libyans have been increasingly impoverished, while
criminals employ violence and patronage networks
to steal billions from the national coffers. Ironically,
the violence in Tripoli offered a unique opportunity
to introduce long-awaited and much-needed economic
reforms. On 12 September, a range of economic
measures were launched in order to improve the
living conditions of the Libyan people and reduce
opportunities for militias in the shadow economy.

Security and the economy are two of the three
pillars required for stability. The third is the political
pillar. The Presidency Council’s cabinet reshuffle on
7 October ushered in four new ministers. The United
Nations will support further appointments to help
improve the delivery of services and security to the
Libyan people. UNSMIL focus remains on policies,
not on politicians, and on improving institutions,
not on promoting individuals. Efforts to amend the
Presidency Council continue. UNSMIL welcomes the
continued contact between members of the House of
Representatives and the High Council of State, which
started in the meetings UNSMIL organized between
them in the fall of 2017. We shall see if a true agreement
can be reached.

The imposition of fees on foreign currency
transactions caused an almost 25 per cent drop in
the black-market exchange rate. Closing the gap
between the official and black-market rate reduces the
margin for exploitation. Prices have dropped for basic
goods — sugar, bread, school supplies and secondhand cars. Many of the long-standing concerns have
been mitigated, with the liquidity crisis receding and
the queues outside banks shrinking. Where there used
to be deficits, the public coffers now enjoy a surplus.
That was only the first step. More must be done to
further normalize the situation and prevent gains from
being rolled back. The phasing-out of fuel subsidies for
direct cash transfers will increase the real income of
poor families while preventing billions of dinars from
falling into the hands of smugglers.

The Libyan people, the United Nations and the
international community have given the House of
Representatives every opportunity to act in the best
interests of the country, but the House has failed to
uphold its responsibilities. Months after a binding
commitment to producing the legislation required to hold
a referendum on the draft constitution and presidential
and parliamentary elections, no such legislation has
emerged. It is now clear that the postponed sessions
and contradictory public statements have been intended
simply to waste time. The body calling itself Libya’s
sole legislature is largely sterile. To both Houses,
elections are a threat that must be resisted at all costs,
but to the citizens elections are a means of liberation
from the ineffective and increasingly illegitimate
authorities. According to our latest poll, which I
received this morning, 80 per cent of Libyans insist on
having elections as soon as possible.

18-368213/21

S/PV.8394

The situation in Libya

Countless Libyans are sick and tired of military
adventurism and petty political manoeuvres. The time
has come to give a wider and more representative group
of Libyans the opportunity to meet on Libyan soil, with
no external interference, in order to identify a clear
path out of the present impasse, reinforced by a clear
timetable. They want to move forward with the National
Conference, and I agree. That is the way forward. A
summer of tragic events — with terrorist attacks, the
oil crescent crisis, Derna battles and, most recently,
the Tripoli clashes — have compelled us to delay this
important, potentially historic event, which evidently
cannot be organized in times of acute polarization or
armed clashes.
Now, conditions are more propitious. The National
Conference is to be held in the first weeks of 2019.
The subsequent electoral process should commence in
the spring of the same year. The Conference will be
Libyan-led and Libyan-owned. It will build on and
develop the contributions of the thousands of Libyans
who participated in the 77 preparatory meetings held
throughout the country and abroad in the spring of
this year. The Conference will provide a platform for
and give voice to the Libyan people. With it, they can
push the Libyan Political Agreement institutions — the
House of Representatives, the High Council of State
and the Government of National Accord — to take the
necessary and long-awaited steps to move the political
process forward.
The Conference is neither intended to be a new
institution, nor is it an effort to replace existing
legislative bodies. Rather, as provided for by the Libyan
Political Agreement itself, it shall create a space for
Libyans to crystallize their vision for the transition and
no longer be ignored by their politicians. International
support for the National Conference recommendations
will be crucial to ensuring its success.
I must now address the situation in the south of
the country, which is becoming ever more precarious.
We are seeing a complete collapse in the provision
of services to the population, rising terrorism and
criminality, rampant lawlessness, threats to the oil
fields and the water infrastructure upon which the
nation relies, foreign armed groups on Libyan soil and
shortages of everything, from fuel to cash and from
medicine to food. The problems are countless and
no State institutions are there to tackle them. Long
ignored and marginalized, and now used as a theatre
for outsiders, resentment in the South is deepening.
4/21

08/11/2018

We encourage Member States to support the
Libyan authorities in addressing the foreign presence.
The threat posed by open borders has facilitated the
presence of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS), Al-Qaeda and other terrorist groups across the
south of Libya. That threat was again highlighted by
the 29 October ISIS attack on the village of Al-Fuqaha.
We will continue working with the local authorities
to provide humanitarian assistance, and urge the
Government of National Accord to step up its delivery
of services. We would of course welcome the Council’s
efforts in that regard. To that effect, this month we
will organize a specific briefing to the international
community on the situation in the south in all of
its complexity.
While the east remains more stable, political, there
are still political, humanitarian and security challenges
there, including the way people coming from Derna are
being treated. By my next briefing, we will have opened
a United Nations office in Benghazi, which will enable
us to better serve people across the east of the country.
I also welcome the Presidency Council’s decision
to establish the Women’s Support and Empowerment
Unit on 24 October, in line with the Libyan Political
Agreement. This is a landmark development for all
Libyan women. UNSMIL remains committed and
ready to provide support to the Unit, and urges the
international community do the same.
Libya is caught in a futile and destructive cycle,
fuelled by personal ambitions and the nation’s stolen
wealth. While it is endowed with great human and
material resources, Libya is fast becoming a tragedy of
lost opportunity. The risks are too high to allow that to
continue. Civilians are being killed in indiscriminate
fighting, terrorists are looking at Libya as a shelter
following their defeats elsewhere, human rights are
violated on a daily basis, and the next generation of
Libyans is being held back from fulfilling its potential.
Despite the complexity of the crisis, the solution
is straightforward. The path to stability requires that
the demands and needs of the Libyan citizens guide
the way and that politicians follow. Together, we must
support the citizens in addressing their institutions,
pressing them to listen and compelling them to deliver
on what is required of them.
Having taught international relations for a good part
of my life, I acknowledge that competition and rivalry
18-36821

08/11/2018

The situation in Libya

between Powers is normal, and somehow legitimate,
but the reflection of that on Libya is truly detrimental.
Too many use it as an excuse to maintain an unfair
and volatile status quo that impoverishes Libyans and
transforms the country into a source of alarm for its
neighbours and beyond. The unity of the international
community is therefore crucial if we want progress in
Libya’s stabilization. The real challenge is to rebuild a
united, legitimate and sustainable State — no less than
that.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Salamé for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Salamé for his briefing and by reiterating the
United Kingdom’s strong support for him and the work
of all his team on the ground.
It is clear that a military solution to Libya’s problems
will not bring the long-term peace and stability that
the country needs. All Libyans must come together
in a spirit of compromise and engage in the United
Nations-led political process. The United Kingdom
fully supports the additional clarity that Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salamé has
provided on the next steps in implementing his action
plan of September 2017. A Libyan-led, Libyan-owned
national conference will provide an opportunity to
forge greater consensus among Libyan stakeholders on
the way forward on some of the key questions relating
to Libya’s political transition. Let me highlight three
important building blocks to help make the Libyan
national conference a success.
First, as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Salamé said, participants in the national
conference should be drawn from as broad a political,
regional, tribal and ethnic spectrum as possible. It will
also be vital for women to be represented.
Secondly, Libya’s political institutions will need to
work with the national conference and take account of
its outcomes. That will signal that they have the best
interests of the Libyan people at heart and that they
are committed to finding a durable political solution to
Libya’s crisis. The Libyan people will not understand if
those institutions continue to fail to do what has been
asked of them. It is vital that Libya’s institutions deliver

S/PV. 8394

the essential public services across the country for the
good of the Libyan people.
Thirdly, it is essential that the international
community and the Security Council now support
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Salamé
and the United Nations action plan. The conference
hosted by Italy in Palermo will be an important
opportunity to demonstrate wider international and
Libyan support for the United Nations-led effort,
including the national conference. It will also offer
the chance to secure important commitments from
the Libyans in terms of economic reform and the
establishment of more sustainable and credible security
arrangements.
We also look forward to seeing Libyan delegations
at Palermo that are inclusive and representative of
the Libyan people. To that end. We congratulate
the Presidency Council on establishing women’s
empowerment units within it and the ministries of the
Government of National Accord. Those units should
now be given the authority and resources that they need
to be effective.
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Salamé touched on the challenging security situation
in Libya. We welcome the progress on security
arrangements in Tripoli since the ceasefire in September,
and we thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Salamé for his efforts in securing the ceasefire.
Such arrangements should not be limited only to the
capital. A sustainable security architecture across the
country is necessary for a secure and stable Libya.
The United Kingdom continues to recognize the
importance of tackling terrorist threats in Libya. We
again express our deep concern about the humanitarian
situation, including in Derna. We reiterate the urgent
need for humanitarian access to the civilian population.
Those who violate international humanitarian law will
be held to account.
On the economy, the recently introduced transaction
fee on foreign exchange in Libya must now pave the
way for wider work on economic reform. We all must
support the work of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya and the international financial institutions
to put in place further reforms. We also welcome the
progress made towards an audit of the Central Bank of
Libya. That should take place in parallel with work to
reunify the Central Bank of Libya and its counterpart
in the east.

18-368215/21

S/PV.8394

The situation in Libya

Lastly, we welcome the recent visit by the members
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya, which enabled them to
better understand the dynamics in the country. We look
forward to seeing how that will translate into even more
targeted and effective sanctions against the spoilers.
We call on the Libyan authorities to do more to ensure
that the sanctions are implemented effectively.
Finally, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Salamé told us that Libya was rapidly becoming
the tragedy of lost opportunity. The United Kingdom
calls on all parties in Libya and the members of the
Security Council to unite behind the United Nations
efforts in order to ensure that we seize this opportunity
for an inclusive political solution.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salamé for his
briefing today and for the excellent work that he and his
staff are doing on the ground. I also once again thank him
for facilitating last week’s important, indeed historic,
visit by the members of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
We read the reports and our cables but nothing
can really replace a field visit. Last week, I was in
Tripoli for less than two days but that was enough to
realize how the spike in violence in Tripoli at the end
of August and in September had really shattered the
capital and put the country on the brink of collapse.
The windows of the oil company were blown out by
rockets and the building remains with glaring holes as
a symbol of fragility. If it were not for the mediation
efforts of the United Nations, and of course the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the situation
could have easily spiralled out of control and we could
have seen a return to 2014.
Hopefully, that is now a signal to those who thrive
and hold on to the status quo that that is not tenable.
The ceasefire, as well as the recently announced
security agreement in Tripoli, must now be effectively
implemented. We urge all parties to end hostilities,
refrain from further destabilizing threats or actions and
protect civilians.
The crisis at the end of August should also be a
wake-up call for us all and serve as a turning point for
the political process. We all agree that only through
political solutions can there be sustainable peace in
Libya. The Libyans themselves must of course own the
political process. However, active international support
6/21

08/11/2018

and unity are needed. The facilitating role of the United
Nations is critical in that regard.
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Salamé’s determined efforts to use his good offices
and promote reconciliation and dialogue between the
east and the west, as well as the intention to expand
the presence of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya to the eastern part of the country, should be
commended. All international and regional partners
need to unite in fully backing the United Nations
efforts.
We welcome Mr. Salamé’s plans, as he outlined
to us today, to prepare for a national conference at
the beginning of next year. The upcoming conference
can provide an important opportunity to find a way
out of the current protracted transition and to promote
conditions for free and fair elections. My United
Kingdom colleague rightly pointed to the virtue of
inclusivity at the national conference.
We must therefore now urge all Libyan actors to
engage responsibly and constructively in the process
and work together in a spirit of peaceful compromise.
The House of Representatives, for its part, must honour
its commitment to ensuring a legal framework for
elections. The elections must in turn be thoroughly
prepared to ensure that the necessary conditions are in
place, and all parties should recommit to respecting the
election results.
The recent crisis also provides an opportunity to
address some of the underlying root causes. Economic
issues underpin the conflict, and there is little chance
to make progress unless serious efforts are undertaken.
Predatory economic practices and profiteering for
personal gain must be more effectively countered.
Economic reforms are also critical to ensure a fairer
and more equitable distribution of resources. Recent
initiatives are encouraging. However, more needs to
be done to enhance transparency and accountability,
fight corruption and promote the unity of the financial
institutions. I met with some key new ministers in charge
of finances and internal affairs who seem to understand
all the challenges and to be committed to starting work
to address them. They need to be supported.
To restore stability, there is an urgent need to
establish functioning and unified security institutions.
Security-sector reform and further efforts to build
professional armed forces and police should be
a priority.
18-36821

08/11/2018

The situation in Libya

Any sustainable political solution in Libya will
require the full and equal participation of women. We
stress the importance of women being engaged at all
stages and levels of the political process. For instance,
women should be adequately represented in the Libyan
delegations to the upcoming Palermo conference and
have seats at the table.
Continued reports of human rights violations and
abuses, including sexual and gender-based violence,
are of deep concern. The widespread abuses in prisons,
detention facilities and migrant centres are unacceptable
and must be stopped, as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General rightly pointed out. We welcome
the introduction of sexual and gender-based violence as
a separate listing criterion for sanctions in resolution
2441 (2018), adopted earlier.
The sanctions Committee’s visit to Libya on
1 and 2 November was the first of its kind since the
adoption of the sanctions regime in 2011. It provided
the opportunity to obtain first-hand information
from various counterparts, receive briefings on the
political transition and security situation, review
the implementation of sanctions and strengthen the
engagement and cooperation with the Panel of Experts.
I hope that the planned visit to the eastern part of the
country that had to be postponed this time can be
carried out soon.
The aim of the sanctions is to advance peace,
security and stability. In 2018, seven individuals were
added to the sanctions list for engaging in acts that meet
the sanctions designation criteria, including violations
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, attacks against oil installations and
attempts to export oil illegally. This shows the readiness
of the sanctions Committee to use this tool in pursuit of
peace and stability and to protect the broader interests
of the Libyan people.
The illegal flow of arms continues to fuel the
conflict and cause suffering to the civilian population.
In my meeting with President Serraj, he pointed to
reported violations of the arms embargo. All United
Nations Members must do more to fully implement the
sanctions, including the arms embargo, and the Council
needs to act on reported violations. We remain open
to further use of the sanctions instrument, including
against those who seek to obstruct the United Nationsfacilitated process.

S/PV. 8394

Upholding the sanctions regime is also crucial
to helping ensure that Libya’s natural resources are
protected and properly managed for the benefit of the
Libyan people. This applies also to the country’s frozen
assets. As Chair, as well as in our national capacity, we
have listened carefully to Libya’s concerns regarding
the management of frozen funds. We have actively
pursued a way forward on this issue in discussions with
other members of the sanctions Committee, Libyan
representatives in New York and now in Tripoli, and
the entities whose assets are frozen.
I am encouraged by the readiness expressed by
Libya to continue its dialogue with the World Bank to
start finding a way forward on this issue, even if only
a partial one. We stand ready to continue supporting
that process.
The people of Libya want peace; they want security;
and they want a brighter future for their children. The
main conclusion from my visit last week is that the
status quo is untenable. The recent crisis was a close
call. We are now at a time when momentum should
be seized to break the impasse and firmly put Libya
back on a credible path towards peace and unity. The
Council, the wider United Nations membership and
regional organizations have a common strategic interest
in Libya reaching a political solution.
From almost every situation on our agenda, we
know that unity in the Council and among the main
regional players and neighbouring countries is a key
element for success. We must therefore stand united
and rally behind the United Nations-facilitated process.
The high-level conference to be held in Palermo next
week will provide an opportunity in this regard.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I, too,
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, for his briefing.
I will focus on two main topics: security and
political developments, and economic developments.
First, with respect to security and political
developments, the security situation in the capital,
Tripoli, has improved significantly since our most
recent meeting on the situation in Libya, on 5 September
(see S/PV.8341). The role played by UNSMIL, led by
Mr. Salamé, had a clear impact on reducing tensions
and improving the security situation. Those efforts

18-368217/21

S/PV.8394

The situation in Libya

led to a ceasefire and a revitalization of the work of
the security institutions, particularly the security
arrangements committee.
We welcome the adoption by the Government of
National Accord of its resolution 1437, adopting the joint
security plan for greater Tripoli, which will establish
security arrangements for the protection of civilians
and private and public property and for establishing
public order by regular police and security forces
instead of armed groups. In addition, the plan will set
up mechanisms to coordinate with UNSMIL, and we
hope that all stakeholders in Tripoli will cooperate with
and respond to this plan so as to enhance the security
and safety of civilians and promote stability in Libya.
The instability in Libya requires that the
international community and the Security Council
make further efforts to find a permanent solution aimed
at preventing the spread of armed groups through
support for legitimate, unified security institutions that
are subject to the authority and supervision of the State,
with a view to promoting the transitional process and
the political process as set out in the United Nations
action plan. That will help to prevent the spread of
terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), which continues to exploit the political
and security vacuum to implement its destructive plans.
That is particularly true in the southern part of the
country, which, as we heard from Mr. Ghassan Salamé,
is witnessing an unprecedented level of insecurity,
including a total absence of services and the threat of
spreading criminality.
In the context of the United Nations plan in Libya,
we commend the role of UNSMIL, which continues to
meet with various Libyan institutions and political and
social stakeholders. Most recently it met with the two
heads of the dialogue committees related to the House
of Representatives and the High Council of State, where
they issued a joint press statement on the importance of
restructuring the executive authority and unifying State
institutions leading to end the division in the country.
We hope that the international conference to be
held in Palermo, Italy, on 12 and 13 November will
push the Libyan political process forward and help end
division and the spread of armed militias, leading to a
unified Libya that is stable and free of any threat to its
peace and security while representing all Libyans.
Secondly, concerning economic developments,
we are relieved that the production of oil in Libya
8/21

08/11/2018

has been resumed and has reached its normal level of
about 1.3 million barrels a day, therefore overcoming
any negative impact resulting from the armed clashes
in the oil crescent region last June. This accelerated
recovery is clear evidence of the will of the Libyan
people to move forward towards an economic future in
a country that enjoys security and stability and where
their aspirations can be met.
In order to achieve economic and development
stability in Libya, we commend the adoption by
the Government of National Accord of the longawaited economic reform programme, which will
play a significant role in enabling Libyan economic
institutions to provide better services to the brotherly
Libyan people. The positive effects of the programme
have helped the exchange rate of the Libyan dinar
against foreign currencies to recover and increase.
We stress the importance of accountability and of
coordinating with Libyan financial and economic
institutions to preserve the wealth of the Libyan people
and prevent waste.
We renew our support to the efforts of Mr. Salamé
to facilitate the comprehensive political process in
Libya according to the United Nations plan, and to open
an UNSMIL office in Benghazi during the upcoming
period. We urge all Libyan parties to work together
towards a peaceful settlement of the crisis by engaging
constructively and with determination in all technical,
legislative, political and security tasks necessary to
hold comprehensive, transparent and peaceful elections,
with a view to building a unified and stable Libya.
In conclusion, we welcome the visit of the
representative of Sweden last week in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, and we
look forward to a briefing on this visit in which our
delegation participated.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for his particularly enlightening
briefing on the latest developments in Libya and for his
tireless work. I also thank the Ambassador of Sweden for
his briefing on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya
and his visit there in early November.
The security situation in Libya, as described by
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, is a source of concern. Struggles
for influence among the militias continue on the ground.
18-36821

08/11/2018

The situation in Libya

After clashes in Tripoli, several attacks took place
in late October and early November against Libyan
financial institutions, two schools and a hospital. The
situation is also deteriorating in the south of the country,
with the intrusion of foreign groups on Libyan soil. A
terrorist attack claimed by Da’esh was perpetrated, as
has already been mentioned, on 28 October in Central
Libya after a first attack in early October, which is
again extremely worrying.
In this context, I would like to once again welcome,
on behalf of France, the efforts and commitment of
Special Representative Ghassan Salamé and his robust
mobilization on security developments. We remain
engaged alongside him to achieve a lasting return to
calm and the effective implementation of security
arrangements in Tripoli. Faced with this unstable
situation, the unification of the Libyan armed forces
under civil authority remains a priority. I welcome the
military dialogue sponsored by Egypt in this regard.
In this context, I wish to reiterate our concern about
continuing economic predation and various attempts
to destabilize the fragile equilibrium in Libya. As
underscored by Mr. Ghassan Salamé on 5 September
before the Council (see S/PV.8341), the predation
economy lies at the heart of the Libyan challenge, as
it encourages many actors to perpetuate the status
quo rather than support the political transition. I want
to make it very clear here that all those who threaten
the peace, security and stability of Libya are liable to
international sanctions. The renewal of the sanctions
regime early this week (see S/PV.8389) allowed us
to recall this, as did the recent designation by the
Council of Ibrahim Jadhran, who stands accused of
trafficking in persons. Other designations should also
be considered, especially in view of the violence in
Tripoli in recent months.
In this context, the pursuit of economic reforms
is also a priority, particularly in terms of the collegial
functioning of the Libyan Central Bank and the
transparent management of Libya’s resources to
the benefit of all Libyans. I encourage the Special
Representative to pursue his efforts in this regard, in
conjunction with all relevant actors and in support
of the Prime Minister’s request to the Council. The
conference to be held next week in Palermo, at
the invitation of the Italian authorities, must be an
opportunity to launch resolute action by the Libyan
people and the international community against the
predation economy.

S/PV. 8394

The humanitarian situation also continues to
deteriorate dramatically, particularly the situation of
migrants and refugees, who face daily human rights
violations. France reiterates its appeals to the Libyan
authorities to spare no effort to ensure that migrants
and refugees are treated with dignity. This is a top
priority, both in terms of human rights protection and in
the fight against organized crime. It is therefore urgent
to progress on the path towards a political settlement,
which brings me to my last point.
The Palermo conference, which the Italian
authorities have undertaken to host in the wake of
the Paris meeting on 29 May, gives the international
community the opportunity to mobilize and
demonstrate its unity in support of the efforts of the
Special Representative and Libyans themselves.
France welcomes this initiative, which should enable
us to advance on all matters — including security, the
economy and the political process — and in which our
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Yves
Le Drian, will participate. It is essential to maintain
our full support for the efforts of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and the Special
Representative to break the institutional stalemate and
advance the transition in Libya.
I thank the Special Representative for providing us
with more detail on his framework for action through
the National Conference, which we fully support.
Libyans have demonstrated their peaceful aspirations
for change by registering in their masses on electoral
lists; their voices must be heard. The alternative to
elections is the perpetuation of the predation economy
and the rule of militias. This would allow free rein for
those tempted to take the fate of Libya hostage. Only
elections with a precise, rapid and ambitious calendar
can anchor stability in Libya.
The status quo is our common enemy because it
mechanically prolongs instability. However, there is
a window of opportunity for a political dynamic. The
Libyan actors must honour the commitments they made
in Paris in May in order to break with the status quo
and encourage this dynamic. The Palermo conference
organized by Italy must be part of this framework, in the
presence of the relevant actors, and reiterate the support
of the international community for the UNSMIL action
plan. It is fundamental that we support all these efforts
and show real unity in encouraging Libyans to maintain
the course set by the Special Representative. France

18-368219/21

S/PV.8394

The situation in Libya

will continue to work in this direction with all members
of the Council.
Mr. Cohen (United States): We, too, would like to
thank Special Representative Salamé for his important
and detailed briefing, and I would like to thank
Ambassador Skoog for sharing his impressions from
his recent trip to Libya.
The stakes for achieving stability and progress in
Libya have never been higher. In recent months, heavily
armed militias have continued to fight each other, street
by street, to control property and resources, without
consideration for their fellow Libyans. Thousands of
desperate people from across the continent, wishing
for a better life, continue to die after setting sail from
Libya’s shores, despite the decline in migrant smuggling
and trafficking this year. The Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham and other violent extremist groups continue to
look for safe havens in areas beyond the Government’s
authority. Too often, the international community has
failed to speak with one voice in support of United
Nations mediation, creating excuses for recalcitrant
Libyan leaders to pull their country back towards chaos.
The Libyan people are suffering and simply want
what we all deserve: security, dignity and a chance for
prosperity. For far too many Libyans, the promise of
a new life — following the decades-long tyranny of
a brutal dictatorship — has begun to fade, as a small
number of Libyan leaders and armed groups prey upon
Libya’s wealth and pursue their narrow self-interests
at the expense of the country. It does not have to be
this way.
Amid all the setbacks, we continue to look to
the leadership of Special Representative Salamé to
break the impasse that has regrettably persisted in
Libya over the past several years. We commend his
leadership in de-escalating the violence in Tripoli
and in helping Libyans to begin putting more durable
security arrangements for the capital in place. We also
note the important steps that Prime Minister Serraj and
other Libyan leaders have taken to establish national
security forces that can finally break the stranglehold
of violence and instability caused by armed groups,
especially in Tripoli. The United States fully supports
this vital work to strengthen security arrangements.
While the ceasefire remains fragile, a political process
cannot proceed under the threat of violence.
The United States remained strongly committed to
efforts to facilitate a Libyan-led, Libyan-owned political
10/21

08/11/2018

process. We strongly support Special Representative
Salamé’s vision to lay the groundwork for an inclusive
constitutional process and credible, peaceful and wellprepared elections, building on the momentum of
the United Nations-facilitated National Conference.
Next week’s international conference on Libya in
Palermo, hosted by our Italian partners, will build on
the momentum generated by the Paris conference last
May and offer a crucial opportunity for Libyan and
international leaders to hear about the United Nations
road map for breaking out of the political paralysis
in Libya.
We stand ready to support. It is vital that key
Libyan constituencies, including Sebha and the south,
be an active part of the political process. We share
the assessment that achieving political progress will
require greater attention to the economic dimensions of
the conflict, and we call on the Government of National
Accord to redouble its efforts to move forward with
comprehensive monetary and subsidy reforms, which
Libya urgently needs to stabilize its economy.
Equally critical are the United Nations efforts to
accelerate an audit of the Central Bank of Libya, an
important step towards greater transparency in Libya’s
economic institutions. Those reforms will reinforce
some much-needed conversation among Libyan
leaders about fiscal transparency and a more equitable
distribution of the country’s oil resources. The United
States stands ready to support the Libyans in discussions
on economic challenges, at Libya’s request and in close
partnership with the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya.
The Council should use all of its collective
influence to support Libyans on their path. While we
recognize that any mediation process will inevitably
face setbacks, as we have seen time and again, we
are confident that these obstacles can be overcome
because of one critical element: the spirit of the Libyan
people. The Libyan people have suffered for far too
long. Libyans have made clear that they are fatigued by
insecurity, lack of opportunity and the many spoilers
who continue to obstruct a political transition to a
better future. We call on all parties in Libya to seize
this critical opportunity to set the course towards a
better future for their citizens. All who threaten Libya’s
peace, security and stability must be held to account.
Special Representative Salamé’s task undoubtedly
remains a daunting one, but he can count on the full
18-36821

08/11/2018

The situation in Libya

backing of the Council as we advance towards our
shared goal of a long-lasting political solution for the
benefit of all Libyans.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea thanks
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya and Head of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), for his
excellent briefing on the situation in Libya during the
recent period, as well as for his commitment to carrying
out his mandate.
We also express our gratitude to Ambassador
Olof Skoog, in his capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya, for having shared with us his
impressions and what he experienced and saw during
his recent visit to Tripoli.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea joins the
voices of both UNSMIL and the United Nations in
condemning the events that have taken place in Tripoli
in recent days, in particular the attacks of armed groups
and militias on hospitals and their medical staff, as
well as on private entities, with the aim of intimidating
and systematically instilling fear, emboldened by the
prevalence of impunity for their actions. That is one of
the issues that must be confronted in order to put an end
to such cowardly, detestable and deplorable actions.
We call for the absolute and immediate cessation of
such actions. They must not happen again in future.
We must remember that any attack on civilians or
medical facilities and their personnel is prohibited by
international humanitarian law, and that such actions
can be considered war crimes.
As it has in previous statements, the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea expresses once again its deep
concern over the sad situation faced by migrants and
refugees trapped in Libya, who are subject to deplorable
humiliation and continue to suffer arbitrary detention,
who fall prey to illegal human trafficking networks
and victim to systematic violations of human rights,
and who in some cases are sold as slaves. They endure
terrible conditions of extreme overcrowding, without
access to health care or adequate food. They are
subjected to torture and other ill treatment in detention
centres, without minimum guarantees or basic humane
conditions. For that reason, as we said on Monday,
5 November (see S/PV.8389), we welcome the updating
of the sanctions regime and the inscription of new

S/PV. 8394

individuals on the list of sanctions. These measures are
aimed at confronting that situation and sending a clear
and direct message to the perpetrators of those barbaric
violations that they may be held accountable for their
actions before courts of law.
We believe that we need to take further steps. It is
no secret to any of us that groups that smuggle migrants
and violate their rights are being financed by third
parties. In our view, such activities are shameful. We
therefore propose that an investigation be launched in
order to identify those elements or groups to ensure that
they feel the weight of the Council’s sanctions. What we
are witnessing in Libya, where some 200 armed groups
are vying for control of a natural resource, petrol,
is something that we have seen in other countries of
Africa where armed groups, financed by third parties,
sow terror and destruction while the third parties go
unpunished. We have always called for investigations
to ensure that those groups, too, feel the weight
of sanctions.
In conclusion, we welcome with optimism the
positive aspects outlined by Special Representative
Salamé in his briefing, such as the ceasefire, the
resumption of oil production, which now stands at a
rate of almost 1.3 million barrels per day, the prospect
of elections and the possible establishment of peace.
However, we recognize that much needs to be done in
Libya. We acknowledge that it is Libyans themselves
who must lead the process, allowing for the full
implementation of the United Nations action plan and
achieving reconciliation through frank, inclusive and
direct dialogue with room for all those voices in favour
of national unification and the restoration of peace
to be heard. In that context, the upcoming Palermo
conference is of vital importance.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): On
behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, I would like
to join others in expressing our sincere thanks to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Libya, Mr. Ghassan Mr. Salamé, for his informative
briefing.
Please allow me to focus on three important
aspects: first, moving the political process forward;
secondly, addressing the economy; and thirdly,
promoting accountability.
When we joined the Council at the start of this year,
we saw an opportunity for Libya to take significant
steps towards stability. We emphasized then that what

18-3682111/21

S/PV.8394

The situation in Libya

was needed above all is the political will of all Libyan
leaders to look beyond their personal interest and to put
their people first. Today, we have to conclude that it
is precisely that lack of will that has held the political
process back ever since. The House of Representatives
and the High Council of State should show their
commitment by laying the groundwork for elections to
take place.
Throughout all the discussions, the voice of half
of Libya’s population continues to be ignored. I am of
course referring to Libya’s women. The parties need to
step up their efforts. We expect women to be part of the
Libyan delegations at the Palermo conference next week.
We welcome the Special Representative’s proposals
to revitalize the political process and overcome
obstacles. He has our full support. The Council and
the international community need to unite behind the
efforts of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and stand ready to support those efforts, including
by listing spoilers in the political process. We are
encouraged by the efforts of the Special Representative
to address the security situation in Tripoli by reaching
a ceasefire.
Work on security and political reconciliation needs
to be reinforced with economic reforms and financial
transparency. That brings me to my second point,
concerning Libya’s economy. Too many people profit
from Libya’s political stalemate, which leads to a lack
of financial transparency and economic division. On
Tuesday we heard from Ms. Reitano (see S/PV.8393)
that by far the largest share of revenues from organized
crime in conflict areas ends up with corrupt leaders.
They are the main beneficiaries of instability, violence
and a lack of State capacity for enforcement. That needs
to be addressed, including in Libya. We welcome the
rapprochement between the two Central Banks and
the increased focus on economic reforms. The Council
should actively support the fight against illegal money
flows through the black-market economy. The sanctions
regime will continue to be an important tool in that
regard.
My third point concerns accountability. Following
last week’s briefing on the invaluable work of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in Libya (see
S/PV.8388), we have to step up efforts to end impunity,
strengthen the rule of law and bring to justice those
who pursue violence.
12/21

08/11/2018

With the establishment of a new listing criterion
earlier this week, the Council took a promising step
towards addressing sexual and gender-based violence
in Libya. That sends a powerful signal to perpetrators
of sexual violence that the international community
stands ready to take action against those practices
in Libya.
Existing sanctions need to be better implemented. In
that light, we welcome last week’s visit by the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya. That message of better
implementation was conveyed by the Committee
during its visit to Libya, and supported by the Council
in resolution 2441 (2018), adopted on Monday.
Sanctions alone are not enough, however. To
ensure accountability we need to follow through on
prosecutions. In that regard, we call on all parties to
cooperate and execute the warrants of arrest against
fugitives indicted by the ICC, including against
Mr. Al-Werfalli.
In conclusion, we strongly urge Libyan leaders to
step up their efforts, take on their responsibilities and
seize the opportunity offered by the Palermo conference
next week. The Council expect results, but above all
else the Libyan people expect results.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the convening of this afternoon’s meeting
and the important briefing by Special Representative
Ghassan Salamé. We would also like to pay tribute
to the personal efforts of Ambassador Olof Skoog
of Sweden and his recent trip to Libya, which we
hope will result in a greater degree of cooperation
by the Libyan authorities with the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya.
Peru notes with concern the deterioration of
security in the country and the stalemate in the dialogue
process, which prevent Libya from overcoming the
current political crisis and meeting the urgent needs
of the civilian population — in a country affected by
terrorism and with a high number of displaced persons,
where atrocious crimes continue to be committed and
which is also crippled by a serious economic crisis.
We condemn the most recent attacks in Tripoli,
which show the fragility of peace and exacerbate the
degree to which population is vulnerable to violence.
We welcome the initiative of Prime Minister Serraj
18-36821

08/11/2018

The situation in Libya

to establish the greater Tripoli security plan and the
assistance provided by the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) with a view to providing
the Government of National Accord with a professional
security force.
We reiterate our concern about the lack of
progress in the implementation of the amendments
proposed by the Libyan Political Agreement due to
the stalemate in the negotiations between the High
Council of State and the House of Representatives. On
the plus side, we note the progress in the negotiations
on a new Presidency Council mechanism that
would establish a unified structure recognized by
both parties, which shows that the status quo can be
overcome with political will and good faith, on the basis
of what was agreed at the Paris conference. To that end,
we stress the urgency for the House of Representatives,
as agreed at Paris, to adopt the electoral legislation
required to hold the parliamentary and presidential
elections scheduled for December. We hope that the
international conference on Libya to be held this
month in Palermo will lead to progress towards an
understanding among the Libyan parties under the
auspices of the United Nations.
The state of the Libyan economy and its potential
impact on stability requires urgent action to set the
country back on the path to sustainable peace. As
Mr. Salamé mentioned here in the Chamber a few
months ago (see S/PV.8341), for many in Libya every
day is a personal emergency.
Along those lines, we want to emphasize the
importance of the work that UNSMIL is carrying out
through the so-called national conference, in which
over 7,000 citizens from more than 40 cities were able
to participate, channelling their concerns about, and
hopes for, an open and inclusive dialogue process. We
eagerly await the final report of the conference.
We also stress the need for the Libyan authorities
to comply with the economic reforms agreed in the
economic dialogue. We consider it essential to reach
a compromise on the oversight and transparent and
efficient management of the hydrocarbon resources,
which are the country’s main resources. The political
process must be accompanied by a fair and equitable
distribution of wealth to promote the well-being of
citizens, while preventing the country’s wealth from
being used for financing militias and warlords.

S/PV. 8394

Finally, we express our concern at the violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
that continue to be reported in Libya. We wish to
recognize and support the work of UNSMIL to promote
accountability and combat impunity, among its other
important functions, in accordance with its mandate.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Ghassam Salamé, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
for the quality of his briefing and reiterates its support
for his efforts to promote peace and reconciliation
in Libya. My country reiterates its appreciation to
Ambassador Olof Skoog for presenting his report and
the outstanding conduct of the activities of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
Despite the hope raised by the Paris conference of
29 May, which called for parliamentary and presidential
elections to be held on 10 December, the current
situation remains worrisome, owing to the delay in
establishing the legal framework for those elections
and the fragile security environment. My delegation
welcomes the efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General that led to the ceasefire observed
since 4 September, and stresses the urgent need for
all stakeholders to do more to improve the security
situation, which is an essential condition for the holding
of inclusive and credible elections. The elections should
undoubtedly encourage the establishment of republican
institutions and strengthen the security tools essential
for reconquering the areas controlled by armed groups
and trafficking networks, as well as for exercising State
authority throughout the national territory.
My delegation notes with regret the serious threats
posed by terrorist groups. We urge the international
community to support the Government of National
Accord in putting an end to the clashes and suffering
of thousands of Libyans. To that end, Côte d’Ivoire
welcomes the adoption by the Government of National
Accord of the greater Tripoli security plan, developed
with the support of UNSMIL, which aims to establish
professional security forces. We also welcome the
actions taken by Mr. Faiez Serraj, President of the
Presidency Council, to combat insecurity.
Peace in Libya will be the result of a compromise
among all the protagonists in the current crisis and
strong national ownership of the political process to

18-3682113/21

S/PV.8394

The situation in Libya

08/11/2018

resolve the crisis, which, it must be stressed, must be
inclusive and promote the emergence of a stable Libya.
Regional actors play a significant role in that process,
which is why my delegation welcomes the initiative
of the African Union (AU) to very soon organize a
national reconciliation conference in Addis Ababa,
following the meeting of 2 November between the AU
Commissioner for Peace and Security and a high-level
delegation of the Libyan National Army. My country
sincerely hopes that the conference will lead to national
consensus among all Libyan forces, including tribes,
women and youth, whose contribution to the national
reconciliation process is crucial.

commend the work of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) in supporting Libyan
actors to underpin the ceasefire agreed in September
and fully implement the new security arrangement
in the capital, which aims to strengthen the power of
legitimate State institutions.

With regard to the humanitarian situation and
human rights issues, my country calls on all actors to
uphold international standards in that regard, while
ensuring the protection of civilians. Côte d’Ivoire
strongly condemns the attack on Al-Jalaa Hospital
on 6 November and recalls that attacks on hospital
infrastructure constitute violations of international law
and must tried before the competent courts.

We also underline the importance of addressing the
economic difficulties Libyans continue to face every
day — Special Representative Salamé explained to
us the serious situation in that regard. An economic
reform that would ensure a more equitable distribution
of resources, to the benefit of all citizens, is essential
not only to address the economic challenges but also to
pave the way for a meaningful political process. The
implementation of the economic reform package by all
Libyan authorities will be key to delivering long-term
gains to the benefit of the Libyan people. Once again,
we appreciate the comprehensive support that UNSMIL
provides to Libyan actors. It is indeed vital that the
international community continue its partnership in
support of national efforts.

In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the spirit
of compromise among Member States of the Security
Council that enabled the renewal of the mandate of
the Panel of Experts to oversee the sanctions on illicit
exports of crude oil and refined products from Libya.
We urge the Libyan authorities to continue their efforts,
despite the many challenges ahead, to achieve lasting
peace and stability in Libya.
Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ghassan
Salamé for his comprehensive briefing today. We
continue to support his tireless diplomatic endeavours
to facilitate a Libyan-led political solution to end the
protracted crisis. We also appreciate the visit made
by Ambassador Olof Skoog to Libya as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya, and we look forward to his
detailed briefing in due course.
The continued violence by armed groups and
terrorists shows how the security situation in Libya
remains highly fragile. That, together with the
widespread sense of impunity, is seriously threatening
the stability and security of the country. What Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salamé told us
today clearly attests to that. We believe that improving
the security situation should be one of the top priorities
in addressing the multifaceted Libyan crisis. We
14/21

While the continued assistance of UNSMIL, and
the whole international community in general, remains
important, it is of course the primary responsibility
of all Libyan actors to set aside their differences and
genuinely cooperate to bring stability and security to
their country. In that connection, unifying State security
institutions throughout the country is absolutely vital.

We all agree that the multifaceted crisis in Libya
cannot be resolved without a comprehensive Libyanled and Libyan-owned political process facilitated by
the United Nations. We reiterate our full support for
Special Representative Salamé, who has been making
every possible effort to implement the United Nations
action plan, taking due cognizance of the realities on
the ground.
The successful national conference process that
UNSMIL has been convening throughout the country
has demonstrated how the Libyan people are committed
to actively participate and raise their concerns and hopes
for the future of their country. We understand that the
final report of that process will be used as an important
input to hold the upcoming national conference. We hope
that will offer another opportunity for an inclusive and
transparent process that amplifies the true aspirations
of Libyans, both living in and outside the country.
During the national conference process, the Libyan
people have unequivocally expressed their support for
18-36821

08/11/2018

The situation in Libya

peaceful and inclusive elections to end the protracted
transition. In that regard, we are grateful to Special
Representative Salamé for his continuous engagement
with all Libyan actors to put the proper conditions in
place. All the required legislative, political and security
conditions should be put in place to facilitate the
holding of successful elections that would be considered
credible and acceptable to all Libyans. In that regard,
we understand that the discussions are not advancing
as expected. It is absolutely imperative that all Libyan
actors engage meaningfully and constructively with the
Special Representative Salamé so that all the required
political and legislative instruments can be in place. We
also underscore the importance of national dialogue
and reconciliation to bring about a lasting solution for
the protracted crisis.
Finally, it is important that the political process be
supported by coordinated regional and international
efforts. In that regard, we hope that the conference on
Libya to be held in Palermo will be another opportunity
to provide coherent support for the Libyan-led political
process. As many have already said, the Security
Council should be united in sending a strong message
to all Libyan actors in support of the tireless efforts of
Special Representative Salamé.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ghassan Salamé for his very informative briefing on
the recent developments in Libya. I would also like to
thank Ambassador Olof Skoog for his first observations
from his recent visit to Libya.
Poland reiterates its full support for the United
Nations action plan for Libya and encourages all
Libyans to work together in a spirit of compromise in
the inclusive political process under the leadership of
the Special Representative. In that regard, we welcome
the Presidency Council’s establishment of the Women’s
Empowerment and Support Unit and the appointment
of Chairperson Laila Lafi and her Deputy Hanan
Al-Fakhri. It is crucial to ensure the full and effective
participation of women in the democratic transition and
reconciliation effort, as well as in the security system
and national institutions. We also commend the Italian
initiative to organize an international conference on
Libya in Palermo next week. We look forward to the
outcome of the conference.
We condemn the recent attack by militias against
the Al-Jalaa Hospital for Women and Childbirth

S/PV. 8394

in Tripoli. Persistent violence against medical
facilities — including the shelling and bombing of
hospitals; attacking and intimidating of medical staff;
looting of medicines, equipment and ambulances; and
clashes inside hospitals — must stop immediately.
We remain concerned about the illegal use of force
and intimidation against private and public institutions
in Tripoli, notably against the Al-Aman Bank Al-Siyahia
branch and the Libyan Arab Foreign Investment
Company. Any interference with the livelihood of
Libyans and Libya’s national wealth is a grave matter
and must stop immediately. The perpetrators must face
criminal prosecution. Armed groups must withdraw
from State and sovereign institutions and civilian
facilities, not increase their grip.
In that regard, echoing the statement made last
week by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, (see S/PV.8388), we call
on the Libyan authorities to fully cooperate with the
International Criminal Court to help bring about justice
and accountability for crimes under the international
law in Libya.
We welcome this week’s renewal of the sanctions
regime imposed on Libya, including the new designation
criteria on planning, directing or committing acts
involving sexual and gender-based violence. We believe
that sanctions remain one of the key tools that support
stabilization and the restoration of peace in Libya.
In conclusion, I wish to express my gratitude to
Special Representative Salamé and the staff of the
United Nations in Libya for their dedication and support
for a peaceful end to the transition in Libya.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank you, Mr. President, and
the Chinese delegation for convening today’s important
meeting, and Mr. Salamé for his objective briefing.
Mr. Salamé knows that Russia very much
appreciates his efforts and his honest and professional
attitude to his work. We know how much he has done
to re-establish a United Nations presence in Libya. But
the reality there is such that we in the Security Council
seldom hear news that gives grounds for optimism.
Libya’s profound fragmentation, the predominance
of localized interests, sometimes fuelled by external
forces, and the absolute power of the armed groups are
truly depressing. The outbreaks of violence, to which
even the capital of Tripoli is not immune, are very

18-3682115/21

S/PV.8394

The situation in Libya

worrying. The power vacuum in the country’s unstable
southern regions is intensifying, and the threat of
terrorism continues and is getting worse. That is the
result of the irresponsible outside influence on Libya
that was brought to bear in 2011.
We appreciate the United Nations efforts to restore
unity in the country, draw its State institutions, including
security structures, closer together and find a way to
emerge onto a path of socioeconomic development.
We hope to see progress in the implementation of
the United Nations Action Plan, one of whose key
elements is general elections. The key to their success
must be a general understanding among Libyans of the
parameters for the elections, which require compliance
with the necessary internal Government procedures.
The existence of conditions suitable for the holding
of elections is also an essential factor. The elections
must represent a step towards unifying the country, not
fragmenting it. We hope that the national conference
that Mr. Salamé has just informed us about will help to
resolve the issue.
The economic reforms proposed by the United
Nations, with the participation of specialized
international institutions, should be designed to
protect Libyans’ interests and promote unification.
We are well aware that it would be extremely difficult
for the United Nations to bring Libya out of this
deep period of instability alone, and Mr. Salamé will
need international aid. It is clear that with his direct
assistance, inter-Libyan contacts are taking place
at various levels. Libya’s neighbours are providing
excellent help on individual tracks, and we should
especially note the efforts being made by the Arab
Republic of Egypt. International initiatives are being
proposed. Right now we are awaiting the holding of a
conference in Palermo, at Italy’s proposal, in which we
intend to take a very active part, and we welcome the
Italian Government’s ideas and initiatives. We want to
emphasize that all efforts should be coordinated under
United Nations auspices, as laid down in the relevant
Security Council documents.
We take a cautious approach to restrictive measures
and evaluate them from the point of view of their
effectiveness, as well as their influence on political
efforts and the situation of the civilian population. The
calls for expanding the sanctions toolkit in the Libyan
context have become more frequent lately. We realize
the importance of combating those who undermine the
peace process, do harm to the economy’s oil sector or
16/21

08/11/2018

commit crimes against civilians or migrants. However,
in many cases the answer is to be found in the arena
of national justice and international cooperation in this
area. The threat of Security Council sanctions should
not be used as an instrument for manipulating events
inside Libya in order to settle scores with political
opponents, or the sanctions’ results will be the exact
opposite of their officially stated purpose. The chief
danger is that in practice well-intended efforts could
make the task of unifying the country harder.
We urge Council members to carefully study
the proposals that our colleague the Permanent
Representative of Equatorial Guinea just made for
finding a formula for resolving the issue of migration.
We need to be combating not the migrants themselves
but those who created the migration issue and who are
now profiting off their criminal business, an area where
sanctions really will be essential.
We need a thorough investigation of the situation
concerning Libyan assets that have been frozen under
Security Council decisions. The questions that the
Libyan authorities have been asking about protecting
them are quite justified. Those funds will still be
needed when the country restores unity and begins to
recover after this massive crisis. Also, with regard to the
vital oil sector, we should emphasize that exploitation
of Libya’s natural resources should contribute to the
development of the country itself and to improving its
citizens’ well-being rather than serving the interests
of outside Powers. Libya’s mineral wealth belongs to
Libya and its people alone.
We took part in the important visit to Tripoli of a
delegation from the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya and led
by the Permanent Representative of Sweden as part
of our planned visit to Libya. We are in complete
agreement with Ambassador Skoog that there is no
substitute for field trips in the Security Council’s work.
Unfortunately, for whatever reasons, we were not able
to visit the country’s eastern regions and meet with the
local authorities there. We hope that the Chair of the
Committee, whose work we very much appreciate, will
rectify this as soon as possible, meet the conditions for
the mission’s terms of reference, which we all approved,
and make a report on that basis to the members of the
Committee. Let us work together to help the Ambassador
of Sweden, particularly since all the members of the
Council have just spoken in favour of these efforts and
of maintaining contacts with all the Libyan parties. We
18-36821

08/11/2018

The situation in Libya

know that Mr. Salamé fully shares that approach and is
ready to provide the necessary assistance. The Security
Council does not have the right to let its work with
Libyan parties become distorted. It would be wrong
from a political point of view and could have a negative
effect on the vigorous unification efforts currently
ongoing under United Nations auspices.
For its part, Russia, basing its efforts on the
priceless historical potential of its friendship with the
Libyan people, will continue to work with all parties,
encouraging them to unite the country, overcome their
differences and move forward to a phase of sustainable
development. We will undertake those efforts both
independently and in collaboration with our friends in
the League of Arab States and the African Union, and
among our international partners.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the report presented
by Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special Representative of the
Secretary General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), and we would
like to take this opportunity to reiterate our full support
to him in his ongoing efforts.
We want to emphasize the point he made about
the fact that violence has come to a halt in Libya, as
well as UNSMIL’s role in achieving that. However, we
are deeply concerned about the deteriorating security
situation in Libya and the surge in violence that occurred
in August. Unfortunately, as a result of armed clashes,
bombings and the detonation of explosive remnants of
war, more than 140 people lost their lives during the
first half of the year. That is on top of Da’esh’s continued
attacks, the most recent of which targeted the residents
of Al-Fuqaha on 28 October and in which four people
were killed.
We also want to express our concern about the wave
of violence on 1 November, when illegal armed groups
tried to seize control of public and private institutions
in Tripoli by force, and on 5 November, when armed
militias attacked the Al-Jalaa maternity hospital in
Tripoli, shooting a doctor and causing the hospital
to shut down for three days. Such attacks on civilian
and medical facilities, and the looting of medicines
and equipment and partial or total destruction of
medical infrastructure, are violations of international
humanitarian law, and we therefore reiterate to the
parties and stakeholders involved that they are obliged to
guarantee the safety and integrity of civilians and their

S/PV. 8394

spaces and infrastructure, and to apply the principles
of distinction and proportionality. Otherwise, these
deliberate attacks may constitute war crimes, which
would fall under the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court for investigation and prosecution.
In that regard, we call on the parties to respect and
comply with the ceasefire consolidation agreement
signed on 9 September, and to join the de-escalation
efforts being promoted by the Special Representative.
It is also important to take action to guarantee security
in southern Libya, which is seeing an increase in the
fighting as a result of the involvement of foreign armed
groups, worsening an already fragile situation. These
groups are seeking personal gain at the expense of
the security and integrity of the Libyan people and
further undermining the country’s independence and
territorial integrity.
Another situation of concern to my delegation is
the continued reports of widespread violations of the
rights of the nearly 8,000 migrants and refugees being
held in Government-operated detention centres and
others under the control of various armed groups. It is
important to note that the great majority of detainees
are being held in pretrial detention and incommunicado,
without information about the charges against them
or any access to legal defence or representation.
Their situation is critical, as their defencelessness
is compounded by detention conditions that include
degrading treatment, torture, sexual violence against
both women and men, forced labour and the denial of
medical assistance. We reiterate our call to the parties to
prevent abuses and violations of migrants and refugees’
rights and remind them that they must comply with
their obligations under international law. In that regard,
we appeal urgently to the Libyan authorities to initiate
appropriate investigations in order to prevent impunity
for those atrocities.
We want to emphasize the importance of the full
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement in
order to definitively complete and finalize the transition
period. Bearing in mind the parties’ commitment to
holding parliamentary and presidential elections at the
end of the year, it is therefore essential that they hold
the necessary consultations on the new Constitution
and develop the legislation needed to clearly and
concretely establish the elements and prerequisites for
advancing the electoral process inclusively and with the
participation of the entire population, especially women
and young people. We also support the upcoming

18-3682117/21

S/PV.8394

The situation in Libya

conference to be hosted by Italy in Palermo. We hope
that that space for dialogue will bring together all
sectors of society, especially women and young people.
We reiterate that there can be no alternative or
military solution to the conflict, and we therefore
call on all the parties to comply with the Council’s
relevant decisions, particularly resolution 2259 (2015)
and the presidential statement of 14 December 2017
(S/PRST/2017/26), and to join the ongoing efforts to
maintain a continuing dialogue aimed at achieving a
peaceful, orderly and inclusive political transition that
addresses the interests of the Libyan people and enables
them to determine their future freely and by consensus.
Clearing anti-personnel mines planted on Libyan
territory by militias and combatant groups, especially
in Benghazi, is particularly important for ensuring the
people’s safety and facilitating the return of the more
than 190,000 internally displaced persons and refugees.
In that regard, we want to highlight the work that the
United Nations Mine Action Service has been doing to
assist and collaborate with Libya’s mine action centre.
Finally, it is important to underscore and bear in
mind that the impact of the Libyan conflict on the
security situation in the region is a direct consequence
of interventionist practices and regime-change policies,
which have had collateral-damage effects in the Sahel
that have led to the emergence of chaos, terrorism and
militarization, with terrible results that continue to
proliferate to this day.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Representative Ghassan Salamé for his comprehensive
briefing on the situation in Libya. At the outset, our
delegation would like to commend him and the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya for their work and
successful mediation efforts to facilitate a ceasefire
agreement and bring an end to the violence between the
armed groups in Tripoli.
We once again reiterate our call for focusing on
strengthening Libya’s State structures, including its
armed forces and security sector. Without that, we
will continue to see a breeding ground created for the
emergence and illegal activities of terrorist, extremist
and other destructive forces in Libya. Timely action
will also prevent the recent tragic events in Tripoli
from recurring. In that context, the agreement between
the House of Representatives and the High Council of
State on a mechanism for restructuring the Presidency
Council is a welcome step towards that goal. There is
18/21

08/11/2018

hope that that newly restructured body could act as
a Government of unity for all of Libya. We reiterate
our appeal to all Libyan parties and stakeholders to
maintain a strong commitment to the common goal
of seeking a political settlement to the lasting crisis
by implementing confidence-building measures.
Kazakhstan welcomes the upcoming international
conference on Libya to be held in Palermo on 12 and
13 November, which will bring together the main
Libyan stakeholders and international actors. We firmly
believe that the only possible solution to the Libyan
crisis is political, not military, and that all differences
should be resolved through political and diplomatic
means, with a comprehensive and inclusive dialogue.
In conclusion, my delegation would also like to
commend the recent visit to Libya of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya, led by Ambassador Skoog, the first
such visit since the sanctions regime began in 2011. We
look forward to the Chair’s report in due course.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
I would first like to thank Special Representative
Salamé for his briefing and to welcome Ambassador
Skoog in the wake of his leadership of the visit to Libya
by the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
China has been closely following the developments
in Libya and is concerned about the recent clashes that
have broken out. We call on the relevant stakeholders
to resolve their differences through dialogue and
negotiations. Libya is still dealing with multiple
challenges, such as the fragile security situation,
rampant terrorist groups and serious refugee and
immigrant problems. The international community
should therefore ramp up its support and help Libya to
restore stability and effective governance as soon as
possible. I also want to highlight the vital importance
of the following specific actions.
First, there must be a firm commitment to the
overall direction of achieving a political settlement of
the situation in Libya. The international community
should therefore respect Libya’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity while resolutely
advancing a Libyan-owned and -led political process
through inclusive dialogue at the national, local and
other levels. The various Libyan actors should commit
18-36821

08/11/2018

The situation in Libya

to expanding their consensus, reducing their differences
and fostering mutual trust in the pursuit of political
solutions that are acceptable to all.
Secondly, efforts must be made to create a security
environment conducive to the success of the political
process. Countries and regional organizations with
influence should use it to get the relevant actors to
refrain from resorting to force. They should instead
be encouraged to achieve reconciliation through
confidence-building measures and establish a unified
national security agency as soon as possible. The
international community should step up its counterterrorism efforts and support the countries of the
region in playing an active role in fighting terrorism
and transnational organized crime.
Thirdly, the mediation role of the United Nations
must be strengthened. China supports Special
Representative Salamé’s leadership of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya in its efforts to
further implement the United Nations Action Plan
for supporting Libya in advancing the drafting of its
Constitution, revising the Libyan Political Agreement
and making the right preparations for the presidential
and parliamentary elections. We call on Libya’s
neighbours, as well as the African Union, the League
of Arab States, the European Union and others, to
intensify their coordination and cooperation with the
United Nations in a joint effort to help Libya implement
the Action Plan.
Fourthly, sanctions, which are a means, not an
end, must be handled properly and should always serve
the political settlement of the relevant issues. When
sanctions are imposed on Libya, efforts should be made
to prevent any negative effects on Libyan civilians
and third countries. Neither the State of Libya’s
overall interests nor the people’s normal livelihoods
and humanitarian needs should be undermined. The
Sanctions Committee should begin considering without
delay how to properly respond to Libya’s legitimate
concerns about the continuing depreciation and losses
incurred by its frozen assets. China supports any effort
conducive to stabilizing Libya and promoting a political
settlement of the Libyan issue, and we stand ready to
continue to play a constructive role in restoring security
and stability to Libya as soon as possible.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.

S/PV. 8394

Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and to wish you every success.
I also want to thank Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya, for
his briefing on the latest developments in my country.
We welcomed the visit by several members of the
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, led by the
Permanent Representative of Sweden in his capacity as
the Committee’s Chair.
Two months have passed since the Security
Council last met and heard a briefing by Mr. Salamé
(see S/PV.8341) on the operations of the United Nations
Support Mission to Libya for the previous period. While
we value and support his efforts to help the country
arrive at some sort of stability, we want to emphasize
the importance of developing the Mission’s operations
so as to expedite the achievement of the peace,
peacebuilding, and sustainable stability that we all
desire, using preventive tools that can put a stop to any
negative developments, especially on the security front.
The Libyan delegation would like to underscore the
importance of implementing well-organized security
arrangements that rely fully on professional and regular
police service and other law-enforcement services. We
must seek successful solutions capable of eliminating
the undisciplined activities of various armed groups,
which consistently claim that they are working with
the State and the Government of National Accord
but in reality function in complete contradiction to
that. They use weapons in densely populated areas
and their constant interventions obstruct the work
of Government institutions, while at the same time
they ignore instructions and refuse to adhere to the
principles of hierarchy and discipline in the work of the
State security forces.
The international community has worked to
intervene in Libya by adopting Security Council
resolutions aimed at protecting civilians and upholding
democracy. But seven years since the crisis began,
Libyans all over the country are asking questions about
the reasons that have led to the current situation, as
well as about the Council’s resolutions and whether
they are being implemented. The resolutions note and
call for the measures needed to protect civilians and
human rights and to achieve stability and peace. They
are an obligation that all Council members and all

18-3682119/21

S/PV.8394

The situation in Libya

States Members of the United Nations must abide by.
But Libyans are not feeling the results of that obligation
in real life. Our civilians live under constant threats
of danger; the State’s instability continues; terrorists
continue to thrive; and Libyan political parties continue
to manoeuvre. They do not want to arrive at a solution,
even though logic has dictated that Libyans have left
behind one historical stage and moved on to another.
That should have been a step towards a change for
the better, enabling them to achieve and fulfil all that
they aspire to in terms of a modern civil State that can
guarantee progress, prosperity and well-being.
However, that is not the reality and the behaviour of
some States has made our crisis worse. In that regard,
we want to point out the frequent violations of Security
Council resolutions on Libya described in United
Nations reports, especially with regard to obstructions
of the process of reaching a peaceful settlement
between Libyans, violations of the arms embargo and
the continuing illegal trade in oil and attempts to use
frozen Libyan assets. Unfortunately, certain States have
been involved in those abuses and have been named
in many of the reports issued by the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 1973 (2011). We have
seen that the Council has taken no measures against the
States that have carried out such acts. We believe that
they have exacerbated the situation in Libya and have
given all kinds of unscrupulous support to those whose
aim is to prolong the status quo, thereby depriving my
country of stability.
We want to underscore the provisions in Security
Council resolutions that require all Member States to
stop dealing with parallel entities that claim legitimacy,
including the so-called transitional Government, whose
continued existence, in our view, is a threat to the
country’s unity and contributes greatly to creating an
atmosphere of discord and division among Libyans. We
stress that the time has come for them to disappear and
be replaced by unified institutions that work to serve all
Libyans. In that regard, we hope that the Council will
bring greater pressure to bear on States to stop dealing
with such entities and help us unify all the various
Libyan institutions, including the Central Bank and
military, security and other institutions.
We value the genuine international efforts that
certain States, along with regional and international
organizations, have made to help Libya overcome its
current crisis, but we also want to stress the importance
of ensuring that those efforts are clear and not duplicated,
20/21

08/11/2018

while bearing in mind the following points. The first is
the need to underline the important and primary role
of the United Nations in supervising the process by
implementing the United Nations Action Plan, which
was adopted in 2017 as a road map designed to reach
solutions acceptable to all Libyan factions.
The second is the importance of pursuing intensive
and constant diplomatic efforts to reach out to all
Libyan factions. We must urge them to meet among
themselves in order to overcome their political deadlock
and arrive at agreements and understandings that must
be implemented and may not be disavowed for any
reason. All who violate or obstruct any kind of positive
progress capable of helping to complete the transitional
political process must themselves be held accountable.
Thirdly, no States should take advantage of the
situation in Libya to settle scores that foster the
country’s instability and deteriorating situation.
Fourthly, the Security Council must distinguish
between the political parties and the armed groups,
since most of the latter do not actually belong to any
political party but rather carry out illegal actions that
can only be classified as criminal and should not be
considered merely as part of the political differences.
The Libyan State needs help from new initiatives to
dismantle those groups and merge them into its security
and military bodies as professionals, away from
personal allegiances, following the orders of the State
and its relevant institutions.
The fifth is the importance of completing the
political process in a democratic way that is not based
on the concept of quotas. We must establish a clear time
frame for meeting all the constitutional requirements
for moving to the phase of organizing legislative and
presidential elections. The fact is that the current
painful situation in Libya must come to an end and
cannot continue indefinitely. It should be clear to all
that if this situation continues it will have disastrous
effects for Libya, its neighbours and the entire world.
Imagine how many lives would be saved, how many
terrorists acts foiled, how many development projects
implemented and how many mutual interests served
between my country and the countries of the rest of
the world if we all worked to expedite the peace and
stability process.
My delegation would like to draw the Council’s
attention to a dangerous issue involving the actions
of outside mercenary gangs entering southern Libya
18-36821

08/11/2018

The situation in Libya

and launching attacks on Libyan cities and violating
the State’s sovereignty, as well as committing acts of
extortion and murder, which have put national security
and civilian lives in jeopardy. The most recent examples
were the attacks on the cities of Kufra and Sabha. We
hope that neighbouring African States will subdue and
control those and secure their borders. We also hope
that the Security Council will urge those States to abide
by the relevant Security Council resolutions and find a
way to stop the illegal entry of those elements that are
opposed to the Government. That would prevent them
from being exploited by armed groups already in Libya
and used as mercenaries to carry out hostile acts, which
have contributed to significantly escalating and further
worsening the situation.
Irregular migration and its impact affect us in
every area. Although we deeply regret and condemn
what irregular migrants are subjected to by trafficking
networks and gangs, we stress that we have also fallen
victim to that abominable phenomenon, which is foreign
to our society. The scope of human trafficking in all its
apparent and non-apparent forms and manifestations
makes us wonder about the nature and extent of such
a trafficking because it involves more than simply
transporting people from one side of the Mediterranean
to the other. Although Libya may be a transit State, the
incentives for trafficking in migrants and what makes
it lucrative originate outside of the Libyan State. The
international community must trace the various steps of
such trafficking, starting with the countries of origin,
then with the transit countries and eventually with the
receiving countries, so as to determine the responsible
parties, as the responsibility for addressing illegal
migration is a collective one, which does not befall a
single country. We must seek and develop a unified and
comprehensive strategy to deal with this phenomenon,
and avoid blaming one single country.
The Government of my country understands that
Libyan assets were frozen by the relevant 2011 Security
Council resolutions in order to preserve the wealth of
the Libyan people. However, we fail to understand how

S/PV. 8394

those assets can be maintained without the involvement
of the relevant Libyan institutions. On several occasions,
and in letters to the Security Council and in meetings
with the sanctions Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya, those Libyan
institutions have warned of the massive depreciation
of those assets. Moreover, we point out that the 1970
Committee does not understand the nature of those
assets, which are the property and earnings of official
Libyan institutions. Their continued freeze, the passage
of time and international economic fluctuations have
significantly diminished the market value of those
assets, as they have not been well managed. My
delegation reaffirms the need for the Security Council
to establish a fair mechanism that would meet the goals
of the relevant Security Council resolutions while at the
same time enabling the management and investment of
Libyan assets by the relevant Libyan institutions, given
that they belong to the Libyan State and that they are
investment-related.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to we
stress the need to find a solution to the problems facing
Libya. We are convinced that the Security Council
could find a way to resolve those unjustified problems
and differences in my country if it were to speak as
one voice and in one language to deal with all internal
and external parties. It must not focus on the narrow
interests of one party, because serving the short-term
interests of any one party would result in a disaster for
everyone in the long term, especially given that the
vast majority of the Libyan people has grown tired of
the situation, which in and of itself is a fabricated and
illogical one reflecting local and international agendas
and lacks popular support. The situation calls for the
restoration of the State and its bodies so that they can
function effectively as institutions governed by the
spirit of law, order and justice.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

18-3682121/21
