S/PV.7205

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7205th meeting

Tuesday, 24 June 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin/Mr. Pankin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Omaish
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

14-43906 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1443906*

Ukraine

S/PV.7205

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/136)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Tayé-Brook
Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, and Mr. Ivan Šimonović, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Human Rights.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Šimonović,
who is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Zagreb.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Zerihoun.
Mr. Zerihoun: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on recent
developments in Ukraine.
Due in large part to the initiative taken by
President Petro Poroshenko since his inauguration
on 7 June to find a peaceful, lasting resolution to the
crisis in Ukraine and to the unrelenting efforts of the
international community, there are encouraging signs
towards a de-escalation of the conflict in Ukraine, and
political and diplomatic steps are beginning to be taken
towards the resolution of the crisis.
On 20 June, Ambassador Yuriy Sergeyev of Ukraine
provided the Secretary-General with an official copy
of President Poroshenko’s peace plan, which included
de-escalatory measures such as amnesty for those who
did not participate in serious crimes, disarmament,
the decentralization of power and early local and
parliamentary elections, and a programme for creating
jobs in the region.
Simultaneously, upon the advice of his military
commanders informing him that the border with the
2/24

24/06/2014

Russian Federation had been secured, on 20 June
President Poroshenko announced the start of a one-week
unilateral ceasefire aimed at giving armed militia a
window of opportunity to disarm. Government forces
were ordered to withdraw from their engagements,
allowing rebels a chance to lay down their weapons.
According to the plan, all rebels who surrender
peacefully and who have not committed grave crimes
would be granted amnesty. Also, with a view to engaging
with Ukraine’s eastern regions, the President travelled
on 19 June to the Donbass region, where he met with
civil society, business and community leaders. The
following day, he travelled to conflict areas in Donetsk
and Lugansk.
On 21 June, the Secretary-General spoke to
President Poroshenko over the phone, expressing his
encouragement over the peace plan and in particular
the start of a unilateral ceasefire. At the same time,
the Secretary-General voiced concern that it might be
difficult to halt the violence without the engagement
of the armed groups. The Secretary-General has since
been pleased to see that peace talks have reportedly
started with representatives of the armed groups in
eastern Ukraine, led by former Ukrainian President
Leonid Kuchma and with the participation of the
Russian ambassador to Ukraine and European officials.
The Secretary-General has stressed that such talks are
indispensable to efforts to help defuse tensions.
The Secretary-General has also taken note of
the fact that the armed militia groups have agreed to
reciprocate the ceasefire, despite previously rejecting
the President’s offer and continuing their offensive.
Overall, the ceasefire is holding. The Secretary-General
expects all sides to live up to the ceasefire and to leave
the door open for effective negotiation and mediation
towards a peaceful resolution of the crisis.
Today, according to reports, in a welcome
development that will not only help reduce tensions but
also improve the chances for a negotiated settlement,
President Putin asked the Russian Parliament to revoke
the authorization given to him to send troops to Ukraine.
President Poroshenko’s office welcomed the move as
the first practical step after President Putin expressed
support for the peace plan. While those are important
steps with the potential to de-escalate the situation,
the Secretary-General remains deeply concerned that
the realities on the ground are still grave and deeply
worrying.

14-43906

24/06/2014

Ukraine

Until those recent political developments, fierce
fighting, particularly in eastern Ukraine, had raged
on, claiming hundreds of lives and injuring many
more, including civilians. Arms, weapons and fighters
had crossed Ukraine’s border, making the situation
more complex and more violent. Various rebel groups
had sprung up, uncoordinated, and are reportedly not
fighting for any apparent political cause.
Even after President Poroshenko’s announced
ceasefire, the armed groups had publicly rejected the
offer and continued their assault on Ukrainian forces
on the night of 20-21 June, reportedly injuring six
servicemen. During that same period, other reports
indicate that Ukrainian forces also continued their
security operations, although it was unclear if they
were merely defending themselves against attacks. The
Russian Federation has reported that shells from those
exchanges had crossed its border, causing material
damage.
On 14 June, a Ukrainian Ilyushin-76 military
transport aeroplane was shot down while approaching
an airport in Luhansk. The aeroplane was targeted by
armed militia on its approach to the Luhansk airport
and crashed at 12.50 a.m. local time. All 49 people on
board, including 40 paratroopers, were killed.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe monitors abducted almost a month ago on 26 and
29 May are still being held captive. The SecretaryGeneral has reiterated his call for their immediate and
unconditional release.
The fighting has resulted in loss of lives and caused
much suffering to innocent people. It is for the sake
of those innocent people that efforts must be made to
urgently capitalize on the progress that has been made
in the political and diplomatic areas.
The Secretary-General has been stressing all along
that the international community cannot afford to fail
Ukraine and its people. He has reiterated the pressing
need for the international community to work together
to stop the hostilities and help achieve lasting peace.
President Poroshenko’s peace plan has received support
from key parties in the country, the region and beyond.
However, there is still more hard work to be done. The
international community needs to support Ukraine in
surmounting the current crisis and finding a peaceful
and lasting solution to the challenges facing the country.
The United Nations stands ready to support all efforts
to that end.

S/PV.7205

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Zerihoun for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Šimonović.
Mr. Šimonović: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to brief the Council on the situation of human rights
in Ukraine. The Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights has just issued the third monthly report
of the United Nations human rights monitoring mission
in Ukraine. The report covers the period from 7 May
to 7 June. In this briefing, I will also provide some
updates since the report’s 7 June cut-off date.
The report outlines some positive developments
that have occurred over the period through a number
of initiatives and legislative changes. They include
legislative amendments to combat discrimination
and corruption. There have also been legislative
developments relating to amnesty, the lustration of
judges, language rights, ethnic policy, torture and illtreatment, the media and the reform of law enforcement
agencies. These are important pieces of legislation that
will go a long way towards ensuring that proper legal
safeguards are put in place to address some of the root
causes of the crisis.
The Government has also taken steps towards the
implementation of the Geneva statement of 17 April
through the organization of round tables on national
unity. The outcome of these round tables contributed
to Parliament’s adoption on 20 May of a resolution
entitled “Memorandum of concord and peace”. The
memorandum foresees the adoption of a constitutional
reform package that includes the decentralization
of power, special status for the Russian language,
judicial and police reform, and an amnesty law for
anti-Government protesters in the east who would
agree to give up weapons, excluding those who have
committed serious crimes against life and physical
integrity. This is a welcome development.
The report notes that the presidential election took
place on 25 May, with relatively few human rights
violations in most of the country. However, serious
human rights violations took place in that context in
the eastern regions of Donetsk and Luhansk, where
attacks on election commissions and commissioners
occurred throughout the pre-electoral period and
during the election, disrupting the holding of elections
and depriving a large proportion of residents of their
right to vote.

14-439063/24

S/PV.7205

Ukraine

Progress in the ongoing accountability processes
for the Maidan violence, as well as for the 2 May
incidents in Odesa, remains slow. Some arrests of
Berkut forces have taken place, but there have been no
prosecutions so far in the case of the 113 persons killed
during the Maidan events between November 2013 and
February 2014.
With regard to the tragic events of 2 May in Odesa,
no fewer than six investigations have been launched.
Our report so far points towards grave inaction, and
concerns with the conduct of the police and the fire
brigade in taking the necessary measures to prevent the
incidents and ensuing casualties. The proliferation of
investigations carries a high risk of miscommunication
and consequent contamination of evidence. The lack of
transparency in the investigations is also of concern. It
will be crucial for these investigations to be carried out
thoroughly, promptly and impartially.
I shall now turn to the east of the country, where we
are seeing the most serious human rights challenges.
The report highlights the rapidly deteriorating
situation in the east. However, the situation has
deteriorated even further, since the cut-off date of
the report. Estimates based on information gathered
from official sources indicate that from 15 April
to 20 June, 423 people, including servicemen and
civilians, were killed. There has been an increase in
arms and recruitment for armed groups. Representative
of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic have
recognized the presence within their ranks of armed
groups of citizens of the Russian Federation, including
from Chechnya and other republics of the North
Caucasus.
Abductions and detentions by armed groups
remain a worrying trend. The lawlessness continues
to spread. Human rights abuses by the armed groups
are increasing and common criminality is rising. The
monitors have recorded 222 cases of abduction and
detention by armed groups since 13 April. Of these, as
of 7 June, 4 had been killed, 81 remained in detention
and 137 had been released.
In the context of the Government’s security
operations, there has been an increase in reports of
enforced disappearances and of excessive use of force
that have led to casualties among the population.
Despite security constraints, we continue to monitor
these incidents and to raise them with the Government.
While we have not received reports of the deliberate

4/24

24/06/2014

targeting of the population, we are verifying allegations
that security forces could have taken measures to prevent
civilian casualties. The Government must ensure that
its armed forces refrain from using excessive force and
that its security operations are at all times in line with
relevant international human rights standards.
The population is leaving, partly due to fear, but
also because of the worsening situation of economic and
social rights. Over the past two weeks, the population of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) has doubled in the
country, with a large movement of people — estimated
at some 15,200 — within the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions. As of 23 June, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees had profiled more than
46,100 1DPs, 11,500 from Crimea and nearly 34,600
from the east. In the absence of a formal registration
system, and given the limited access to some areas by
humanitarian partners, the number of IDPs is likely to
be higher.
The Government has been encouraged to respond
to the humanitarian needs of IDPs, including by
establishing a comprehensive registration system,
formulating legislative and regulatory acts to ease
access to important social and economic rights, and
establishing public assistance programmes. The
mobilization and coordination of civil society-initiated
relief efforts, and cooperation with international donors
and technical assistance, are also crucial.
The report indicates that in May, studies had to be
suspended in several towns in the east, affecting 21,700
pupils. Hospitals remain overcrowded and understaffed,
medical supplies are low, and the Ministry of Health
reports that up to 10 hospitals in the eastern regions are
now closed. Food prices have skyrocketed. Seasonal
vegetables are now on average four to fivetimes more
expensive than before. Meanwhile, it is becoming
increasingly difficult for businesses to operate and
people to go to work. There have been, for instance,
armed attacks on mining companies, which constitute
the main share of the region’s economy.
About half of the population of the Donetsk region
is experiencing some problems with access to water.
Since last week, in Slovyansk there has been no running
water. Around 90 per cent of the town is now cut off
from electricity. Phones do not work most of the time
and public transport does not function.
The situation of journalists is also alarming. The
Council rightly condemned the recent killing of two

14-43906

24/06/2014

Ukraine

Russian journalists by mortar fire, which followed the
killing of an Italian photojournalist and his Russian
interpreter on 24 May. While the perpetrators of those
recent attacks are yet to be identified, it will be highly
important to ensure accountability.
The report describes the situation in Crimea
as a legal limbo. Although Ukrainian legislation is
supposed to remain in force, also in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 68/262, legal institutions
in Crimea are already being required to comply with
the provisions of legislation of the Russian Federation.
That has very practical effects, as some 15,000 judicial
cases remain in legal limbo between Ukrainian and
Russian laws and legal systems.
The Crimean Tatar population has been facing
some concerning limitations on their enjoyment of the
freedoms of expression, peaceful assembly, association
and religion.
The United Nations human rights monitoring
mission in Ukraine has so far been playing an important
role in defusing tensions through its impartial reporting
on the human rights situation. It can play an equally
useful role through human rights and humanitarian
confidence-building measures. The mission has already
facilitated numerous releases of individuals detained by
the armed groups. However, such measures should be
based on reciprocity, and individuals that are arbitrarily
detained by the authorities must also be released if
there is no well-founded legal basis for them to remain
in detention. As the mission has contacts on all sides, it
will continue to support and facilitate such initiatives.
President Poroshenko’s recently announced
peace plan and unilateral ceasefire is a positive step
in the right direction. It is also encouraging to learn
of yesterday’s announcement by the armed groups
that they would observe a ceasefire until Friday. That
creates a window of opportunity for human rights and
humanitarian confidence-building measures.
Beyond the immediate crisis response, respect for
all the human rights of everyone living in Ukraine is a
prerequisite for sustainable peace. The United Nations
human rights monitoring mission stands ready to
support the Government of Ukraine, as well as civil
society and various national and social groups, to make
that happen.
With your permisison, Mr. President, I will now
disconnect from the video teleconference. Because of

S/PV.7205

an unforseen change in my flight schedule, I will need
to depart now to catch a flight to Bujumbura.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Šimonović for his briefing. Mr. Šimonović has
asked for my leave to depart. I cannot deny it, as he has
given his briefing to the Security Council. Given that
he has an urgent reason, we will indeed grant that leave.
I would be grateful if one of his assistants could listen
in to our discussion.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): Time and
again — at least 17 times since February — we have
gathered here to discuss the situation in Ukraine. And
time and again, we have had to dedicate significant
amounts of time to reviewing the efforts of Russia
to destabilize its neighbour and to refuting the bald
misinformation and outright fiction about what is
happening on the ground in Ukraine.
Russian rhetoric has been inaccurate, inflammatory
and self-justifying. On 17 June, just last week, Foreign
Minister Lavrov accused Ukrainian military authorities
of carrying out ethnic cleaning. Days earlier, a leader
in the Duma accused Ukraine of committing mass
genocide. My Government, the Security Council and
the United Nations take extremely seriously any reports
of ethnic cleaning or genocide. But baseless claims like
those have the effect of radicalizing Russian separatists,
escalating this horrible crisis and further eviscerating
the credibility of Russian reports from the region.
We should consider such claims alongside the facts
on the ground, such as the situation of the ethnic Tatar
community in Crimea following Russia’s purported
annexation, which the international community will
never recognize. The homes of Tatar leaders have been
arbitrarily searched and editors of their main newspaper
have been threatened with prosecution. Tatars who
have participated in peaceful protests have been locked
up by the dozens, and many more insulted and harassed
for speaking their language in public. And its members
have been told that they and all Crimeans must give
up their Ukrainian citizenship or else be treated like
foreigners in their own land.
Meanwhile, in areas controlled by illegal separatist
groups in south-east Ukraine, we continue to see
Russia’s extensive support for the campaign of violence
and separatist terror. The crimes committed by those

14-439065/24

S/PV.7205

Ukraine

groups are methodically documented in the United
Nations monitoring mission’s reports and follow a
pattern set by Russia’s unlawful intervention in Crimea.
They include the violent seizure and occupation of
public and Government buildings, unprovoked lethal
attacks against Ukrainian security forces and arbitrary
arrests, torture, beatings, death threats, disappearances,
killings and other serious abuses carried out by Russian
fighters and the pro-Russian separatists.
We do not need to look very far or hard to find
evidence of that campaign. We see it in the three
T-64 Russian tanks that suddenly showed up in the
hands of separatists in eastern Ukraine. We see it in
the burned out BM-21 rocket launcher, one of many
that suddenly appeared in eastern Ukraine in the past
weeks, which photographs show recently belonged to
Russia’s eighteenth motorized rifle brigade, based in
Chechnya. We see it in surface-to-air missiles that
were recently seized by Ukrainian forces after a clash
with separatists; they were still accompanied by their
official paperwork, revealing that as recently as two
months ago those missiles were held on a Russian airdefence base in the Krasnodar region. Those are just
the type of surface-to-air missiles, I would note, that
were used to bring down a Ukrainian military transport
plane last week, killing all 49 people on board. And
we see it in the alarming redeployment of thousands
of Russian troops and military hardware along the
border with Ukraine, at the closest proximity since the
invasion of Crimea in February.
Russia has attempted — erroneously — to
characterize the events unfolding in eastern Ukraine
as a humanitarian crisis. They falsely have cast
themselves as the defender of rights and vindicator of
the vulnerable, and the Russian army and its operatives
as a humanitarian aid agency. But this Russian aid
operation sends soldiers, not doctors. It mans armoured
personnel carriers, not relief tents. It provides
surface-to-air missiles, not meals ready-to-eat.
Russia claims that 100,000 people have fled
Ukraine for Russia. Yet Under-Secretary-General
Amos informed the Council in a briefing last week
that the real number was around 4,600. I do not for one
moment intend to minimize the very real humanitarian
consequences of the crises in eastern Ukraine and
Crimea, including the tens of thousands of internally
displaced people within Ukraine’s borders. But we have
to be objective and fact-based in our claims, and candid
about what has brought about these dire humanitarian

6/24

24/06/2014

consequences, namely, the political and military
support that Russia continues to provide to armed
violent separatists.
Yet, remarkably, even in the face of separatist
attacks and inflammatory propaganda, the Ukrainian
Government and Ukrainian people have shown in word
and in deed a sustained willingness to work towards
a peaceful solution. The Ukrainian people elected a
leader, Petro Poroshenko, who campaigned on creating a
democratic, unified and peaceful Ukraine. Since taking
office, President Poroshenko has persistently sought to
achieve that goal through dialogue and reconciliation,
even in the face of provocations and violence. He
proposed, and then implemented, a unilateral ceasefire
to allow separatists to lay down their arms. He offered
to create a safe passage for Russian fighters to return
to their country. And he proposed amnesty to Russianbacked separatists who had not committed serious
crimes.
We welcome yesterday’s reports that representatives
of the Ukrainian and Russian Governments and
separatists groups met together, leading to an
announcement by some separatist leaders that they
would respect the ceasefire. President Poroshenko and
his Government have taken steps to decentralize power,
increase transparency, combat corruption and protect
the rights of minorities. And he has put on the table a
comprehensive and just peace plan. In sum, he and the
Ukrainian people have done everything that could be
expected, in an effort to make peace in accordance with
international law and norms.
Over the last few days, we have seen more
contradictory behaviour on the part of Russia. On the
one hand, President Putin expresses his support for
President Poroshenko’s ceasefire and his intention to
work towards a peaceful settlement. That is a welcome
development. Yet, on the other hand, Russia has
recently returned a significant number of its troops to
the border and has ramped up the flow of weapons and
materiel to separatists, an increasing number of whom
are Russian citizens with no personal connection to
eastern Ukraine.
President Putin has also placed Russian troops
on combat alert and launched a new surprise military
exercise. President Putin’s recent statements are
welcome. But it is hard to take a little rhetoric of
reconciliation seriously when it is accompanied by
actions that are clearly aimed at stoking tension. It
is even harder to take seriously given that Russia’s
14-43906

24/06/2014

Ukraine

track record of repeatedly breaking its commitments
to dialogue and to peace, as it did after the Geneva
statement in April and after the pledges that President
Putin made to President Obama in Normandy earlier
this month. While we welcome the more conciliatory
rhetoric from President Putin in recent days, those
words now need to be reflected in a genuine shift in the
facts on the ground. Those facts are best gathered by
unbiased reporting, like that conducted by international
monitoring missions. But the Russians and the armed
separatists that they support do not seem comfortable
with facts or with monitors.
As we sit here, eight monitors of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe are being held
captive for the crime of bearing witness and gathering
facts, actions that are dangerous only to those who
would distort those facts. The monitors have been held
captive for nearly a month — a month — by separatists
in Donetsk and Luhansk, with no justification. For
these crimes there must be consequences. There
also must be continued consequences for Russia’s
consistent violations of the fundamental principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and for its ongoing
failure to meet the commitments it has made. And
there must be consequences for the widespread crimes
and abuses committed by the armed separatists Russia
supports — both because the victims of those crimes
merit justice and because, as we have seen, unless
Russia feels effective pressure to de-escalate, it will
continue to choose to escalate the crisis.
We have urged Russia to be part of the political
solution to the crisis in Ukraine. But, if it persists with
the same escalatory tactics, it must face additional
costs.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun and Assistant
Secretary-General Šimonović for the briefings that we
have just heard and for the detailed and thorough work
being undertaken by the United Nations human rights
monitoring mission in Ukraine.
Let me start with the positive. The United Kingdom
strongly supports the peace plan set out by President
Poroshenko on 20 June. That plan builds on earlier steps
taken by the Government of Ukraine to implement the
Geneva statement of 17 April. They include holding
three rounds of national dialogue and submitting a
draft law on amnesty for those who hand over illegal
arms and who vacate illegally occupied buildings. The
Government of Ukraine has also initiated constitutional

S/PV.7205

reform and decentralization and has guaranteed
protection and a special status for the Russian language.
The peace plan constitutes a genuine and far-reaching
set of proposals, which now create a major opportunity
for de-escalation. Now is the moment for others to
reciprocate.
We welcome the fact that President Poroshenko’s
peace plan has received at least a measure of support
from Russia. President Putin has described the
declaration of a ceasefire as without question an
important step towards reaching a settlement and has
said that Russia will certainly support those plans. We
also note reports from Moscow that President Putin
has asked the Russian Parliament to revoke the right
of military intervention in Ukraine. Although we
emphatically reject any suggestion that the decision by
the Russian Parliament would confer any legitimacy on
Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea, it would send a
positive signal that needs to be reinforced by positive
actions.
Russia must now back up those statements with
actions to tackle instability in southern and eastern
Ukraine. Those actions must include the following: first,
adopting effective measures to prevent the continued
flow of illegal fighters, arms and equipment from
Russia into Ukraine; secondly, applying its influence
over separatist groups to ensure that they renounce
violence, lay down their arms and commit themselves
to addressing their grievances through the peaceful and
democratic mechanisms that are available to them; and,
thirdly, continuing the withdrawal of troops from near
the Ukrainian border.
Russia has created facts on the ground through its
direct support for armed separatist groups. It must now
reverse the dynamics it has created, by preventing the
flow of arms and fighters into Ukraine and using its
influence over armed separatist groups so that they
stop their illegal activities. If that does not happen,
the countries of the European Union, including at
the Foreign Affairs Council meeting yesterday, have
reiterated their readiness to take further measures
against Russia.
I now come to the latest human rights monitoring
report. The Ukrainian Government has engaged
constructively with the mission, highlighting its
commitment to transparency and to upholding the
human rights of its citizens. It is disappointing
that, once again, Russian Government sources have
criticized the report and impugned the professionalism

14-439067/24

S/PV.7205

Ukraine

and integrity of the monitors and of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights as a whole. We encourage the Government of
Ukraine to address concerns raised in the mission’s
report of a lack of cooperation among the six different
investigations into the tragic events of 2 May in Odessa,
what Mr. Šimonović called “grave inaction” just now.
We also urge the Government to ensure the security of
all diplomatic missions. We condemn unreservedly the
attack against the Russian Embassy in Kyiv on 14 June.
Establishing confidence in the rule of law in Ukraine
is essential. The United Kingdom, together with our
partners, is ready to support the Ukrainian Government
as they tackle reforms in those areas.
The mission’s latest report highlights the role
played by illegal armed groups in Donetsk and Luhansk
in preventing many voters in those regions from
participating in the presidential elections of 25 May. The
separatist tactics of threatening, beating and abducting
staff of the Electoral Commission, destroying voter
lists and ballot boxes and seizing control of polling
stations demonstrate a contempt for democracy and a
determination to prevent the people of those regions
from having a voice in the future of Ukraine.
As the latest report underlines, the actions of illegal
armed groups have led to a deterioration in the human
rights situation in Donetsk and Luhansk. Having
violently seized control, those groups are failing
to provide public services and are damaging vital
infrastructure. We are deeply disturbed by the mission’s
findings of abductions, detentions, ill treatment,
torture, looting and killings being carried out by those
groups against the broader civilian population.
The monitoring mission has reported 222 cases
of abductions and detentions by illegal armed groups.
They have also recorded numerous allegations of ill
treatment and torture, starvation of prisoners, beatings,
electric shocks and even amputation, which are all
reportedly being used by pro-Russian groups. It is
no surprise that the mission’s report concludes that
areas under separatist control are characterized by an
atmosphere of fear and intimidation.
The monitoring mission’s report cites compelling
evidence of the use of propaganda and misinformation
to generate a climate of fear and instability in Ukraine.
That includes the use by the Russian media of doctored
photographs and re-purposed film footage. The report
notes, for example, the footage used to substantiate
claims that Ukraine was using United Nations marked
8/24

24/06/2014

helicopters, a claim also made in the Chamber by the
Russian Federation, was in fact filmed in other countries
at an earlier date. For example, a photograph of such
a helicopter presented by Russia as evidence to the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) was in fact taken in 2011 in Côte d’Ivoire.
There are numerous other examples of misinformation,
including footage claiming to show incendiary weapons
being used by the Ukrainian military, which was in fact
filmed in November 2004 in Iraq. On one occasion
recently, the Russian Permanent Representative urged
us all to follow the Russian media for an accurate
picture of what is going on in Ukraine. On the evidence
of this report, I think that most of us would beg to differ
with that.
The mission’s latest report also confirms that
in Crimea the introduction of Russian legislation is
undermining Ukrainian citizens’ enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms. Pro-Ukrainians
are being targeted and intimidated with increasing
discrimination, especially in the areas of education and
employment. We underline that the United Kingdom
will not recognize or accept Russia’s illegal annexation
of Crimea.
Over a succession of Council meetings, we have
seen a deterioration of the security situation in parts of
Ukraine caused by illegal armed separatist groups. We
have seen growing evidence of human rights abuses,
in large part because of the actions of those armed
groups, and we have witnessed a growing humanitarian
challenge. The peace plan put forward by President
Poroshenko provides an opportunity to break out of that
downward spiral. Yesterday’s OSCE-brokered talks in
Donetsk seem to have given positive momentum to that.
The United Kingdom urges the Council to give strong
and united support to that plan. It urges the Ukrainian
Government to press forward purposefully with its
implementation, and it urges the Russian Federation to
follow up on its positive statements with positive actions
that will cut off political and practical support to armed
separatist groups and allow a process of dialogue and
democratic engagement to take root.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
wish to thank Mr. Zerihoun for his briefing and
Mr. Šimonović for introducing the third report of the
United Nations human rights monitoring mission in
Ukraine. I understand that the Ukrainian authorities
have accepted the renewal of the mission’s mandate for
the next three months. We welcome that. The mission is

14-43906

24/06/2014

Ukraine

S/PV.7205

an invaluable source of information in terms of giving
an overview of the situation in Ukraine.

late May, which poses an unacceptable obstacle to that
Organization’s mission.

The report submitted by Mr. Šimonović covers an
important event in the history of the country — the
election of Petro Poroshenko as the new President of
Ukraine. Despite the obstacles placed before the people
of the east in the exercise of their right to free expression,
voting proceeded normally in the rest of Ukraine.
As the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) has stressed, international norms
were respected. Mr. Poroshenko is therefore the new
legitimate President of Ukraine and has been recognized
as such. His talks in Normandy during the ceremonies
to commemorate the 6 June 1944 landing, as well as
his inaugural ceremony, are evidence of that. This is an
important stage because the election has given birth to
a process of political normalization.

The violence, as has already been confirmed,
is fueled and sustained from outside. The presence
of those foreign elements and all foreign support for
them must cease. Control of transborder movements is
critical. In such conditions, the Government of Ukraine
is responsible for taking appropriate and proportional
measures, with respect for international law, to combat
the armed groups, protect the populace and ensure
control of its own borders.

Mr. Šimonović’s third report sheds light on the
important steps taken by the Government of Ukraine,
particularly in the context of implementing the Geneva
statement of 17 April. Round tables were organized to
bring diverse sectors of Ukrainian society together,
and a draft law entitled “Memorandum of concord
and peace”, which provides for the decentralization
of power and guarantees on the status of the Russian
language, has been adopted by the Rada.

Those operations impact the population’s access
to basic services. Some residents have been forced to
flee areas of confrontation and take refuge in other
regions of Ukraine or in the Russian Federation. No
one can deny that humanitarian needs exist. That is
why humanitarian actors on the ground are already
mobilized to respond. Coordinating all these responses
not only among the various agencies but also with
the Ukrainian authorities is essential. Indeed, the
Ukrainian Government has taken all necessary steps
to provide shelter to those who have been forced from
their homes. I note that all regions of Ukraine, east and
west alike, have responded to the call for solidarity. The
sense of unity and of sharing a common destiny clearly
exists in Ukraine.

The report also notes that investigations are under
way into the serious human rights violations committed
during the events of Maidan Square, as well as those that
took place in 2 May in Odesa. While there has not yet
been a full clarification of those tragic events, it should
nonetheless be stressed that efforts have been made to
that end. The cooperation of Ukraine with the United
Nations human rights monitoring mission on this issue
has also been significant. Those elements show that,
despite the many difficulties that have arisen, Ukraine
is in the process of achieving its political transition.

As the mission report points out, the imposition of
Russian law in Crimea, which was illegitimately annexed
by Russia, has created a situation of judicial instability
that prevents the local population from exercising its
human rights and basic freedoms. Discrimination in
hiring is rampant. Leaders and human rights activists
of the Tatar community are being prosecuted. It is
increasingly difficult to keep two nationalities, and
those who refuse to inform the Russian authorities are
now subject to criminal charges. The human rights of
these people have been trampled.

Despite such positive developments, eastern
Ukraine, including Donetsk and Luhansk, has
experienced a general deterioration in its security,
human rights and humanitarian situation under the
sway of illegal separatist armed groups. The third
report stresses that arbitrary arrests, kidnapping,
torture and murder now affect not only journalists,
public officials and human rights activists, but the
population as a whole. Mr. Šimonović has just informed
us that the situation has grown even worse over the past
week. In that regard, I remind the Council that eight
OSCE observers have been held by separatists since

Faced with the serious crisis in Ukraine, the
authorities in Kyiv have made a number of good-will
gestures. We welcome President Poroshenko’s decision
to propose a 15-point peace plan and to declare a
week-long ceasefire. We note with satisfaction that his
proposed truce was accepted yesterday by the armed
groups in the context of the three-way meetings held
among Ukraine, Russia and the OSCE following the
meetings in Normandy. We encourage that dialogue to
continue and we call on the armed groups in eastern
Ukraine to lay down their arms, leave all illegally
occupied public buildings, and engage honestly and

14-439069/24

S/PV.7205

Ukraine

24/06/2014

openly in a political dialogue that will allow them to
make their claims in a legal and peaceful manner.

Government has announced that there has been no
fighting in eastern Ukraine since yesterday.

In such conditions, everything possible must be
done to promote a return to calm, which is a sine qua
non for the start of a political dialogue. That, I repeat,
entails control of the Russian-Ukrainian border in
order to halt the infiltration of equipment and armed
men. The international community as a whole and all
members of the Council must strive towards that end
and support Kyiv’s efforts. We welcome the declaration
of the ceasefire enjoys the support of the Russian
President. That support must be reflected on the ground
at a time when there is cause for concern over word that
wide-scale new military exercises are under way. In
that light, we are heartened by the Russian President’s
call on the Russian Federation Council this morning
to annul its authorization for the Russian Army to
intervene on Ukrainian territory.

We take positive note of the promise of the rebels to
release the observers of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) who have been held
hostage since May. That is a significant development.
According to news reports, a representative of the
rebels at the negotiations held yesterday in Donetsk,
in line with President Poroshenko’s peace plan, stated
that the release of the OSCE observers would “be one
of the steps that will improve mutual understanding on
both sides”. We would like to see the OSCE observers
released unconditionally and without delay.

Today, there is no other path for Ukraine except that
of unity and reconciliation. The European Union and
France stand ready to offer Ukraine all their support
in those efforts, as our Heads of State and Government
recalled at their summit on 27 May.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank the briefers for their
updates on political developments and the human rights
situation in Ukraine. On political developments, we
are pleased to note that, after months of conflict and
escalating tensions, the people of Ukraine now have
an opportunity to peacefully resolve the crisis that has
destabilized their country.
We have carefully studied Petro Poroshenko’s
15-point peace plan. We see it as the best way forward in
the current circumstances to address the various issues
that led to the conflict in eastern Ukraine. We urge the
people of Ukraine and the international community
to support the plan. Of particular significance in the
plan are the week-long ceasefire, steps to decentralize
power, the protection of the Russian language and
constitutional reform.
We welcome the support of Russian President
Vladimir Putin for the ceasefire. We believe that it
has played a role in the decision of the pro-Russian
separatists to respect the ceasefire. We see it as a
positive development that raises hopes for an end to the
fighting that has caused substantial damage to property,
left hundreds dead or wounded, displaced hundreds
of thousands of people and disrupted livelihoods. We
are pleased to note that the ceasefire is holding, as the

10/24

All things considered, the prospects for a peaceful
resolution of the Ukrainian crisis have been enhanced.
We hope that the people of Ukraine will build on
the momentum and goodwill generated by President
Poroshenko’s peace plan. We have consistently
advocated dialogue as the way to resolve the crisis in
Ukraine, and we are pleased to see that happening now.
On human rights, we have carefully examined the
third report of the human rights monitoring mission
in Ukraine, which covers the period of 7 May to
7 June. We note that the reporting period precedes
the peace plan of President Poroshenko. The report
links the deterioration of the human rights situation
in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions to the conflict
in eastern Ukraine. We condemn all violations of
human rights, including abductions, torture, forced
disappearances and illegal detentions. We would like to
see the perpetrators brought to justice in order to send
a strong message that impunity will not be tolerated. It
is our hope that with the current ceasefire and eventual
cessation of hostilities the human rights situation in
eastern Ukraine will begin to improve.
In conclusion, we would like to stress the need
for all concerned to respect the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence of Ukraine, in line with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I, too,
thank Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, and Mr. Ivan Šimonović,
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights, for
their briefings.
Luxembourg welcomes the resolute action taken by
the democratically elected President of Ukraine, Petro
Poroshenko, to restore peace and stability in eastern
Ukraine. We welcome his decision to take a first
14-43906

24/06/2014

Ukraine

essential step towards de-escalation by announcing the
comprehensive 15-point peace plan and by establishing
a unilateral ceasefire to allow the peace plan to be
implemented. That decision has already had a positive
effect, since last night it led to a separatist leader of the
Donetsk region responding to the presidential initiative
by committing, for his part, to observing a ceasefire
until next Friday. We welcome the constructive role
played by the current chairmanship of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in that
regard.
Russia has a key role to play in achieving a
sustainable de-escalation of the situation. We call on
that country to use all its influence with the separatists
so that they stop the violence, lay down their arms once
and for all and release the OSCE observers. We also call
on Russia to take effective steps to stop the continuous
flow of weapons and fighters to Ukraine and thereby
to establish conditions conducive to the implementation
of the peace plan announced on Friday by President
Poroshenko.
A political solution is crucial to improving the
living conditions of the Ukrainians in the areas
controlled by separatist armed groups in the Luhansk
and Donetsk regions. Luxembourg shares the concern
of the Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights
over the collapse of public order and respect for the
rule of law in those areas. We are very concerned
about the increasing number of abductions, detentions,
cases of torture and killings by the separatists. The
crimes and human rights abuses no longer target only
local politicians, activists and independent journalists
but also now affect the population of those regions in
general.
The combined effect of the presence of armed
groups committing illegal acts and the increased
exchange of fire between separatists and the Ukrainian
armed forces has had a negative impact on the human
rights of the people living in areas that are under the
control of separatists. The public services are severely
disrupted. We are also concerned about the number
of internally displaced people, which continues to
increase.
The situation in Crimea is of concern, as well. The
monthly reports of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights show that the
human rights situation has severely deteriorated since
the holding of the illegal referendum on 16 March and
the annexation by Russia. Residents of Crimea who

S/PV.7205

support the unity of Ukraine are intimidated and subject
to discrimination. The fundamental freedoms ensured
by Ukrainian law are being challenged and minorities
live in fear.
Luxembourg remains firmly committed to the
sovereignty, political independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Ukraine within its internationally recognized
borders, which are basic principles affirmed by the
General Assembly in resolution 68/262 of 27 March.
Pending the restoration of the territorial integrity of
Ukraine, we call on the authorities that are controlling
Crimea to allow access for international observers, in
particular, the United Nations human rights monitoring
mission.
The third report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights underscores the
practical steps taken by the Ukrainian Government to
fulfil its obligations under the joint statement adopted
on 17 April in Geneva by Ukraine, Russia, the United
States and the European Union. A second crucial step
was taken with the presentation of the peace plan and
the establishment of a ceasefire.
The international community expects Russia also
to send a clear signal of its willingness to achieve a true
de-escalation. Apart from increased monitoring of its
border and condemnation of violence by armed groups
in eastern Ukraine, we call on Russia to continue to
withdraw its troops from the Ukrainian border and to
refrain from a build-up of troops on the border. We also
call for the order of the Federation Council authorizing
the presence of Russian armed forces on the territory
of Ukraine to be overturned. We note the step that has
been taken today in that regard by the President of the
Russian Federation.
The election of a President whose legitimacy is
unquestionable, the dialogue established between Kyiv
and Moscow since the election of President Poroshenko,
his announcement of a peace plan and the declaration
of a ceasefire are encouraging elements. We hope that
they will be a decisive turning point in the search for
a political solution to the crisis in Ukraine. All good
will must now be mobilized to take advantage of this
opportunity and put an end to a crisis that has already
caused too many casualties and suffering among the
civilian population in eastern and southern Ukraine.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Assistant Secretaries-General Zerihoun and Šimonović
for their briefings.

14-4390611/24

S/PV.7205

Ukraine

24/06/2014

Recently, some areas in Ukraine have experienced
continuous unrest, armed conflict and frequent
violence, resulting in heavy tolls on people and property.
China is deeply troubled by that situation. Conflict
and violence have led to an increase in the internal
displacement of persons in Ukraine and a shortage of
water, electricity and food. We hope the United Nations
and the international human rights and humanitarian
agencies will adhere to the principles of neutrality and
objectivity in their work.

political solution. We will play a constructive role in
that process.

On the question of Ukraine, I would like to
highlight the following points. First, a political solution
is the only way to resolve the crisis in Ukraine. We take
note of the fact that President Poroshenko announced a
peace plan and declared a unilateral ceasefire, and that
the armed groups have also declared a ceasefire. China
welcomes any efforts that would de-escalate tensions
in Ukraine and hopes that all parties will keep calm
and exercise restraint, take this opportunity to enhance
mutual trust and implement the ceasefire in conflict
areas in a practical manner so as to create favourable
conditions for a political solution.

The recent report of the United Nations human rights
monitoring mission identified a number of worrying
human rights concerns in Ukraine, particularly in the
eastern region. We note with deep concern that the
human rights situation in Donetsk and Lugansk has
continued to deteriorate with increased violence and
criminal activities by illegal armed groups. We are
particularly disheartened to learn that lawlessness and
violence, including abductions, arbitrary detentions,
torture, harassment and killings are now affecting the
broader population of those regions. Moreover, the
continuing clashes between the armed groups and the
Ukrainian forces exacerbate the situation, resulting in
an increased loss of life, further displacement and the
destruction of vital infrastructure.

Secondly, the crisis in Ukraine has historical roots
and a very real complexity. A comprehensive solution of
the crisis calls for consideration of the overall situation.
The solution should be long-lasting and balanced and
take into account the legitimate rights, interests and
demands of all regions and people in Ukraine, address
the legitimate concerns of all and strike a balance of the
interests of all sides.
Thirdly, relevant actors of the international
community are actively engaged with each other on the
question of Ukraine. That is conducive to addressing
the concerns and differences of all parties through
peaceful and political means and avoiding conflict and
confrontation. Such momentum should be sustained.
The Geneva four-party joint diplomatic statement and
the road map of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, which reflect the wisdom and
good will of all sides, should be implemented effectively
and comprehensively.
Fourthly, a swift and proper solution of the crisis
in Ukraine is not only in the interest of the country and
its people but also in the interest of regional peace and
stability. China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all countries, including Ukraine, and we will
continue to hold a fair and objective position in actively
taking part in the consideration of any proposals and
initiatives for the easing of tensions and for finding a
12/24

Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank Assistant Secretaries-General Zerihoun and
Šimonović for their briefings.
The Republic of Korea appreciates the dedicated
work of the United Nations human rights monitoring
mission in Ukraine and its informative and
comprehensive report.

In the light of such a volatile situation, we welcome
the efforts of the Ukrainian Government to stop the
escalation of violence and seek a peaceful settlement
as shown in President Poroshenko’s peace plan. We
call for the illegal armed groups to reciprocate those
efforts and immediately halt all acts of violence and
lay down their arms. It is important to ensure the full
implementation of the peace plan in order to achieve
a sustainable solution to the crisis. In that regard, we
welcome the fact that Russian President Putin has
expressed support for the peace plan.
At the same time, we reiterate that an inclusive
political process is the essential foundation for a stable
and democratic future for all Ukrainian people. We
encourage the Ukrainian Government, building on the
legitimacy of the democratically elected president, to
lead comprehensive reform measures that reflect the
wishes of all Ukrainians. The protection of all ethnic
and linguistic minorities should be a priority in that
process.
Finally, we appreciate the ongoing diplomatic efforts
towards the stabilization of Ukraine, in particular those
of the United Nations, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, the European Union and
14-43906

24/06/2014

Ukraine

bilateral partners. We encourage all parties to continue
such efforts to seek a peaceful political solution.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun and Mr. Ivan Šimonović
for their briefings on the situation in Ukraine. Argentina
will concentrate specifically on the theme and the focus
of today’s meeting, namely, to analyse the report of the
United Nations human rights monitoring mission in
Ukraine.
In that regard, like our colleagues, we are concerned
at the deterioration of the situation in the eastern part
of Ukraine. The living conditions of the majority of the
population, the actions of armed groups, the increasing
number of armed persons and weapons, unilateral
acts, worsening of violations of human rights and
confrontations seem to spreading. Without any doubt
we are all aware that those trends have to be dealt with
in an urgent manner. The toll in human lives increases
with each violent confrontation, and the lives and rights
of residents of the affected areas are threatened. We
therefore cannot be optimistic but I do believe that we
are facing a scenario in which there is awareness that
priority must be given to having an open dialogue and
finding a political solution to this crisis.
However, we cannot ignore the violations of human
rights described in the report of the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights. The killing,
torture, kidnapping, harassment, illegal detention and
intimidation are unjustified. All allegations should be
investigated and those responsible should be brought to
justice. All the necessary measures must be taken to
protect all the human rights of everyone in Ukraine and
to ensure their full enjoyment, irrespective of ethnicity,
language, cultural group, religion or the region of the
country in which they live.
We have taken note and understood how the
increase in violence impacts those living in the areas
affected by the confrontations. It was therefore clear
that a direct consequence of that would be an increase
in displaced persons and in the number of people to
leave the region — for example, from Donetsk — access
to water in Slovyansk and other areas in the Donetsk
region having been limited, along with limited access
to health services and a lack of electricity and gas,
as well as problems with the availability of food and
medical supplies. All of that has served not just to
subject the population to difficult living conditions;
I wish to repeat that it demands a positive attitude to
finding a solution to the crisis.

S/PV.7205

I will conclude my observations by mentioning the
15 points set out by the Government of Ukraine, which
I appreciate. It is also very important, in particular with
regard to points 14 and 15 of the plan, that discussions
also take on board not just the talks between the State
and the regions, armed groups and various minorities,
but also the behaviour of the market. I say that because,
in listening to Mr. Šimonović say that there is an extreme
humanitarian crisis that is creating great suffering for
a huge segment of the population, we also see in the
document that has been circulated to us that the cost
of food has increased dramatically, with some seasonal
vegetables being four or five times more expensive than
in the past.
We know that during crises, whether they
be security, political, economic or social, some
unscrupulous market players, who do not sit with us
here to reconcile our differences — we do not even
know where they are — well know how to speculate
when it comes to the cost of food. No Valerie Amos
can hold back, and no Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Assistance can be up to the task, if we
remain indifferent to such actions, which are ethically
reprehensible. We should discuss that in the forum
where it should be discussed: the organs of the United
Nations.
We believe it is necessary to take every measure
to address the situation effectively, while ensuring that
assistance reaches those who need it, including in the
areas that are still outside of Government control, and
facilitating the conditions for the civilians who wish to
leave the areas affected by the conflict to be able to do
so.
Finally, I should like to make the following brief
points. Argentina insists on the need to redouble efforts
on the part of all stakeholders to demonstrate political
will and the belief that the only acceptable way forward
is through dialogue and that resorting to violence is not
an option.
Secondly, Argentina will support any initiative
that might genuinely contribute to putting an end to
the violence and providing a space for constructive
negotiations and reaching a political compromise
among the parties.
Thirdly, the measures agreed in Geneva and
the road map of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) continue to be a road
map, the effective implementation of which by all

14-4390613/24

S/PV.7205

Ukraine

parties will allow us to de-escalate the situation and
move forward in a process of national dialogue that
generates trust among the various communities and
provides assurance for all Ukrainians that their main
demands will be heard and their rights respected.
Fourthly, we are pleased with the efforts being made
by the democratically elected Ukrainian Government
for a peaceful settlement to the country’s situation and
with the steps taken by the Russian authorities to the
same end.
Fifthly, it is vital to combat the hate speech,
discrimination, hostility and violence. Argentina
reaffirms its respect for, defence of and belief that the
international community and all its Member States must
act within the framework of respect for international
law and the Charter of the United Nations.
Along with the representative of Nigeria, we too
hope that the rebels’ promise to release the OSCE
detainees will come to pass. In that connection, we have
asked many times that they be released unconditionally
and without delay.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Mr. Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General of
Department for Political Affairs, and Mr. Šimonović,
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights, for
their briefings.
The report on Ukraine issued by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
covering the period 7 May to 7 June, unfortunately
confirms the worsening of the human rights situation in
that country, in particular in the south-east. Chad notes
with concern that well-trained and -equipped armed
groups are gaining strength and continue to occupy the
majority of public and administrative buildings in many
cities and communities, in particular in the regions
of Donetsk and Luhansk. We also note an increase in
the number of kidnappings, detentions, ill treatment,
torture, killings and even summary executions by armed
groups. The attacks of those groups are no longer just
targeting journalists, elected or local officials or civil
society activists, but are directly impacting civilians.
We condemn the abduction and detention of
eight monitors of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and we demand their immediate
and unconditional release.
As the fighting intensifies, civilians are
increasingly caught in the crossfire between the armed

14/24

24/06/2014

groups and the Ukrainian military. That results in a
growing number of civilians killed and wounded, in
particular women and children. Chad calls on all the
parties involved to act with calm and restraint and
urges countries with influence on them to help them
make dialogue and reconciliation between Ukrainians
a priority.
Given the environment of insecurity related to
social and economic hardship, civilians are fleeing the
areas of conflict. There are already more than 15,000
internally displaced persons, 64 per cent of whom are
women and children, in particular in the east. Chad
calls upon those involved in the fighting to facilitate
access for humanitarian organizations to areas affected
by military operations so that people’s needs may be
evaluated and taken into account.
The crisis in Ukraine is an ongoing threat to the
freedom of expression. Many journalists have been
killed, kidnapped, tortured or prosecuted. Hate speech
on social networks continues to fuel tensions and widen
the divisions between communities. In that regard, Chad
calls upon all stakeholders to refrain from spreading
messages of intolerance that incite discrimination,
hatred or violence.
In spite of the bleak human rights situation in
Ukraine, Chad is pleased with the new Government’s
efforts to restore public order, re-establish political
dialogue and stabilize the country. In upholding
Ukraine’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity,
Chad supports and encourages the implementation of the
plan to peaceably resolve the situation, led by President
Petro Poroshenko, and in particular the Government’s
unilateral decision to institute a ceasefire in the east of
Ukraine from 20 to 27 June.
We also welcome the Ukrainian Parliament’s vote
on the resolution on the memorandum of understanding
and peace that provides for a package of constitutional
reforms of areas that include the decentralization of
power, special status for the Russian language, reform
of the judicial and police systems and enactment of
an amnesty for participants in the anti-Government
demonstrations in the East who agree to lay down their
arms. Chad urges that the judiciary in Ukraine guarantee
the victims’ rights and commits to investigating those
responsible for violating human rights, including the
perpetrators of the events linked to the Maidan Square
demonstrations, the murders that took place in January
and February and the incidents on 2 May in Odesa.

14-43906

24/06/2014

Ukraine

In our view, the underlying causes of the crisis
in Ukraine are structural ones, and if the country is
to emerge from crisis its solutions must include those
that take those realities into account. If they are to
succeed, reconciliation and development among the
country’s communities must be achieved by peaceful
and democratic means, with respect and guarantees
for human rights for all. In order to deal with these
challenges and to those linked to its territorial integrity,
sovereignty and stability, Ukraine needs the support of
the entire international community.
Ms. Murmokaité (Lithuania): I would like to
thank Assistant Secretaries-General Ivan Šimonović
and Tayé-Brook Zerihoun for their briefings. President
Poroshenko’s peace plan offers a fragile hope for a
solution to this artificially induced crisis, which has
been stoked by Russia’s persistent anti-Ukrainian
propaganda as well as a continuous influx of militants
and weaponry from across Ukraine’s Russian borders.
A return to normality is badly needed after the months
of destruction and lawlessness perpetrated by illegal
armed separatists, which have led to a disturbing
deterioration of human rights and the humanitarian
situation in eastern Ukraine, as the third report of
the United Nations human rights monitoring mission
testifies.
The report is yet more proof that a pro-Russian
militant insurgency has been the cause, and not the
effect, of the serious human rights violations and a
breakdown of law and order in the eastern regions of
Ukraine, just as Russia’s occupation of Crimea was the
cause, and not the effect, of serious human and minority
rights violations in that region. The report details cases
of abductions, unlawful detentions, killings, torture,
ill-treatment, forced disappearances, intimidation
and harassment perpetrated by the armed separatists
in eastern Ukraine. Criminality and looting have
increased considerably in areas held by the militant
separatists. Stalinist-style arbitrary executions by the
insurgents have also been recorded, including within
their own ranks or as revenge on those giving support
to Government forces. One such case mentioned in the
report is the execution of a farmer in front of his family
for bringing food to Ukrainian forces.
The separatists have been carrying out increasingly
brazen attacks using ever more sophisticated weapons.
They possess anti-aircraft and anti-tank weaponry,
automatic assault rifles, man-portable air defence
systems and other arms. Last week, three T-64 tanks,

S/PV.7205

BM-21 Grad multiple rocket launchers and other military
vehicles crossed illegally from Russia into Ukrainian
territory and were seen in the towns of Snizhne, Torez
and Makiyivka. On 14 June, in a criminal act they
readily admitted to, militants downed a Ukrainian
military transport plane, leading to 49 deaths. Only
a few minutes ago, while we were speaking in the
Council, a military helicopter was again downed by the
separatists, resulting in nine more deaths. We offer our
sympathy to all those who have lost their loved ones and
have been affected by the displacement, deprivation,
intimidation and threats produced by this crisis.
We reiterate our long-standing position that
Ukraine has a right and a duty to defend itself and
to seek to restore law and order within its borders.
Legitimate force must be used with due restraint,
avoiding unnecessary damage to civilian infrastructure
and civilian casualties. The best way to defeat the
deadly mix of violence, hate and lawlessness that drives
the pro-Russian insurgency is by upholding legality and
the rule of law.
Mr. Šimonović’s third report contains a number
of recommendations to the Ukrainian Government.
Lithuania and all the members of the European Union
stand ready to assist Ukraine in reforming the security
sector, the police and the rule of law. We welcome the
steps that the Government of Ukraine has taken so far in
implementing the 17 April Geneva statement, through
a number of round tables, initiatives and legislative
changes, including those aimed at decentralizing
power. Other important legislative measures are in
the process of being enacted, and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Šimonović spoke about that at length. The
Ukrainian Government has repeatedly offered to
grant amnesty to those who lay down their arms. Just
a few days ago, President Poroshenko went to eastern
Ukraine to directly engage with the local population
and authorities.
Welcome steps have also been taken to ensure
the rights of ethnic minorities. In stark contrast to the
situation in occupied Crimea, where the teaching of the
Ukrainian and Tatar languages is being squeezed out,
on 30 May Kyiv amended the framework curriculum
to improve the teaching of minority languages as
diverse as Armenian, Bulgarian, Tatar, Gagauz, Greek,
German, Hebrew, Hungarian, Korean, Moldovan,
Polish, Romanian, Russian and Slovak.
President Poroshenko’s most recent initiative, a
15-step plan for a peaceful settlement of the situation

14-4390615/24

S/PV.7205

Ukraine

24/06/2014

in eastern Ukraine, which my country fully endorses,
could be a real game-changer. While it was unfortunately
greeted by more insurgent attacks, trilateral talks
are taking place, and there has been some movement
on exchanging prisoners and restoring public utility
services.

and stability in line with the international principles
of respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of Ukraine. We hope that all the parties
will seize this opportunity, although the events of a few
minutes ago raise legitimate doubts as to the separatists’
commitment to it.

The Ukrainian Government is doing its part to
realize the peace agreement. The onus is now on the
separatists and on Russia to do theirs. We note the
fact that on Wednesday Russia’s Federation Council is
to revoke a resolution authorizing the use of Russian
armed forces on Ukrainian territory, and we hope that
implies all of Ukrainian territory. More, however, must
be done. Russia has yet to clearly dissociate itself from
the militant separatism in eastern Ukraine or to call on
all the insurgents to lay down the arms. It has not yet
ensured proper control of its borders with Ukraine or
put an end to the flow into eastern Ukraine of Russianmade weaponry and mercenaries, as well as foreign
fighters.

Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretaries-General Zerihoun and Šimonović
for their briefings this morning.

Importantly, Russia has yet to end the incendiary
campaign against Ukraine that has been stoking militant
insurgency in the eastern part of the country. Ukraine’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
are non-negotiable and must be respected by all. We
reiterate our condemnation of the occupation of Crimea
and stress that a forced redrawing of internationally
recognized borders has no place in the twenty-first
century.
Lithuania appreciates the work being done by the
United Nations human rights monitoring mission and
the special monitoring mission of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to
provide regular updates on the situation in Ukraine.
We welcome the Ukrainian Government’s invitation
to allow the extension of the United Nations mission
for three more months. As noted by previous speakers,
impartial reporting on human rights violations and
developments on the ground is key to ensuring that
facts are not manipulated.
Ukraine’s continued openness to international
monitoring shows its constructive spirit and stands
in stark contrast to the actions of the separatists, who
have done all they can to prevent reporting from the
areas they hold captive. Let us not forget that they
are still holding eight OSCE observers. We call for
their immediate release and that of all the hostages
in separatist hands. The Ukrainian peace plan offers
a potential breakthrough for the restoration of peace
16/24

Australia welcomes President Poroshenko’s peace
plan as a major opportunity for de-escalating the situation
in Ukraine. We also welcome Ukraine’s declaration of
a unilateral ceasefire and the apparent support for it
from separatist leaders. The peace plan, with its call
for dialogue with legally elected authorities in the east,
security guarantees for all parties who participate
in negotiations, the release of hostages and further
efforts to decentralize power, including through local
elections, presents a welcome chance for addressing
grievances and ending the crisis. Those are courageous
initiatives and should have our support.
We urge separatists in eastern Ukraine to adhere
to — and not take advantage of — the ceasefire. Reports
of separatist attacks against Ukrainian border posts
after the ceasefire’s declaration must be condemned.
Reports received in the last half an hour of a Ukrainian
helicopter being shot down near Slovyansk, with nine
dead, are a very bad development. Commitments to
adhere to the ceasefire must be upheld. Australia
understands that Ukraine’s armed forces will use force
to defend themselves if attacked. They have the right
to do so. Of course, the Ukrainian Government must
continue to ensure that any operations conducted by its
armed forces are in line with international standards.
There are disturbing reports of the continued flow
of illegal fighters, arms and other military equipment,
including heavy weapons such as tanks, across the
Russian border into Ukraine. The Council should not
tolerate those continued and destabilizing violations
of Ukraine’s sovereignty. It is essential that Russia
exercise control of its borders. We are also concerned
by reports that Russia has again redeployed thousands
of troops near the Ukrainian border in what appears to
be a further calculated provocation. All those actions
have been destabilizing eastern Ukraine. We again urge
Russia to pull its troops back from the border, prevent
the flow of illegal arms and fighters into Ukraine and
call publicly for separatists in Ukraine to renounce
violence.
14-43906

24/06/2014

Ukraine

S/PV.7205

More positively, we welcome President Putin’s
request to the Russian Duma today to repeal the
resolution that purported to sanction Russia’s use of force
in Ukraine. No such use of force is legal or legitimate,
but, if carried out, Putin’s move to repeal it constitutes
at least a signal of movement towards de-escalation.
We also welcome the Secretary-General’s continued
engagement with the situation and the United Nations
commitment to work with Ukrainian authorities to
assist with internally displaced persons.

overcrowded and understaffed, running water and
electricity are scarce in some areas, and food prices
have increased rapidly. It is clearly increasingly
difficult for civilians in eastern Ukraine to lead normal
lives, but we note also the United Nations assessment
that the situation in eastern Ukraine, unacceptable as
it is, does not constitute a humanitarian crisis. The
risk, of course, is that it could worsen and become a
humanitarian crisis if armed separatists do not desist
and if Russian assistance to them does not stop.

The third report of the United Nations human rights
monitoring mission in Ukraine presents a damning
picture of the consequences of violent separatism
in eastern Ukraine. The majority of human rights
abuses are occurring in Donetsk and Luhansk, where
separatist groups are active. In other areas of Ukraine,
under Government control, concerted efforts are being
made to ensure human rights are respected. The report
commends Ukraine’s own efforts to address grievances
and build a society that respects the rule of law.

I should note that the human rights situation in
Crimea has deteriorated markedly since Russia’s illegal
annexation of the peninsula. Freedom of assembly and
religious belief are under threat. There are reports that
some Crimean residents have been forced to surrender
their Ukrainian citizenship. It is disturbing that only
a small number of Crimeans were able to vote in
Ukraine’s presidential elections and had to do so by
travelling to mainland Ukraine.

Ukraine has addressed constitutional reform, with
a focus on the decentralization of power; announced
parliamentary elections for later this year; worked
to reform law enforcement bodies and taken steps to
fight corruption. Ukrainian authorities have begun to
investigate the Maidan protests and the 2 May Odesa
incident. Timely accountability is crucial, so it is
important that those investigations progress quickly.
In contrast to those positive steps, the situation
in eastern Ukraine continues to deteriorate. The
aggressive actions of separatist groups are having a
negative impact on the human rights situation in areas of
Ukraine under their control. As the report states, “with
the demise of security, the rule of law and governance,
the protection gap is widening”. Civilians have been
killed by armed groups. Abductions and detentions now
affect the broader population in Donetsk and Luhansk,
who live in a climate of fear and intimidation. We are
affronted at the ongoing detention of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe monitors in
eastern Ukraine, and we call again for their immediate
release. Journalists in eastern Ukraine face attacks,
abductions and detentions. Five have been killed during
the crisis. We welcome the Council’s press statement
on the killing of journalists in eastern Ukraine. In a
situation where misinformation abounds, it is critical
that journalists be able to report freely and without fear.
Violence in the east, as we know, has disrupted
social services. Schools have closed, hospitals are

The report makes useful proposals for the way
ahead, which deserve our support. Crucially, it
emphasizes that all armed groups must immediately
put an end to their violent activities and lay down their
arms. President Poroshenko’s peace plan and ceasefire
provide the opportunity to do that — to end separatist
violence — and all parties should seize this opportunity.
A failure to resolve the situation by peaceful means
will destroy the lives and livelihoods of even more
Ukrainians. None of us in the Council should allow that
to happen.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the briefings by Assistant Secretaries-General
Šimonović and Zerihoun and express our appreciation
for the efforts that the Secretary-General continues to
make to bring the situation in Ukraine to an end.
The recent report of the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission in Ukraine continues to
generate concern for our country with respect to the
human rights situation in eastern and southern Ukraine,
in particular in Donetsk and Luhansk. My delegation
is particularly concerned by the alarming increase
in human rights violations and abuses, which have
primarily affected journalists, politicians and activists.
We deeply deplore the deaths of two Russian journalists
and an Italian journalist in Luhansk last week.
The increase in violations of the right to life,
liberty and security that now affect civilians in those
regions, as manifested in the attacks, kidnappings,

14-4390617/24

S/PV.7205

Ukraine

torture and harassment taking place, highlight the need
to restore the rule of law and respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
General Assembly resolution 68/262 and international
law. We also reiterate our concern about the situation
of internally displaced persons in Ukraine, which,
according to the report, now total over 12,700 people,
primarily women and children. That is a clear sign of
the severity of the crisis.
Chile would like to acknowledge the efforts of the
Ukrainian Government to put an end to the situation
in the country and highlights the peace plan and the
unilateral ceasefire recently announced by President
Poroshenko. The announcement by separatist groups
that they would comply with the ceasefire is an
encouraging sign and should be reflected in their actions
on the ground. Of equal importance are the proposed
constitutional amendments in the Memorandum of
concord and peace, which was drafted during the round
table on national unity and adopted on 20 May by the
Ukrainian Parliament, which are aimed at determining
Ukraine’s future in a democratic, transparent and
inclusive manner.
We urge the parties to seek a peaceful solution to
the crisis through direct political dialogue, exercise
restraint, refrain from unilateral actions that could
exacerbate tensions and participate in international
mediation efforts such as the trilateral contact group,
which includes Ukraine, Russia and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, and the
Geneva agreement of 17 April. Similarly, we call for
full respect for the rule of law, democracy and human
rights in Ukraine, including the rights of all minorities.
The Government of Ukraine has the responsibility
to maintain public order throughout the territory, in
conformity with its constitutional norms and domestic
legislation and with full respect for the rights and
safeguards of all people in Ukraine. The monopoly of
the use of force that the Government of Ukraine enjoys
in its own territory, as is the case for any Government
in the international community, should be exercised
with full respect for human rights and in proportion to
the situation at hand.
Chile reiterates its support for the appeal made by
Mr. Šimonović for ensuring accountability with regard
to violations and abuses of human rights in Ukraine,
including the 222 cases of illegal detention, of the
disappearance of 81 persons, and the deaths of more
18/24

24/06/2014

than 400 people in the east, including children, members
of the armed forces and armed groups. It is equally
essential that the authorities continue to investigate and
finally bring to justice those who were responsible for
the death of 48 persons in Odesa on 2 May, and that
they look into why the security forces did not take more
timely and decisive steps to prevent that tragedy.
We reiterate our support for the work of the United
Nations human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine
and with the monitoring mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. We are confident
that those independent international mechanisms will
continue to contribute to achieving a solution to the
crisis.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Mr. President, I thank you
for convening this meeting. Let me also thank Assistant
Secretaries-General Tayé-Brook Zerihoun and Ivan
Šimonović for their respective briefings on the political
and human rights situations in Ukraine. We commend
the Secretary-General for his good offices and for
his unwavering efforts to find a lasting political and
diplomatic solution to the Ukrainian crisis.
As we meet today, we are encouraged by several
steps taken by the parties in the region to de-escalate
the situation. Rwanda supports the 15-step plan of
President Petro Poroshenko to end the crisis and
welcomes the unilateral ceasefire he announced on
Friday, 20 June. We hope that the plan will serve as
a stepping stone for all parties involved to commit to
finding a long-term peaceful solution to the crisis and
the suffering of Ukrainians. In that regard, we welcome
the decisions by the separatist groups to observe a
ceasefire until Friday, 27 June. We see these parallel
ceasefires as providing new momentum for the political
talks in the framework of the peace plan presented by
President Poroshenko. At the same time, we commend
today’s decision of President Vladimir Putin of the
Russian Federation to request the Federation Council to
revoke his right to use force in eastern Ukraine, as well
as for his call on all parties to the Ukrainian conflict to
cease hostilities and sit down at the negotiating table.
Despite the aforementioned possible developments,
we are concerned at the alarming level of escalation,
particularly criminal activities and reports of serious
human rights violations. We condemn the continuing
abductions, detentions, acts of ill treatment and torture,
arbitrary arrests and sexual harassment. The reported
cases of forced disappearances are extremely worrying.
We urge the United Nations human rights monitoring
14-43906

24/06/2014

Ukraine

mission in Ukraine and the National Preventive
Mechanism, in cooperation with the Ombudsperson,
to continue their efforts to ensure that human rights of
those who remain detained are upheld.
We further call for the immediate release of
the monitors of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, held captive since 26 and 29 May.
The reported increase in the number of internally
displaced persons is also concerning, but even more
so are the reports of limited access to humanitarian
actors, who are unable to reach the internally displaced
persons in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions. We urge
all actors to ensure that those in need have access to
humanitarian support. We equally urge the Government
of Ukraine to establish a corridor for the safe passage
of civilians and to provide the necessary security. The
consequences of the violence in southern and eastern
Ukraine have impacted the already dire economic
situation, with a poverty rate of 24.7 per cent in youth
unemployment and a lack of access to medical services.
The delivery of medication and other necessities has
been challenging as a result of instability.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
Council needs to unite and rally behind the people of
Ukraine. We must show them that we are committed
to the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine, as well as to our own responsibility to maintain
international peace and security. Let me reiterate our
call on the armed groups to disarm and adhere to the
ceasefire, engage in constructive dialogue, and support
the ongoing efforts to de-escalate the crisis.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank Mr. Šimonović and
Mr. Zerihoun for their briefings this morning. We have
taken note of the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the third report, dated 15 June, of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, based on the findings of the United
Nations human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine.
My delegation expresses its deep concern over the
worsening situation in eastern Ukraine, and particularly
in Donetsk and Luhansk, following the proliferation of
weapons and a rise in the number of armed elements,
which have in turn increased the number of kidnappings,
incidents of forced detention and torture, and crime in
that region. It has also led to a rise in the number of
messages of hatred and media propaganda campaigns
fabricated by those groups.

S/PV.7205

Jordan therefore reiterates its condemnation
of all those acts, as well as its invitation to all those
with influence in Ukraine to strive to de-escalate the
situation and to reach a solution that can re-establish
stability in eastern Ukraine and thereby guarantee the
return of internally displaced persons to their homes and
to avert a negative socioeconomic impact in Ukraine.
Jordan welcomes the progress achieved by
the Ukrainian Government in implementing the
recommendations contained in the two previous
reports. We appeal to the Government to continue
to accelerate its efforts in order to implement all the
recommendations contained in the last report. We also
welcome the commitment of the Ukrainian authorities
to implementing the points of the Geneva statement of
17 April. We reiterate the need to respect international
norms in all operations that may be launched to
re-establish the State’s authority throughout Ukrainian
territory.
The democratic election of a new President in
Ukraine last month represents a ray of hope for the
Ukrainian people. Jordan pays tribute to the steps that
President Poroshenko is beginning to take in order to
ensure a return to stability in his country, starting with
the visit he made to the regions of the east of Ukraine
and his proposal for a peace plan that would put an end
to the revolt in the east. The President has also proposed
a general amnesty to separatists who elect to surrender
their weapons, as well as to open safe corridors so that
they can leave Ukraine. He is also continuing to work
to promote the rights of minorities and communities
that are not Ukrainian speakers. Those are all signs of
good will on the part of the Ukrainian authorities that
enhance the chances of achieving a peaceful solution
to the crisis.
In conclusion, we appeal to the international
community and the United Nations to combine their
efforts to ensure the success of the peace plan and to
continue with mediation and good offices in order to
end the crisis and bring about a return to stability in
Ukraine.
The President (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I shall now make a statement in my capacity
as the representative of the Russian Federation.
I must note first and foremost that, yet again,
during today’s discussions some members of the
Security Council did not attempt to objectively evaluate
the situation in Ukraine and its root causes. They

14-4390619/24

S/PV.7205

Ukraine

made insinuations and even threats against Russia. We
categorically refute them, and let us get to the heart of
the matter now.
For the first time in Ukraine, fragile encouraging
signs have begun to appear. That President Poroshenko
has declared a ceasefire is certainly important; there
can be no negotiations without one. Most important,
however, is that the ceasefire should lead to dialogue
among all the warring parties in order to reach a
compromise acceptable to all, so that people living
in south-east Ukraine feel without a doubt that they
are an integral part of the country, with all the rights
of citizens of that State, and that those rights are
guaranteed, including by the Constitution.
We value the first consultations that were held in
Donetsk between the authorities and official leaders of
Ukraine and militias of south-east Ukraine, with the
participation of the Russian Ambassador to Ukraine
and the representative of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We expect that
the agreement to support the ceasefire will be strictly
adhered to by the parties.
Dialogue has begun, although the so-called
Poroshenko plan did not originally include negotiations.
Not surprisingly, the representatives of the east
embraced him warily. They have no basis for trusting
the Kyiv authorities. For our part, we are convinced
that, without practical action and direct negotiations,
the peace plan process will not be viable or realistic.
In order to normalize and resolve the situation in
the eastern regions of Ukraine, as well as with regard
to the trilateral talks already launched on that matter,
Russian President Vladimir Putin sent a letter to the
Council of the Federation of the Federal Assembly
concerning the revocation of the Council’s decision on
the use of the Russian Army on the territory of Ukraine,
dated 1 March.
From the outset, Russia has called for a political
solution to the crisis in Ukraine through inclusive
dialogue and swift constitutional reform. That was the
goal of the Geneva statement of 17 April, as well as
of the OSCE road map, which had our support along
with that of many other States, but for some reason
not that of Ukraine. We have repeatedly called for
the relevant documents to be adopted by the Security
Council, from short statements in support of the Geneva
statement to resolutions that stress the importance of
inclusive dialogue in resolving the humanitarian issues.

20/24

24/06/2014

Unfortunately, our initiatives are invariably met with
stonewalling by Western colleagues.
That may be because Kyiv did not adhere to many
of the provisions of that document, even though they
had made a commitment to refrain from violence,
intimidation and provocation. Instead of halting its
punitive operations against its own people, Kyiv
actually intensified them.
Kyiv has not moved to disarm illegally armed
groups, particularly the co-called Right Sector and
other extremists, along with various regional militias
such as the Dnepr and Azov and the legally dubious
National Guard.
The Ukrainian crisis is strongly coloured by the
fact that it is a direct consequence of the violent and
unconstitutional change of Government in February.
Residents of the south-east were treated with contempt
by the self-proclaimed authorities. They copied the
tactics of the Maidan and took up arms in order to declare
their legal grievances, but then they were declared
separatists and terrorists, and punitive operations were
launched against entire cities with the use of heavy
artillery and aviation. For a long time, even against the
backdrop of President Poroshenko’s peace promises,
those operations only gathered momentum, in both
intensity and scope.
Furthermore, the ceasefire was constantly violated.
Shelling even reached Russian territory, as a result
of which people were wounded and buildings were
destroyed in the neighbourhood of the Dolzhansky
Novoshahtinsk crossing point. The humanitarian
situation remains extremely difficult, with an unabated
flow of refugees to Russia. We are trubled by the
refusal of the Ukrainian Ministry for Foreign Affairs to
cooperate with us in that area. We call for the removal
of artificial obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian
supplies and for the establishment of safe corridors for
the evacuation of civilians from combat zones. The
corridors promised by President Poroshenko have yet
to be created.
Even under bullets, refugees continue to leave
Ukraine. Upwards of 450,000 Ukrainian citizens have
crossed the border and remain in Russia. The majority
are living with friends and family, but in the border
regions alone there are more than 220 temporary
shelters, including tent cities. There are currently more
than 19,000 people living in such accommodation,
including more than 5,500 children. However, it is

14-43906

24/06/2014

Ukraine

difficult for the central and southern districts to absorb
such an influx, and new welcome centres are being
established across Russia. Across the country, people
are collecting humanitarian aid for the residents of
south-east Ukraine. I will not hide the fact that we are
deeply disturbed that some of our colleagues on the
Council who are so prone to play the humanitarian card
when they find it politically expedient seem indifferent
in this case.
With respect to the latest report of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
on the situation of human rights in Ukraine, there is
actually no reason for the Council to be discussing the
report. The monitoring mission was established by the
High Commissioner for Human Rights at the invitation
of the Ukrainian authorities. Since the Security Council
did not provide instructions for the report, logic would
dictate that the report not be submitted to the Council.
However, it is surprising that Kyiv, which itself
invited the mission, is refusing to cooperate with it,
particularly with respect to the investigation of the
tragedy in Odesa. The report notes the lack of progress
in OSCE’s parallel investigations, now numbering
six, which simply shows the efforts being made to
drown the truth in paper, and confirms the need for
a comprehensive international investigation into the
Odesa tragedy, as we have stated from the outset. As for
the Russian Federation, we did not invite the mission
and made no recommendations to it. We view the
inclusion of the recommendations in the document as
inappropriate.
The human rights situation in Crimea should
clearly not be the subject of the report. We also believe
that the mission’s inability to provide an assessment
under the pretext of a lack of access is nonsense. The
consequences of Kyiv’s action to cut off water in
Crimea are not mentioned in the report. However, the
lack of access did not prevent the mission from making
politically abhorrent statements on the deteriorating
situation in Crimea. There are several politically
motivated references in the report. According to the
guidelines for drafting the report, it seems that only
verified information should be used. That is probably
correct but that limitation has always benefited Kyiv in
the report.
There are a number of references in the document
to so-called reports of alleged human rights violations
by armed groups in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
However, why are many details overlooked with regard

S/PV.7205

to the residents of the area and journalists, as well as
videos showing artillery strikes on residential areas
in southeastern towns and casualties among civilians
as a result of the indiscriminate use of force by the
Government? The entire world saw the pictures of the
Ukrainian air strikes on the Luhansk administrative
building on 2 June, which could in no way be called a
military target. Civilians were killed. Despite the fact
that colleagues of the OSCE observers underscored that
the strikes were carried out by surface-to-air rockets,
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights for some reason makes the absurd assumption
that it was an unsuccessful attempt by militia to shoot
down a Ukrainian plane. Such a statement has been
rebutted by numerous sources.
In the section on propaganda, the report overlooks
the United Nations helicopter incident. For some reason
the incident is not mentioned. However, in order to
deal with the situation on the ground, we will have to
determine the position with regard to the helicopters
that had previously been provided to Ukraine for
United Nations operations and if they had really been
repainted. That should have been included and the
relevant United Nations resources provided to that end.
A separate discussion on the situation of journalists
is required. The report notes that on 24 May, an Italian
photojournalist, Andrea Rocchelli, and his colleague,
Andrey Mironov, were killed. On 17 June, following
mortar fire, the Russian journalists Igor Kornelyuk and
Anton Voloshin were killed in Luhansk. There needs to
be a careful investigation of those events. There are too
many reports that indicate that it was a targeted attack.
The detention, intimidation and beating of
journalists continue. In addition to the cases in the
report, we would note the 14 June incident, in which
two correspondents of the Zvezda television channel
were brutally beaten by the Ukrainian armed forces in
order to obtain confessions. The Ukrainian authorities
then boasted that the journalists had apologized for the
reporting. There are continuing reports of journalists
being persecuted for carrying out their work, as well as
their expulsion from the country. In general, we must say
that the report undermines trust in the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and gives rise to
serious questions as to whether it is appropriate for the
mission to continue its work.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

14-4390621/24

S/PV.7205

Ukraine

I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): It is of great importance
that the Security Council is having a meeting on the
current situation in Ukraine. I would like to thank all
members of the Security Council for their statements.
I am grateful for their support of our President’s plan
for the peaceful settlement of the situation in eastern
Ukraine.
We thank Assistant Secretary-General Tayé-Brook
Zerihoun for his briefing. We welcome the report on
the human rights situation in Ukraine, presented by
Assistant Secretary-General Mr. Šimonović, who has
travelled to Ukraine many times. The report contains
conclusions and recommendations that are important
to the Government of Ukraine and highly valuable to
our country. Ukraine is ready to further develop and
deepen cooperation with the United Nations human
rights bodies. We welcome the decision to extend
the United Nations human rights monitoring mission
mandate for another term.
The report notes the continuation of the worrying
trends in Crimea, including instances of enforced
disappearances, detentions, violence and ill treatment
by illegal paramilitary groups, or the so-called
Crimean self-defence, often targeting journalists,
human rights defenders and political opponents. It
also notes impunity for human rights violations. The
judicial system remains practically paralysed. Crimean
residents face serious difficulties in exercising their
civil and political rights. Following threats, many
Crimeans have been forced to give up Ukrainian
citizenship. There are only two Ukrainian schools in
Crimea, one of which has already been compelled to
become Russian and its director forced to resign. Today,
we learned that unknown armed men have occupied a
madrasa, or Muslim religious school, near Simferopol.
According to the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the officially confirmed
number of internally displaced persons from Crimea,
Ukraine, is more than 12,000, who have been forced
to leave the peninsula due to the unbearable living
conditions created by the occupying authorities. That is
truly alarming. We demand that the Russian Federation,
which has temporarily occupied the Crimean peninsula,
ensure the protection of the rights of Ukrainian citizens
of all nationalities who remain in Crimea, that is,
Ukrainians, Russians, Crimean Tatars and others,

22/24

24/06/2014

including their right to freedom and to security and the
rights of religious communities.
Given the ongoing systematic violations of human
rights in Crimea, the Ukrainian side hopes that the
situation on the peninsula shall continue to receive the
attention of the international community. It supports the
report’s call on the occupying authorities in the Crimea
to provide access for independent international experts,
primarily the United Nations monitoring mission.
The report, inter alia, contains updates on the
information regarding the tragic events in Odesa. It is
significant that the efforts of the Ukrainian authorities
to investigate both the tragic Maidan events and those
of 2 May in Odesa have been acknowledged in the
report. The assistance that the law enforcement bodies
provided to the mission and their observance of the
proper respect for the rights of those arrested in Odesa
are noted with appreciation. We thank the human rights
monitoring group for the objective approach to the
assessment of the events. As of the present moment,
several suspects have been arrested. State criminal
experts were able to establish the cause of death of the
victims. The investigation continues and the official
results will be made public as soon as they have been
established.
In the report, special attention is paid to the situation
in the eastern regions of Ukraine. The document notes
the growing number of illegal actions committed by
highly organized illegal armed groups in violation of
national and international laws. It is very important to
mention that human rights violations and humanitarian
problems occur only in those cities that are temporarily
under the control of illegal armed groups, such as
Slovyansk, Kramatorsk and Snizhne. The illegal
activities of those groups include murder, torture,
the seizure of administrative and public buildings,
the kidnapping and detention of civilians, including
journalists, taking hostages, including observers of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
and intimidating and terrorizing the local population.
The groups are capturing infrastructure management
buildings, causing disruption to the operation of
some water and electricity supply facilities that have
suffered gunfire. Terrorists are deliberately waging
a war against civilians, creating barriers to the free
movement of people, including disabled persons. Such
people are cynically used as live shields. We express
our deepest condolences over the deaths of the foreign

14-43906

24/06/2014

Ukraine

journalists, Italian and Russian, who became victims of
the fighting.
From the very beginning, I would like to stress
that there is no humanitarian crisis in Ukraine. The
humanitarian problems in some parts of the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions are caused only by the activities
of pro-Russian illegal armed groups that have managed
to seize control of the cities. On the other hand, the
Ukrainian Government is doing its utmost to exercise
control over the situation, to restore law and order and
to provide help for all our citizens. The President of
Ukraine ordered the establishment of all necessary
conditions for the civilian population willing to leave
cities temporarily seized by terrorists through safe
corridors.
The State emergency services were assigned to
establish a multifunctional coordination centre in order
to transport affected persons, as well as to maintain
the health-care and social needs of the civilians. The
local authorities of other regions of Ukraine ensure
the accommodation of people arriving from the area
who have suffered terrorist attacks. The National
Coordination Centre is assisting in the temporary
accommodation of the citizens of Ukraine who are
moving from the Donetsk and Luhansk regions to other
regions of the country. Special attention has been given
to the relocation of children who are being sent to and
accommodated at summer camps in all regions of the
country.
The Ukrainian Government is demonstrating its
ability to bring peace to people. The authorities of
liberated cities like Mariupol and others are now able
to deliver the message of peace to other cities, whose
populations are still influenced by false messages
containing anti-Ukrainian propaganda. As a practical
step, the President of Ukraine, Mr. Petro Poroshenko,
held a large, inclusive meeting-dialogue last week with
the true representatives of the eastern region of the
country — representatives of local communities and of
the business and political elite of Donetsk and Luhansk
and legitimately elected mayors.
In his inaugural speech on 7 June, President
Poroshenko stressed that he was assuming the office in
order to preserve the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and national unity of Ukraine, ensure sustainable
peace and guarantee security for all citizens. Last
Friday, President Poroshenko presented his plan for
the peaceful settlement of the situation in the eastern
regions of Ukraine, which I assume the Security

S/PV.7205

Council supports. Council members will have noticed
that the plan includes three major parts: ceasefire,
restoration and dialogue.
President Poroshenko has already initiated the
implementation of the plan by ordering a unilateral
ceasefire in the east of Ukraine. I would now like
to quote from the speech with which my President
addressed the nation last Sunday and in which he
explained the details of the plan.
“The immediate implementation of the peace
plan will open the path to political dialogue. I
invite legally elected representatives of local
Government, non-governmental organizations and
everyone else to join in the dialogue. Diametrically
opposed views will not be a barrier to participation
in the negotiations. I am ready to talk with those
who have erred or who mistakenly took a position
in support of separatism, but not, of course, people
who were involved in acts of terrorism, murder
or torture. Moreover, I guarantee safety for all
participants in the negotiations, for anyone who
wants to speak the language of argument instead of
the language of weapons.
“It is important to state that the issue of the
territorial integrity of Ukraine is not on the table.
We hear and take into account the specific opinions
of Donbas citizens, but we cannot and will not
transform Ukraine, where there is a large consensus
on the issues of unity, territorial structure, language
and geopolitical orientation, to satisfy them.
“What then is the way out of this situation? It is in
a broad decentralization of power. Decentralization
provides for the expansion of the rights of regions
on issues of historical memory, cultural traditions
and language policy. Those issues will never
again divide the country. Local communities in
Donbas will have the right to freely use the Russian
language along with the State language.”
The plan has been supported by major world leaders
and international organizations — the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Council of
Europe and the United Nations. Ukraine is committed to
strictly following a path of building peace. In response
to the peace-restoring initiative, the gunmen and
terrorists launched continued armed attacks, blatantly
violating the truce terms.
We welcome the intention of the Russian President
to cancel of Federation Council decision on the use of

14-4390623/24

S/PV.7205

Ukraine

armed forces on the territory of Ukraine. However, in
areas of the Russian Federation adjacent to the border
with Ukraine, a notable increase in the concentration
of manpower and military equipment of the Russian
Federation’s armed forces has been witnessed in recent
days.
Ukraine calls on all international partners to
support our sustained efforts to restore peace and the
unconditional implementation by all sides of the 17 April

24/24

24/06/2014

Geneva statement. We have asked the international
community to support President Poroshenko’s plan for
the peaceful settlement of the situation in the eastern
part of Ukraine.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

14-43906
