S/2020/760

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 July 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 29 July 2020 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
In a letter dated 2 June 2020 addressed to me, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Emigrants of Lebanon requested that the Security Council extend the mandate of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for a further year, without
any amendments to its mandate, its concept of operations and its rules of engagement.
In that regard, and further to my recent reports to the Council of 14 July 2020
(S/2020/710) on the implementation of Council resolution 1701 (2006) and of 1 June
2020 (S/2020/473) on the assessment of the continued relevance of UNIFIL resources
mandated in Council resolution 2485 (2019), I hereby request the Council to consider
renewing the mandate of UNIFIL, which is due to expire on 31 August 2020.
While I commend both the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel Defense
Forces on their continued commitment to maintaining the cessa tion of hostilities and
their close cooperation with UNIFIL, there has been no tangible progress towards a
permanent ceasefire and a long-term solution to the conflict, as called for in resolution
1701 (2006). Both parties have yet to fulfil their respective obligations under the
resolution. Israel must cease all violations of Lebanese sovereignty and airspace, as
well as expedite the withdrawal of its forces from northern Ghajar and the adjacent
area north of the Blue Line in accordance with resolution 1701 (2006). There have
been continued violations of Lebanese airspace by Israeli aircraft, including to
allegedly carry out strikes inside the Syrian Arab Republic, which remain of deep
concern. The Lebanese authorities should take all action to ensure that there are no
unauthorized armed personnel, assets or weapons in the area between the Blue Line
and the Litani River other than those belonging to the Government of Lebanon and to
UNIFIL, bearing in mind the primary responsibility of the Lebanese Armed Forces in
that regard. UNIFIL, in close coordination with the Office of the United Nations
Special Coordinator for Lebanon, continues to work with bot h parties to fulfil these
critical outstanding obligations.
The past 12 months have seen incidents of serious concern in the cessation of
hostilities, including the incident between Lebanon and Israel on 1 September 2019,
as detailed in my report of 18 November 2019 (S/2019/889). Following reports on
25 August that one unmanned aerial vehicle had crashed and another one had
exploded in Beirut, and increased tensions along the Blue Line, Hizbullah claimed
responsibility for a missile fired into Israel on 1 September 2019, which led to
artillery fire from Israel into Lebanon. Whereas that series of incidents was contained
through active liaison by UNIFIL, it demonstrated the risk of escalation across the
Blue Line and underlined the need for progress in addressing the outstanding
provisions of resolution 1701 (2006).

20-10311 (E)

040820

*2010311*

S/2020/760

The stability of Lebanon has been further challenged by the continued
deterioration of the country’s economic situation, compounded by the impact of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In addition, since the onset of nationwide
protests in October 2019, the presence of the Lebanese Armed Forces in the UNIFIL
area of operations has been reduced as it carries out security responsibilities
elsewhere in the country.
The liaison and coordination arrangements UNIFIL has established with the
Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel Defense Forces, bilaterally and through
the tripartite forum, remain vital for mitigating tensions along the Blue Line. The
parties – Israel and Lebanon – remain unwilling to engage, other than at the
operational level under the UNIFIL umbrella. I encourage the parties to re -engage in
visibly marking the Blue Line on the ground, a process that has been stalled since
2017, including at contentious points where solutions could be explored within the
tripartite framework and without prejudice to future border negotiations. Such a
confidence-building measure would be helpful with regard to monitoring violations
and preventing inadvertent crossings.
The Government of Lebanon continues to express its strong commitment to
expanding the capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces on land and at sea, which
remains vital for enhancing State presence in southern Lebanon. Mobilizing
additional international support to build this capacity is a key priority, and follow -up
to the commitments made at the ministerial-level meeting known as the Rome II
conference is critical for progress in that regard. UNIFIL, in consultation with the
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon, continues to engage
in mobilizing international support for developing the capabilities identified as
priorities by the Lebanese Armed Forces, including the deployment of a model
regiment to southern Lebanon and the development of a strategy for the gradual
transition of responsibilities from the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force to the Lebanese
Navy. Given the economic situation in Lebanon, international support will be even
more important to help to realize that goal.
Despite the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic since March 2020,
UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces have continued to work together through the
conduct of exercises and the provision of training, on land and at sea, with the aim of
increasing the capacity, capabilities and presence of the Lebanese Armed Forces in
southern Lebanon and the territorial waters of Lebanon. As detailed in my assessment
report (S/2020/473), in order to achieve a gradual transition of UNIFIL Maritime Task
Force responsibilities to the Government of Lebanon, the Lebanese Navy has begun
to participate in maritime interdiction operations along with the Task Force for a oneyear trial period, in order to validate that the Lebanese Navy is capable of taking over
partial responsibilities of the Task Force in one sector of the area of maritime
operations, while maintaining the operational tempo of the Task Force. The inspect ion
by the Lebanese Navy of 100 per cent of the ships referred by UNIFIL will be an
important factor in contributing to the success of the trial period.
In accordance with its mandate, UNIFIL remains committed to taking all actions
necessary within its capabilities to ensure that its area of operations is not utilized for
hostile activities of any kind. To that end, UNIFIL has maintained a high operational
tempo and increased visibility in accordance with Council resolutions 2373 (2017),
2433 (2018) and 2485 (2019), including through foot patrols; increased night patrols
along the Blue Line; and a more effective use of air assets, including by increasing
the number of operational flights, such as reconnaissance over areas to which ground
patrols have limited access, and undertaking night flights over rugged and difficult
terrain.

2/4

20-10311

S/2020/760

As noted in my recent reports on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006),
UNIFIL has yet to gain full access to several sites of interest, despite repeated formal
requests to the Lebanese Armed Forces. Among those locations are the Green without
Borders sites in Aytarun (Sector West), to which a visit was requested in connecti on
with the UNIFIL technical investigation into the 1 September 2019 exchange of fire
across the Blue Line. The ability of UNIFIL to investigate such incidents constitutes
a core part of its mandate to prevent actions by the parties that could undermine th e
cessation of hostilities, and it is incumbent upon the parties to facilitate UNIFIL
investigations, including by facilitating its timely access to all related locations.
The freedom of movement of UNIFIL in its entire area of operations and along
the full length of the Blue Line remains critical. It is the primary responsibility of the
Lebanese authorities to ensure such freedom of movement and to facilitate full access
by UNIFIL to locations for preventive inspections. The incidents involving
restrictions of UNIFIL freedom of movement have been detailed in my reports on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).
To date, the United Nations has not been informed of criminal proceedings to
bring to justice the perpetrators of the attack on UNIFIL peacekeepers that occurred
on 4 August 2018 in Majdal Zun. This remains critical for preventing future incidents
and retaining the confidence of troop-contributing countries. In relation to the tunnels
confirmed by UNIFIL to cross the Blue Line, it remains essential that the Lebanese
authorities undertake a thorough investigation on the Lebanese side and that UNIFIL
gain access to relevant sites.
It is also important to note the urgent need for progress on the responsibility of
Israel to cease all violations of Lebanese sovereignty and airspace. The overflights
cause distress to Lebanese civilians, run counter to the efforts of UNIFIL to reduce
tensions and have a negative impact on the credibility of the Lebanese Armed Forces
and UNIFIL.
As at 16 July 2020, the total number of military personnel was 10,886 members,
including 584 women. The Maritime Task Force comprised six vessels, two
helicopters and 877 military personnel. The UNIFIL civilian component co mprised
239 international and 580 national staff. I am grateful to the 45 troop -contributing
countries and continue to encourage them to increase the number of women deployed
to UNIFIL.
As requested by the Council in its resolution 2485 (2019), the Secretariat
conducted a thorough assessment of the continued relevance of UNIFIL resources.
The findings, detailed in my assessment report (S/2020/473), indicated that the
stability of the UNIFIL area of operations remained fragile amid increasingly
complex conflict dynamics in the region and the absence of political progress to
resolve the underlying causes of the conflict between Israel and Lebanon. Protracte d
tensions in the wider region, Israel’s security concern regarding Hizbullah’s military
capabilities, the Syrian conflict and the unresolved Israeli-Palestinian conflict remain
key factors that affect the stability of the region and of the Blue Line, with an
undiminished risk of a resumption of hostilities between the parties, even if
accidentally triggered. In this highly volatile context, UNIFIL monitors and supports
the cessation of hostilities between Lebanon and Israel and provides valuable
deterrence and prevention and a critical de-escalation mechanism through its
operations. The high density of troops and high tempo of operations continue to play
a critical and necessary role in the ability of UNIFIL to prevent conflict and
implement its mandate.
In my assessment report, I identified several options for optimizing the
configuration and operations of UNIFIL, including a greater focus on reconnaissance
functions (less on heavy infantry), with increased reliance on lighter vehicles, and a
20-10311

3/4

S/2020/760

strengthening of the liaison and coordination capabilities of the mission. The report
also contained a recommendation for reconfiguring UNIFIL operations towards the
Blue Line, as well as options for enhancing monitoring and reporting with new
technology.
I indicated in my report that, according to the assessment, the transfer of some
Maritime Task Force responsibilities to the Lebanese Navy could be realized and
might warrant consideration of a reduction of the Task Force by one ship (from the
current six corvettes to five), following the completion of the ongoing trial period
referred to above. In addition, I identified options to, inter alia, consolidate several
United Nations positions, repatriate some excess equipment and conduct a review of
the civilian staffing structure of the mission. If the options for optimizing UNIFIL
capabilities, as outlined in my report, are supported and endorsed by the Council, the
Secretariat will commence discussions with the Government of Lebanon, the
Government of Israel and troop-contributing countries, with a view to concluding the
implementation process as rapidly as possible.
Meanwhile, pending a final agreement on the boundary between Lebanon and
Israel, and as long as the Lebanese Armed Forces is not able to deploy to southern
Lebanon in significantly larger numbers, UNIFIL operational and liaison activities
continue to provide valuable deterrence and a critical de-escalation mechanism in a
context in which escalation remains a real possibility. The leverage of UNIFIL a nd its
ability to continue to perform its mandated tasks are inextricably linked to its
capabilities, and I believe that UNIFIL, with its robust posture, remains necessary to
prevent a security vacuum until such time as the parties can move towards a
permanent ceasefire. UNIFIL, in close coordination with the Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon, is ready to lend its full support to the parties
in this process.
I would like to express my appreciation to the Head of Mission and Force
Commander of UNIFIL, Major General Stefano Del Col, and to all the military and
civilian personnel of UNIFIL, for the work they are carrying out in southern Lebanon
and for their commitment in the service of peace.
The General Assembly, by its resolution 74/292, took into account the special
circumstances created by the COVID-19 pandemic and authorized the SecretaryGeneral to enter into commitments in the amount of $480.6 million for the
maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021.
As at 17 July 2020, unpaid assessed contributions to the special account for
UNIFIL amounted to $171.9 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions for
all peacekeeping operations at that date amounted to $3,053.5 million.
Reimbursement of the costs of troop and formed police personnel, as well as for
contingent-owned equipment have been made for the period up to 31 December 2019,
in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.
I should like to express my appreciation for the continued united and steadfast
support of the Council for UNIFIL and its mandated activities. With the above
information in mind, I recommend that the Council extend the mandate of UNIFIL
for a further period of 12 months, until 31 August 2021.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

4/4

20-10311
