S/2021/952

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 December 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 18 November 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the 8906th meeting of the Security Council,
convened on 16 November 2021 under the agenda item “Maintenance of international
peace and security”. The interventions of the briefers, Council members, as well as
Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Chile, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Ecuador, Egypt, Finland, Germany, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Japan, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Malta, Morocco, Nepal, the Netherlands,
Pakistan, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Slovakia, South Africa, Switzerland, Turkey,
Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, will
be published as an official record of the Security Council (S/PV.8906).
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for
the 8906th meeting, the following delegations submitted written statements, copies
of which are enclosed: Australia, Guatemala, Italy and the Republic of Korea.
Those statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council, in
accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security
Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the members of the Council
dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the extraordinary
circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, and reference to the
official document will be made in S/PV.8906.
(Signed) Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
President of the Security Council

21-17717 (E) 170322 040422

*2217717*

S/2021/952

Annex I
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Australia to the United Nations
First, let me thank your delegation, Sir, for hosting this open debate on the
important issue of “Peace and security through preventive diplomacy: a common
objective to all the principal organs of the United Nations”.
Australia, like Mexico and many other States around this table and the
world, shares a deep commitment to multilateralism. Australia remains steadfast
in its support for a United Nations system that is fit for purpose, effective, open,
transparent and accountable to all Member States.
We are pleased to be a long-standing supporter of the Secretary-General’s
vision to place prevention at the centre of United Nations peace and security efforts.
Member States have expressed their clear expectation that the whole United Nations
system will advance this agenda energetically and without delay.
We commend Mexico for prioritizing prevention through this signature event
and for encouraging United Nations organs to ensure that they place prevention at
the heart of their work. Preventive diplomacy is a critical tool for preventing conflict,
addressing atrocity risk and ending protracted crises. Sustaining peace requires
action across the United Nations system, not just in traditional peacebuilding areas.
Today is an opportunity to explore how the principal organs of the United Nations
can ensure that preventive diplomacy be employed across respective agendas.
Australia continues to support meaningful reform across the United Nations
development, human rights and peace and security pillars. For reforms to make a
practical difference, it will be crucial to embed coherent working methods throughout
the United Nations system, deepen and broaden partnerships outside the system and
get better at identifying and delivering effective action on prevention.
Persistent inequality will impede our efforts, and recognizing the key role
of women in prevention and championing and facilitating their involvement in
peacebuilding and sustaining peace are vital. Greater diversity and representation
across the United Nations principal organs will give us an opportunity to further
advance inclusive processes.
As we look to implement the Secretary-General’s latest reform measures
in Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), we look forward to working with Mexico, the
Security Council and United Nations States Members to consolidate gains made
from existing efforts and build a United Nations that is as effective as possible. That
includes the current efforts of the United Nations to sustain peace, and its capacity
and readiness to respond to emerging global challenges.

2/7

21-17717

S/2021/952

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Guatemala to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Guatemala thanks the delegation of Mexico in its capacity as President of
the Security Council during the month of November 2021 for convening this open
debate on “Peace and security through preventive diplomacy: a common objective to
all the principal organs of the United Nations”. At the same time, we appreciate the
statements delivered by the speakers.
We acknowledge the importance of the concept note (S/2021/888, annex)
that was circulated as a basis for our deliberations. At the same time, we agree
with what is stated in the note in the sense that the purposes of the United Nations,
as set forth in the Charter, will be achieved only through genuine harmonization,
cooperation and mutually reinforcing collaboration among the principal organs of
the United Nations and jointly with the entire United Nations system. When acting
within their respective mandates, they all share the same ideals for the benefit of
international peace and security and play a fundamental role within the framework
of preventive diplomacy.
In accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council
is the organ responsible for addressing threats to international peace and security.
However, Guatemala believes that the actions that the Council may take to restore
international peace and security, including those actions outlined in Chapter VII
of the Charter, are reactionary. It should have previously exhausted the promotion
of and good offices for the settlement of disputes by peaceful means, as indicated
in Chapter VI of the Charter. In that sense, for the Security Council, conflict
prevention should be a priority, while harmonizing efforts within the United Nations
structure to foster dialogue and preventive diplomacy. The statistics leave no room
for interpretation — investing in prevention will prevent the loss of human life, but it
will also make it possible to optimize the Organization’s limited financial resources.
In addition, we acknowledge that the States Members of the Organization
have at their disposal the Peacebuilding Commission, which prioritizes prevention
and whose reports to the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Security Council contribute, through a coherent approach, to achieving
that objective.
We have witnessed that during special political mission transitions, the
Peacebuilding Commission can and should play a crucial role in maintaining
international support for a country to address its priorities, in particular with
regard to strengthening its institutions and development priorities. We recognize
that the United Nations country team should base its activities on the repositioning
of the development system, which anticipates country needs, in accordance with
Government priorities.
Furthermore, in our view, we stress the importance of the rule of law at the
national and international levels and the strengthening of institutions. A society
with strong, solid institutions is essential in the areas of conflict resolution and
conflict prevention. At the international level, we highly value the important role
played by the International Court of Justice in the peaceful resolution of disputes
between States. Respect for the decisions, judgments and advisory opinions of the
International Court of Justice is key to upholding the Charter and international law
and to consolidating the success of the international justice system.
21-177173/7

S/2021/952

In conclusion, we reiterate our position that the Security Council can and must
consider the full range of resources available for peacebuilding in an environment of
transition and prevention. In order to build peace, we must learn from past lessons.
The Organization as a whole and the Security Council must adapt to the different
contexts of the world today.

4/7

21-17717

S/2021/952

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United Nations
We thank the Mexican presidency of the Security Council for organizing
this timely open debate and express our appreciation to the briefers for their
insightful remarks.
Preventing conflict is one of the priorities of our time, and we share the view
that preventive diplomacy should take a more prominent place in the activities
of the United Nations system. We strongly believe that peace and security issues
must be addressed with a multidimensional and inclusive approach that spans the
development, political, security, justice and human rights dimensions, while paying
due consideration to the concept of the peace continuum and the peace-humanitariandevelopment nexus.
Italy has consistently supported the Secretary-General’s commitment to
changing the paradigm from crisis management to conflict prevention and sustaining
peace. We are long-standing supporters of his good offices and are pleased to see the
steady reinforcement of the role of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs (DPPA) in preventive diplomacy and peacebuilding, in line with the objective
of enhancing United Nations action along the entire cycle of conflict. We encourage
DPPA to continue to follow that path with strong and innovative initiatives and take
full advantage of all possible synergies, especially with the Peacebuilding Fund.
In the same spirit, we agree on the need to reinforce the whole-of-pillar approach,
which is at the core of the reform as well as a significant factor in the initiative of the
Secretary-General — Our Common Agenda (A/75/982).
The United Nations defence of peace worldwide must be comprehensive in
nature. For strong concerted action by the global community, Italy believes that
the United Nations should act as the linchpin and catalyst of joint efforts, while
promoting an effective division of labour among all the actors involved — specialized
agencies, national institutions and non-governmental organizations (NGOs), as well
as parliamentary groups and academic institutions.
The entities of the United Nations system, individually and collectively, should
review existing policies and programmes and sharpen their focus on alleviating the
root causes of conflict. They should find practical ways to cooperate effectively in
preventive diplomacy and in the promotion of the rule of law. We suggest that the
General Assembly be more involved in preventive diplomacy — instituting regular
meetings of the Security Council to review conflict-prone situations. We believe in a
greater role for the Economic and Social Council in identifying social and economic
problems likely to result in crisis, as well as in developing strategies to deal with
economic and social causes of conflict.
Lastly, we also suggest making greater use of the International Court of Justice
in the peaceful settlement of disputes. In addition, Member States should allocate
more funds to preventive diplomacy that can also be directed towards setting up
small preventive diplomacy teams in the regional centres, reinforcing early-warning
capacities and ensuring a smooth transition from early warning to early action.
Closer cooperation between development agencies and humanitarian and human
rights agencies should be ensured both in the field and at Headquarters level.
We believe that the Security Council should further strengthen its relationship
with the Peacebuilding Commission, which is uniquely poised to mobilize
coordinated support for peacebuilding priorities and development plans, as well as
with the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the International
Court of Justice. However, we need more commitment and more unity from the
Security Council.
21-177175/7

S/2021/952

We also believe that the United Nations should be able to count on the
fundamental contribution of regional organizations, since they are in the best position
to detect early-warning signals and deploy preventive tools before tensions escalate.
Italy has also placed conflict prevention and conflict resolution consistently at the
core of its membership in the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
The latter’s contribution to conflict prevention, as a regional organization under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, fully aligns itself with the concept
of a comprehensive approach to peace, recognizing security, development and human
rights as indivisible components of a stable, prosperous and diverse society. That is
the idea at the core of the Secretary-General’s vision of a reformed United Nations.
We cannot overestimate the role of civil society in promoting resilient societies
and preventing tensions from escalating. We stress once again the importance of the
full implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. For Italy, women’s
participation is crucial to guaranteeing inclusivity. In that respect, the launch in 2017
Mediterranean Women Mediators Network responds to the pressing need to foster
women’s participation in a region that is key to global peace and stability. Religious
leaders and NGOs also play an essential role in preventing the escalation of tensions
and fostering the prospects for peace and promoting dialogue and reconciliation. A
notable example is the support provided by the organization Comunità di Sant’Egidio
to the Central African Republic peace process. The work of the Italian NGO Rondine
Cittadella della Pace also attests to the important contribution that so-called secondtrack diplomacy can bring to conflict prevention, and education to peace and the
promotion of human rights.
We are currently members of three country configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and we are a top contributor to the Peacebuilding Fund. The need to
ensure predictable and sustainable financing to peacebuilding and sustaining peace
is clear. We are therefore keen to cooperate in order to define ways to fulfil such need.

6/7

21-17717

S/2021/952

Annex IV

Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations, Cho Hyun
My delegation would like to commend the President of the Security Council
for convening today’s timely open debate. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, the President of the General Assembly, the President of the Economic and
Social Council and the President of the International Court of Justice. The convening
of this meeting itself is a great example that demonstrates how the Security Council
coordinates with the other principal organs of the United Nations.
As the Secretary-General mentions in his report Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982), we now stand at an inflection point in history. Despite all of our efforts
for the prevention of conflicts and peacebuilding, we are still facing the grim reality
of continued conflicts and violence in many parts of the world. In addition, we are
also witnessing multifaceted challenges, from terrorism and violent extremism to
hate speech and the infodemic. The adverse impacts of climate change to global
peace and security are becoming all too real. It is high time to accelerate our efforts
for sustaining peace. In that regard, we warmly welcome the Secretary-General’s
Our Common Agenda, which highlights a stronger and more inclusive multilateral
system anchored within the United Nations for prevention and peacebuilding through
the new agenda for peace.
Against that backdrop, let me highlight three points.
First, my delegation emphasizes the importance of the humanitariandevelopment-peace nexus and the comprehensive all-of-United Nations approach.
As the 2020 peacebuilding architecture review process reaffirmed, effective
peacebuilding must involve the entire United Nations system. That is also highlighted
in Our Common Agenda, which states that prevention must be based on better links
between peace and security and human rights, climate and development work.
Secondly, it is crucial to expand the unique advisory, bridging and convening
roles of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in support of peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. In particular, it is important to strengthen the coordination and
cooperation between the Security Council and the PBC. The PBC has been providing
written advice to the Security Council on some country-specific issues, particularly
ahead of the mandate renewal of peacekeeping missions. However, much more needs
to be done. We need a more systematic mechanism for close consultation between
those two bodies.
Last but not least, we need to ensure adequate, predictable and sustained
financing for prevention and peacebuilding. In that regard, I would like to highlight
the importance of the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) and the multi-year appeal of the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs. In particular, the PBF has been
playing an instrumental and catalytic role in advancing various peacebuilding
projects. Therefore, we need to continue to explore how to finance the PBF, including
funding through assessed contributions.
The prevention of conflicts and peacebuilding has always been a priority for
the Republic of Korea. The Republic of Korea has continued to be a member of
the PBC since 2015 and remains a staunch supporter of the PBF and the multi-year
appeal. Furthermore, sustaining peace will also be discussed at the 2021 United
Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial, to be held in Seoul next month. We hope that
will be another great opportunity to strengthen the impact and contributions of
peacekeeping on transitions and achieving sustaining peace, and we will spare no
effort in that regard.

21-177177/7
