General Assembly

146

fourth session as well as the ongoing work of the Preparatory Com~ttee for the New International Development Strategy and the Committee of the Whole.

109th plenary meeting
19 December 1979
34/208.

Sixth replenishment of the International Development Association and recapitalization
of the World Bank

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Progranune of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 197 5 on development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolutions 31/181 of 21 December
1976 and 33/145 of 20 December 1978 on the recapitalization of the World Bank and the replenishment of
the International Development Association,
Taking into account the greatly enlarged external financing requirements of the developing countries, particularly for long-term capital on highly concessional terms,
Realizing that considerable lead time is required for
contributing Governments to take the necessary legislative action with respect to the replenishment of the International Development Association and bearing in
mind that the commitment authority for the fifth replenishment of the International Development Association expires in June 1980,
1. Calls upon all contributing countries to take the
steps necessary for the early conclusion of negotiations
for the sixth replenishment of the International Development Association and to initiate the necessary action for
that replenishment so as to ensure an adequate increase
in real terms in the resources of the institution, taking
into account t9 the fullest extent possible the rapidly
growing requirements of the developing countries for
such resources and the effects of world inflation;
2. Urges the members of the World Bank to take
early implementing action on the decision to increase the
Bank's capital to ensure that its lending to the developing
countries increases adequately in real terms.

109th plenary meeting
19 December 1979
34/209.

United Nations Special Fund for Land-locked
Developing Countries212

Thirty-fourth Session

erning Council of the United Nations Development Programme,214
Expressing its appreciation for the measures taken by
the Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme, in consultation with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to identify and elaborate concrete projects
which could be financed from the Fund,
Expressing its disappointment at the very low leveJ of
contributions for 1979 announced at the 1978 Umted
Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities,215
Noting that, as reported to the Governing Council of
the United Nations Development Programme, the resources available to the Fund will be fully committed by
the end of 1979 and that, unless additional resources are
received, no further programming activities can be undertaken,
Noting further that the demands for assistance from
the Fund are additional to, and generally different from,
the type of activities financed from other sources of the
United Nations system,
I. Urges all Governments, in particular those of developed countries, to review their position regarding the
United Nations Special Fund for Land-locked Developing Countries, giving due consideration to the special
constraints affecting the land-locked developing countries in their efforts towards economic and social development and to their needs for additional assistance to
overcome such constraints, particularly with respect to
transport, transit and related difficulties;
2. Appeals to all Member States, in particular developed countries, as well as international organizations and
multilateral financial institutions, to contribute generously to the Fund at the 1979 United Nations Pledging
Conference for Development Activities;
3. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme, in consultation with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development and the executive heads of
other related institutions, to pursue action in favour of
land-locked developing countries within the framework
of the interim arrangements, bearing in mind that each
country concerned should receive appropriate technical
and financial assistance;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
analytical report to the General Assembly at its special
session in 1980 on the implementation of the new international economic order, called for in Assembly resolution 33/198 of 29 January 1979, an assessment of the
situation of the land-locked developing countries as well
as a review of the implementation of the present
resolution.

109th plenary meeting
19 December I 979

The General Assembly,
· Recalling its resolution 31 / 177 of 21 December 1976,
by which it approved the statute of the United Nations
Special Fund for Land-locked Developing Countries,
Recalling also its resolutions 32/113 of 15 December
1977 and 33/85 of 15 December 1978,
Taking note of resolution 123 (V) of 3 June 1979 of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development218 and decision 79 /7 of 26 June 1979 of the Gov211 Sec also sect. I, foot-note 11.

111 Sec Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and
.A.nneres (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14),
part one, sect. A.

34/210.

Special measures in favour of the least developed among the developing countries 216

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/149 of 20 December 1978,
in which it, inter alia, recommended that the developed
214 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1979,
Supplement No. 10 (E/1979/40 and Corr.I), chap. XXI, sect. M.
216 See A/CONF.96/SR.1-3 and corrigendum .
21a See also sect. I, foot-note 11.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

countries, as well as the appropriate international organizations and financial institutions within the United
Nations system, should implement the special measures
in favour of the least developed among the developing
countries, as recommended by the General Assembly
and other related bodies of the United Nations,
Recalling also the special measures in favour of the
least developed among the developing countries adopted
by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in its resolutions 62 (III) of 19 May 1972 211 and
98 (IV) of 31 May 1976, 218 as well as Trade and Development Board resolution 165 (S-IX) of 11 March
1978,219
Reiterating the decision taken by the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, in its resolution
122 (V) of 3 June 1979, 220 to launch a Comprehensive
New Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries as one of its major priorities,
Noting that the first phase of that Programme calls for
an immediate effort to meet the critical situation of the
least developed countries in the form of an Immediate
Action Programme, for 1979-1981, of greatly expanded
assistance for the least developed countries, aimed at:
(a) Providjng an immediate boost to their economies and immediate support for projects for meeting the
most pressing social needs,
(b) Paving the way for comprehensive and much
larger long-term development efforts,
Considering that the basic structural and economic
problems facing the least developed countries are so
severe that extraordinary additional measures, especially
designed in the Comprehensive New Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries as an essential
contribution to the establishment of the new international
economic order, are required,
Considering also that the special measures thus far
implemented in favour of the least developed countries
have led on the whole only to relatively small and unsatisfactory results and that their growth rate in real
terms of gross domestic product per capita has declined
in the period 1970-1978,
Emphasizing the need for a greatly expanded transfer
of official development assistance to the least developed
countries, in the context of a general increase in official
development assistance for all developing countries with
a view to realizing the 0. 7 per cent target,
Emphasizing further that external support should be
forthcoming from developed countries, developing countries in a position to do so, multilateral development
institutions and other sources,
1. Endorses the Comprehensive New Programme of
Action for the Least Developed Countries contained in
resolution 122 (V) of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development;
2. Calls upon donor countries urgently to implement
the commitments relating to official development assist217 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.73.II.D.4),
annex I.A.
218
Ibid., Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.II.D.10 and corrigendum),
part one, sect. A.
219
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/33/15 and Corr.I), vol. I, part
two, annex I.
220
See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14),
part one, sect. A.

147

ance to the least developed countries undertaken by
them in connexion with paragraph 13 of resolution 122
(V) of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development;
3. Calls upon donor countries to consider urgently,
as a step towards the implementation of the Immediate
Action Programme, how they should best provide assistance bilaterally or through appropriate multilateral
channels, such as the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Development Programme
Special Measures Fund for the Least Developed Countries and the United Nations Capital Development Fund,
in response to requests from the least developed countries for immediate additional financial support, as envisaged in paragraph 3 (c) of resolution 122 (V) of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
in order to ensure that sufficient resources shall be provided to supplement the activities undertaken by the
least developed countries themselves;
4. Notes that such additional assistance would be
for 1980 and would in no way adversely affect the share
of the least developed countries in the indicative planning figures of the United Nations Development Programme to be considered for the third programming
cycle;
5. Requests the Intergovernmental Group on the
Least Developed Countries of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, which is to act as
the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, 221 to monitor
progress under the Immediate Action Programme and,
in particular, to invite donors, as well as the least developed countries to the extent of their possibilities, to
submit information on the steps they are taking to implement that Programme;
6. Recommends that official development assistance
to the least developed countries should as a general rule
be in the form of grants and that loans to those countries, when provided by mutual agreements, should be on
highly concessional terms;
7. Urges those developed countries which have not
yet done so to take steps as quickly as possible to apply
fully the conclusions approved under section A of Trade
and Development Board resolution 165 (S-IX);
8. Urges donor countries and multilateral development institutions to allocate increased financial resources
and technical assistance in support of activities aimed at
transforming the major structural characteristics of the
least developed countries;
9. Invites all international development institutions
and specialized agencies, as well as bilateral donor institutions, regional commissions and the relevant governmental and non-governmental organizations, to accord a high priority to special measures for the least
developed countries and to give their full support to the
Comprehensive New Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries;
10. Further invites the Preparatory Committee for
the New International Development Strategy to take fully
in!o acco_unt, in t_he formulation of the strategy for the
third Umted Nat10ns development decade, the special
a~d pressing problems facing the least developed countnes;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to include in hi,
analytical report to the General Assembly at its special
session in 1980 on the implementation of the new international economic order, called for in Assembly resolu221

See resolution 34/203 above.

148

General Assembly-Tblrty-fomtb Session

tion 33/198 of 29 January 1979, an assessment of the
situation of the least developed countries as well as a
review of the implementation of the special measures
called for in the present resolution.
109th plenary meeting
19 December 1979

34/211.

Proposals for the new international development strategy

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September
1975 on development and international economic cooperation,
Recalling also its resolution 3 3/ 136 of 19 December
1978 on the acceleration of the transfer of real resources
to developing countries,
Recalling further resolution 129 (V) of 3 June 1979
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,222
Noting with concern the unprecedented widening of
the gap between developing and developed countries, as
a consequence of the continuing deterioration of the
economic situation in the developing countries, made
worse by the effects of the crisis which the present system
of international economic relations is undergoing,
Taking note of the Arusha Programme for Collective
Self-Reliance and Framework for Negotiations, 223
adopted by the Fourth Ministerial Meeting of the Group
of Seventy-seven, held at Arusha, United Republic of
Tanzania, from 12 to 16 February 1979,
Convinced that the development of developing countries requires, inter alia, a massive transfer of financial
resources as a vital contribution to their economic and
social development,
Convinced also that a substantial increase in the financial and other flows for development, supporting the national priorities and plans of developing countries, will
be a significant help in the effective restructuring of the
world economy, with beneficial consequences for all
countries,
Taking note of the Economic Declaration adopted
by the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana from
3 to 9 September 1979, 224
Recalling also its resolution 33/193 of 29 January
1979 on the preparations for an international development strategy for the third United Nations development
decade,
Welcoming the proposals formulated by heads of State
or Government during the general debate of the General
Assembly at its thirty-fourth session for quickly and
substantially improving the economic conditions which
confront developing countries,
222 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14),
part one, sect. A.
223 Ibid. (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14),
annex VI.
224 A/34/542, annex, sect. IV.

l. Reaffirms its resolution 33/193, in which it decided, inter alia, that the new international development
strategy should address itself, among its priority objectives, to increasing substantially the flow of resources in
real terms to the developing countries on a predictable,
continuous and increasingly assured basis;
2. Refers, in this context, to the Preparatory Committee for the New International Development Strategy
consideration of all aspects of the proposal presented in
this connexion to the General Assembly at its thirtyfourth session concerning the transfer to developing
countries of an additional amount of $300 billion in the
form of financial resources, material resources and technical assistance during the 1980-1990 decade, as a contribution to development, of which yearly commitments
of at least $25 billion should be made during the early
years of the third United Nations development decade;
3. Agrees that the Preparatory Committee for the
New International Development Strategy should consider the feasibility and the ways and means of implementing those proposals within the framework of the
third United Nations development decade.

109th plenary meeting
19 December 1979

34/212.

Implementation of section I of the annex to
General Assembly resolution 32/197 on the
restructuring of the econontic and social sectors of the United Nations system

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, and 3281 (XXIX) of 12
December 197 4, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling also its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975, by which it, inter alia, established the Ad
Hoe Committee on the Restructuring of the Economic
and Social Sectors of the United Nations System for the
purpose of preparing detailed action proposals with a
view to initiating the process of restructuring the United
Nations system so as to make it more fully capable of
dealing with problems of international economic cooperation and development in a comprehensive and effective manner, and to make it more responsive to the
requirements of the provisions of the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order as well as those of the
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling also its resolution 32/197 of 20 December
1977, by which it, inter alia, endorsed the conclusions
and recommendations of the Ad Hoe Committee,
Recalling further its resolution 33/202 of 29 January
1979, in which it, inter alia, requested certain actions
and measures within the framework of the implementation of the conclusions and recommendations of the Ad
Hoe Committee,
Reaffirming that the process of restructuring the economic and social sectors of the United Nations system is
an integral part of the efforts required to ensure the
equitable, full and effective participation of the developing countries in the formulation and application of all
decisions within the United Nations system in the field
of development and international economic co-operation,
