A /68/PV.84

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

84th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 23 April 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Tommo Monthe
(Cameroon), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 138 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Note by the Secretary-General (A/68/716/Add.10)
The Acting President: Before proceeding to the
items on our agenda, I should like, in keeping with
established practice, to draw the attention of the General
Assembly to document A/68/716/Add.10, in which the
Secretary-General informs the President of the General
Assembly that, since the issuance of his communication
contained in document A/68/716/Add.9, Vanuatu has
made the payment necessary to reduce its arrears below
the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes
note of the information contained in that document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: I now draw the attention of the
General Assembly to draft resolution A/68/L.38/Rev.1,
circulated under sub-item (b) of agenda item 22, entitled
“Comprehensive 10-year Review Conference on the

Implementation of the Almaty Programme of Action”.
Members will recall that, at its second plenary meeting,
on 20 September 2013, the General Assembly decided
to allocate sub-item (b) of agenda item 22 to the Second
Committee. To enable the General Assembly to take
action expeditiously on that document, may I take it
that the Assembly wishes to consider sub-item (b) of
agenda item 22 directly in the plenary meeting and to
proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 22 (continued)
Groups of countries in special situations
(b) Comprehensive 10-year Review Conference on
the Implementation of the Almaty Programme
of Action
Draft resolution (A/68/L.38/Rev.1)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia to
introduce draft resolution A/68/L.38/Rev.1.
Ms. Rios Requena (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I have the honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
The delegation of the Plurinational State of Bolivia
wishes, on behalf give 77 and China, to express its
gratitude to the delegations that participated in, and
supported the negotiation process on, the draft resolution
entitled “Second United Nations Conference on
Landlocked Developing Countries” (A/68/L.38/Rev.1).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

14-30682 (E)

*1430682*

A/68/PV.84

Accordingly, the delegation of Bolivia wishes to
thank the delegation of Bulgaria for facilitating the
informal consultations, the delegation of Austria for
hosting the Conference, the delegation of Zambia,
which held the presidency of the Group of Landlocked
Developing Countries, the delegation of Paraguay
for coordinating the informal consultative process
on behalf of the Group of Landlocked Developing
Countries and the Group of 77 and China, and the
delegations of the associated countries to the cause of
landlocked developing countries for their contributions
and support during the informal consultation process
on the draft resolution.
Furthermore, the chairmanship of the Group of 77
and China calls for the inclusion of the delegations of
Armenia, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan on the list of
sponsors of the draft resolution.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.38/Rev.1, entitled
“Second United Nations Conference on Landlocked
Developing Countries”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/68/L.38/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/68/L.38/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 68/270).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Zambia, who wishes to make a
statement following the adoption of resolution 68/270.
Ms. Kasese-Bota (Zambia): I wish to thank the
President for convening today’s meeting on sub-item
(b) of agenda item 22, entitled “Comprehensive 10-year
Review Conference on the Implementation of the
Almaty Programme of Action”. I wish also to express
my gratitude to the delegations of Paraguay and the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, which coordinated the
draft resolution on behalf of the Group of 77 and China,
for their excellent work. We also thank our partners for
their contribution, which has led to the resolution just
adopted by consensus (resolution 68/270).
The adoption of the resolution, which focuses on
the Second United Nations Conference on Landlocked
Developing Countries, is of great significance to the
Group of Landlocked Developing Countries as we
look forward to reviewing the Almaty Programme
of Action. The Almaty Programme of Action, which
was adopted 10 years ago, has played its part in
improving the economic and social development of

2/3

23/04/2014

landlocked developing countries (LLDCs) during
its implementation, despite great differences among
individual landlocked developing countries.
Progress has been made in upgrading and expanding
the road transport infrastructure in some LLDC regions.
Some progress has also been achieved towards “soft”
infrastructure development and the harmonization
of transport, transit policies, laws, procedures and
practices. Those efforts made in improving transit,
transport and trade facilitation policies have begun to
yield positive results, especially in terms of reducing
the time required to import or export commodities and
other goods.
However, the LLDC group still faces a great
number of challenges, including the transit-transport
infrastructure for LLDCs, which remains inadequate
and has some missing links. The LLDCs have limited
productive capabilities and constrained ability to add
value, especially in the agricultural and mining sectors,
against the backdrop of a declining industrial base.
Furthermore, those difficulties are exacerbated by
multiple emerging global challenges, including rising
food and fuel prices, economic and financial crises and
climate change, with LLDCs having limited resilience
and mitigating capacities to respond to those challenges.
Strengthening international partnerships with
and support for LLDCs is therefore of paramount
importance to stepped-up efforts aimed at achieving
the internationally agreed development goals, including
the highlighted special needs of LLDCs in the post2015 development agenda. In that regard, we expect
the Conference to undertake a comprehensive appraisal
of the implementation of the Almaty Programme of
Action, share best practices and lessons learned and
identify obstacles and constraints encountered, as
well as the actions and initiatives needed to overcome
them. The Conference will also formulate and adopt a
new development partnership framework for the next
decade to support LLDCs and provide aid for the post2015 development agenda.
In particular, we hope that the Conference
will address those issues related to infrastructure
development, transit issues, trade facilitation
and development, regional integration and policy
frameworks designed to reduce prohibitive transit costs
and enable the LLDCs to fully participate in global
trade. We also hope that the Conference will address
broader issues, including structural transformation,
value addition, export diversification, the improvement
14-30682

23/04/2014

of productive capacities and building LLDC resilience
in the face of shocks such as the effects of climate
change, desertification and economic crises, and
the mobilization of additional international support
measures in favour of the LLDCs.
Lastly, we look forward to the active participation
of Member States in June and October 2014 at our

A/68/PV.84

Preparatory Committee meetings and at the Conference
to be held in Vienna from 3 to 5 November.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 22.
The meeting rose at 3.30 p.m.

14-306823/3
