United Nations

A/RES/58/159

General Assembly

Distr.: General
2 March 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 115

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2003
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/58/506)]

58/159. The incompatibility between democracy and racism
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 the Charter of the
United Nations, the International Covenants on Human Rights 2 and the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 3
Recalling the commitment reached in the Vienna Declaration and Programme
of Action, adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 4
concerning the elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance,
Recalling also the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted by
the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance on 8 September 2001, 5
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 2003/41 of 23 April
2003, 6
Mindful of the responsibility of Governments to ensure such equality as is
established in the relevant international and regional human rights instruments,
inter alia, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenants
on Human Rights and the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination,
Reaffirming that acts of racial violence and discrimination do not constitute
legitimate expressions of opinion, but rather are offences,
Alarmed by the rise of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance in political circles, in the sphere of public opinion and in society at large,
_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
4
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
5
See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.
6
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 3 (E/2003/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
2

03 50412

A/RES/58/159

Recognizing the fundamental role of education and other active policies in the
promotion of tolerance and respect for others and in the construction of pluralistic
and inclusive societies,
Condemns political platforms and organizations based on racism,
1.
xenophobia or doctrines of racial superiority and related discrimination, as well as
legislation and practices based on racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance as incompatible with democracy and transparent and accountable
governance;
Affirms that racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
2.
intolerance condoned by governmental policies violate human rights and may
endanger friendly relations among peoples, cooperation among nations,
international peace and security and the harmony of persons living side by side
within one and the same State;
Affirms also that any form of impunity condoned by public authorities for
3.
crimes motivated by racist and xenophobic attitudes plays a role in weakening the
rule of law and democracy and tends to encourage the recurrence of such acts;
Condemns the persistence and resurgence of neo-Nazism, neo-fascism
4.
and violent nationalist ideologies based on racial or national prejudice, and states
that these phenomena can never be justified in any instance or in any circumstances;
Recognizes with deep concern the increase in anti-Semitism and
5.
Islamophobia in various parts of the world, as well as the emergence of racial and
violent movements based on racism and discriminatory ideas against Arab, Jewish
and Muslim communities, as well as communities of people of African descent,
communities of people of Asian descent and other communities;
Emphasizes that the elimination of all forms of discrimination, especially
6.
gender, ethnic and racial discrimination, as well as diverse forms of intolerance, the
promotion and protection of the human rights of persons of indigenous origin and
members of indigenous communities and migrants, and respect for ethnic, cultural
and religious diversity contribute to strengthening and promoting democracy and
political participation;
Urges States to reinforce their commitment to promote tolerance and
7.
human rights and to fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance as a way to strengthen democracy, the rule of law and transparent
and accountable governance, and in that regard recommends measures such as
introducing or reinforcing human rights education in schools and in institutions of
higher education;
Also urges States to ensure that their political and legal systems reflect
8.
the multicultural diversity within their societies and, where necessary, to improve
democratic institutions so that they are more fully participatory and avoid
marginalization and exclusion of, and discrimination against, specific sectors of
society;
Underlines the key role that political leaders and political parties can and
9.
ought to play in strengthening and promoting democracy by combating racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, and encourages political
parties to take concrete steps to promote solidarity, tolerance and respect, inter alia,
by developing voluntary codes of conduct, including internal disciplinary measures
for violations thereof, so their members refrain from public statements and actions

2

A/RES/58/159

that encourage or incite racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance;
10. Invites
the
Inter-Parliamentary
Union
and
other
relevant
inter-parliamentary organizations to encourage debate in, and action by, parliaments
on various measures, including laws and policies, to combat racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
11. Invites the mechanisms of the Commission on Human Rights and the
treaty bodies to continue to pay particular attention to violations of human rights
stemming from the rise of racism and xenophobia in political circles and in society
at large, with due consideration to a gender perspective, especially as regards their
incompatibility with democracy;
12. Takes note of the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights on the incompatibility between democracy and racism; 7
13. Also takes note of the outcome of the expert seminar on the
interdependence between democracy and human rights, held by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights at Geneva on 25 and
26 November 2002; 8
14. Invites the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance to submit to the General Assembly the study on the issue of political
platforms that promote or incite racial discrimination, as requested by the
Commission in its resolution 2003/41,6 and updated and expanded as appropriate;
15. Decides to continue consideration of the matter at its fifty-ninth session
under the item entitled “Elimination of racism and racial discrimination”.
77th plenary meeting
22 December 2003

_______________
7
8

E/CN.4/2003/62 and Add.1.
See E/CN.4/2003/59.

3
