A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/176
25 January 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 92 (a)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/53/607)]
53/176. Action against corruption and bribery in international commercial
transactions
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3514 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, in which it, inter alia, condemned all
corrupt practices, including bribery, in international commercial transactions, reaffirmed the right of any
State to adopt legislation and to investigate and take appropriate legal action, in accordance with its
national laws and regulations, against such corrupt practices, and called upon all Governments to cooperate
to prevent corrupt practices, including bribery,
Concerned about the seriousness of problems posed by corruption, which may endanger the stability
and security of societies, undermine the values of democracy and morality and jeopardize social, economic
and political development,
Disturbed by the bribery of public officials by individuals and enterprises of other States in relation
to international commercial transactions,
Recalling the further work carried out by the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council
on elaborating the International Code of Conduct for Public Officials1 and a code of conduct on

1

Resolution 51/59, annex.

99-76393

/...

A/RES/53/176
Page 2

transnational corporations,2 consideration of which helped call attention to and raise international
awareness of the adverse consequences of corruption and bribery in international commercial transactions,
Taking note of the Rules of Conduct to Combat Extortion and Bribery in International Business
Transactions of the International Chamber of Commerce,
Recalling its resolution 51/191 of 16 December 1996, by which it adopted the United Nations
Declaration against Corruption and Bribery in International Commercial Transactions, and its resolution
52/87 of 12 December 1997, by which it called for further measures to implement the Declaration,
1. Welcomes recent multilateral initiatives to combat corruption including, inter alia, the InterAmerican Convention against Corruption,3 adopted by the Organization of American States, the
Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions,
adopted by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, the Dakar Declaration on the
Prevention and Control of Organized Transnational Crime and Corruption,4 the Manila Declaration on
the Prevention and Control of Transnational Crime,5 and the Convention on the fight against corruption
involving officials of the European Communities or officials of member States of the European Union;
2. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Promotion and maintenance of the
rule of law: action against corruption and bribery”;6
3. Commends the work of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and the
Centre for International Crime Prevention of the Secretariat in combating corruption and bribery in
international commercial transactions, including the convening of an open-ended meeting of governmental
experts;
4. Calls upon Member States to take all possible measures to further the implementation of the
United Nations Declaration against Corruption and Bribery in International Commercial Transactions7 and
relevant international declarations and to ratify, where appropriate, existing instruments against corruption;
5. Requests the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and other competent bodies
of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates and agreed work programmes, to assist
Member States, at their request, in implementing national programmes to strengthen accountability and
transparency and in implementing relevant conventions, declarations and instruments to combat corruption
and bribery in international commercial transactions, and, in that context, welcomes the valuable work
done by the United Nations Development Programme in the field of governance;

2

E/1991/31/Add.1.

3

See E/1996/99.

4

See E/CN.15/1998/6/Add.1, chap. I.

5

See E/CN.15/1998/6/Add.2, chap. I.

6

A/53/384.

7

Resolution 51/191, annex.
/...

A/RES/53/176
Page 3

6. Requests the Secretary-General, in close consultation with the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session on measures taken by
Member States and competent international and regional organizations, non-governmental organizations
and the private sector to implement the present resolution.
91st plenary meeting
15 December 1998
