S/PV.8991

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8991st meeting

Friday, 11 March 2022, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Alhefeiti/Mr. Abushahab. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-28483 (E)
*2228483*

S/PV.8991

Threats to international peace and security

artillery and multi-launch rocket systems, as well as
missile and air strikes.

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, and Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: The war in Ukraine is now in its
third week. Fighting continues unabated. The Russian
armed forces are pursuing their offensive operations
and laying siege to several cities in the south, east and
north of the country. A large concentration of Russian
forces is reportedly massed along several approaches to
the capital, Kyiv.
The situation is particularly alarming in Mariupol,
Kharkiv, Sumy and Chernihiv, where there is shelling
of residential areas and civilian infrastructure, resulting
in an increasing number of civilians killed and injured.
The utter devastation being visited upon these cities
is horrific.
The numbers bear out the conclusion that civilians
are paying the highest price for the conflict. As of
11 March, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) has
recorded a total of 1,546 civilian casualties, including
564 killed and 982 injured, since the start of the
invasion on 24 February. OHCHR believes that the
real casualty figures are likely considerably higher, as
information from locations where intense hostilities are
ongoing has been delayed and reports are still pending
corroboration. Most of the recorded civilian casualties,
which include children, have been caused by explosive
weapons with a wide impact area, including heavy
2/19

11/03/2022

OHCHR has received credible reports of Russian
forces using cluster munitions, including in populated
areas. Indiscriminate attacks, including those using
cluster munitions, which are of a nature to strike
military objectives and civilians or civilian objects
without distinction, are prohibited under international
humanitarian law. Direct attacks against civilians and
civilian objects, as well as so-called area bombardment
in towns and villages, are also prohibited under
international law and may amount to war crimes.
As of 10 March, the World Health Organization had
verified 26 attacks on health facilities, health workers
and ambulances, causing 12 deaths and 34 injuries.
That includes the bombing of the Mariupol maternity
hospital on 9 March. We condemn such attacks
without reservation. They not only cause death and
destruction, but also deprive people of urgently needed
care and endanger more lives. We cannot emphasize
it enough — the targeting of civilians, residential
buildings, hospitals, schools and kindergartens is
inexcusable and intolerable. All alleged violations of
international humanitarian law must be investigated
and those found responsible held accountable.
Millions of people in Ukraine need urgent
assistance. That includes 2 million internally displaced
people. We are scaling up humanitarian aid in areas
where security permits. More than half a million people
are now receiving assistance, including life-saving
food, shelter, blankets and medical supplies. The United
Nations and our partners have developed operational
plans to meet humanitarian needs where they are most
acute. That work needs funding. Over $1.5 billion was
pledged to the appeals launched last week. We are
grateful for that generosity and encourage donors to
release the funding quickly.
It is critical to urgently achieve a cessation of
hostilities to allow for the safe passage of civilians
from besieged areas and to ensure that life-saving
humanitarian supplies can reach those who remain. On
9 March, over 51,000 people were reportedly evacuated
through five out of six safe passages that had been agreed
upon. Those safe passages must continue. They should
be implemented with clear principles and modalities.
Civilians should be duly informed and in a timely
manner of the possibility to leave the concerned areas
on a voluntary basis and in the direction they choose.
22-28483

Threats to international peace and security

11/03/2022

To expand life-saving assistance and services to
those most in need, humanitarian actors must also
have safe, rapid, unimpeded and sustained access to
all areas. We commend the humanitarian actors on
the ground who are staying and delivering in a highly
volatile situation.
The number of refugees from Ukraine has reached
2.5 million Those numbers continue increasing by the
day. We also commend the countries that have kept
their borders open to welcome and support refugees.
All people fleeing Ukraine, including third-country
nationals, need access to safety and protection, in line
with the principle of non-refoulement and without any
form of discrimination.
The need for negotiations to stop the war in Ukraine
could not be more urgent. We note the three rounds
of talks held thus far between Ukrainian and Russian
delegations. We call for such efforts to intensify,
including to further secure humanitarian and ceasefire
arrangements as a matter of priority. We urge the sides
to build on their contacts, such as the meeting yesterday
between the Foreign Ministers of Ukraine and the
Russian Federation in Antalya, Turkey.
The logic of dialogue and diplomacy must prevail
over the logic of war. The Secretary-General is grateful
to the many Member States working in pursuit of a
diplomatic solution to the dangerous conflict. He is in
regular contact with regional and other leaders and his
good offices remain available.
Let me reaffirm the commitment of the United
Nations to Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity, within its internationally
recognized borders. As the war grinds on, there is
already much reflection about its implications, beyond
the tragedy it represents for Ukraine. We increasingly
hear the use of terms such as “turning point”, “defining
moment” and “end of multilateralism”. I do not believe
that is an exaggeration — indeed, some consequences
are already being felt, economically and politically.
Perhaps most alarming are the threats that the violence
poses to the global framework for peace and security.
We must do everything we can to find a solution and
put an end to the war, and we must do it now.
The President (spoke
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.

in

Arabic):

I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.

I

thank

S/PV. 8991

Mrs. Nakamitsu: I thank Council members for the
opportunity to brief them this morning.
I am aware of reports that certain public health
facilities are in areas impacted by armed conflict,
putting the safety of those facilities at risk. I appeal to
all parties to the conflict to ensure the safety of all such
facilities in Ukraine.
I am aware of media reports regarding allegations
of biological weapons programmes. The United Nations
is not aware of any biological weapons programmes.
That is largely thanks to the 1972 Biological Weapons
Convention (BWC), which prohibits the development,
production, acquisition, transfer, stockpiling and use of
biological and toxin weapons.
The Russian Federation and Ukraine are both
States parties to the Convention. In addition, the
Russian Federation is a depositary Government under
the Convention. All States parties to the Convention
have undertaken to never, in any circumstances,
develop, produce, stockpile or otherwise acquire or
retain biological weapons.
Biological weapons have been outlawed since the
BWC entered into force in 1975. A total of 183 States
have now joined the Convention and biological weapons
are universally seen as being abhorrent and illegitimate.
The BWC lacks a multilateral verification mechanism
overseen by an independent organization, such as the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
Therefore, assessing compliance with its obligations is
a task for its States parties.
Despite the lack of an international verification
regime, the Biological Weapons Convention does,
however, contain several measures to which concerned
States parties can have recourse in order to address
situations in which States parties have concerns or
suspicions about the activities of their peers. For
example, article V of the Convention states:
“The States parties to this Convention undertake
to consult one another and to co-operate in solving
any problems which may arise in relation to the
objective of, or in the application of the provisions
of, the Convention.”
Within the framework of article V, States parties have
established an annual exchange of information based
upon the submission of confidence-building measures.
States parties must declare information about relevant
facilities and activities on their territory in order to

22-284833/19

S/PV.8991

Threats to international peace and security

11/03/2022

prevent or reduce the occurrence of ambiguities, doubts
and suspicions between them.

a reactor’s power supply or the inability to provide
regular maintenance is growing by the day.

The Russian Federation and Ukraine both participate
annually in the confidence-building measures. The
annual reports submitted by the Russian Federation and
Ukraine are available to all BWC States parties for the
purposes of transparency and reassurance.

The forces in effective control of nuclear power
plants in Ukraine must ensure their safe and secure
operation. I am extremely concerned that four of the
seven pillars of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) for the safe and secure operation of facilities
are reportedly not being implemented at Chernobyl and
Zaporizhzhya. Communications must be fully restored,
and operating staff must be allowed to properly carry
out their duties and to do so free of undue pressure.

In addition, and also within the framework of Article
V of the Convention, States parties have developed
procedures for clarifying ambiguous and unresolved
matters, including the possible convening of a formal
consultative meeting to consider such matters.
Article VI of the Convention states:
“Any State party to this Convention which
finds that any other State party is acting in breach
of obligations deriving from the provisions of
the Convention may lodge a complaint with the
Security Council.”
If agreed by the Security Council, an investigation on
the basis of the complaint received could be initiated.
Article VI of the Convention has never been activated.
While those provisions have not been regularly
used, they are nonetheless internationally agreed
procedures that are available to be used to defuse
tensions and to address and resolve any concerns
relating to compliance with obligations under the BWC
in a multilateral setting. I would therefore encourage
BWC States parties to consider making use of the
available procedures for consultation and cooperation
in order to resolve these issues.
Situations such as this demonstrate the need
to strengthen the BWC, to operationalize it and to
institutionalize it. I would therefore like to take this
opportunity to encourage its States parties to come to
the Convention’s ninth Review Conference, scheduled
to take place in Geneva later in 2022, committed to
a serious overhaul of the Convention to ensure that it
is properly equipped and resourced to deal with the
challenges ahead.
To conclude my statement, I would like to take
this opportunity to address the worrying issue of the
safety and security of nuclear power plants in Ukraine.
An accident involving the nuclear facilities in Ukraine
could have severe consequences for public health and
the environment and all steps must be taken to avoid
it. The possibility of an accident caused by failure of
4/19

I would like to echo the Secretary-General’s
support for IAEA Director-General Grossi’s efforts to
develop a framework to ensure the safety and security
of Ukraine’s facilities and welcome the constructive
meetings that he held in Turkey on 10 March with the
foreign ministers of Ukraine and the Russian Federation.
The President (spoke in
Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic has demonstrated how vulnerable humankind
is to biological threats. It has already taken, and
continues to take, an enormous toll on human life.
With the entry into force of the Biological Weapons
Convention (BWC) in 1975, it was hoped that the world
would be free of at least human-made biological threats,
since all signatory countries recognized the horrendous
risks posed by biological weapons and abandoned any
plans to develop them.
Unfortunately, we have reason to believe that
such hopes have not been fully fulfilled. We convened
today’s meeting because, in the course of Russia’s
special military operation in Ukraine, truly shocking
facts have come to light regarding the Kyiv regime’s
emergency clean-up of the traces of the biological
warfare programme being carried out by Kyiv with the
support of the United States Department of Defense.
The Russian Ministry of Defence has in its
possession documents that confirm that a network of
at least 30 biological laboratories has been formed on
the territory of Ukraine, where extremely dangerous
biological experiments aimed at enhancing the
pathogenic properties of plague, anthrax, tularaemia,
22-28483

11/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV. 8991

cholera and other deadly diseases, using synthetic
biology, are being conducted.

whose members, by the way, found refuge in the United
States of America and escaped justice.

That work is funded and directly supervised by
the Office of Military Threat Reduction of the United
States Department of Defense, including on behalf of
the National Center for Medical Intelligence of the
United States Department of Defense. A key role in
implementing those programmes was played by the
Biosafety Level 3 Central Reference Laboratory at the
Ukrainian Anti-Plague Research Institute, named after
I.I. Mechnikov, located in Odesa. Research centres in
other Ukrainian cities — Kyiv, Lviv, Kharkiv, Dnipro,
Kherson, Ternopil, Uzhgorod and Vynnytsya — were
actively involved. The results were sent to United
States biological warfare centres, including the United
States Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious
Diseases, the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research
and the United States Naval Medical Research
Center, as well as the United States Army Biological
Warfare Laboratories at Fort Detrick, which were
previously key sites of the United States biological
weapons programme.

Ukraine has a unique geographical position as a
crossroads of a number of migration routes for potential
vectors of dangerous diseases, many of which run
through Russia and Eastern Europe. The research I
just mentioned was carried out in the heart of Eastern
Europe and in close proximity to Russia’s borders.
According to the data obtained, the birds ringed and
released during bioresearch in the Kherson Nature
Preserve were caught in the Ivanovo and Voronezh
oblasts of the Russian Federation.

All the information is available on the website of
our Ministry of Defence, which announces it in its daily
briefings. I will highlight the most notable examples.
Our army learned the details of the UP-4 project,
which was implemented in laboratories in Kyiv,
Kharkiv and Odesa. Its aim is to study the possibility
of transmitting particularly dangerous infections
via migratory birds, including the highly pathogenic
influenza H5N1, which has a mortality rate of up to
50 per cent in humans, as well as the Newcastle disease.
In another project, bats are being considered as vectors
for potential biological warfare agents. Priority research
areas include bacterial and viral pathogens that can be
transmitted from bats to humans, such as plague and
leptospirosis, as well as filoviruses and coronaviruses.
According to the project documents, the United
States has actively funded biological projects in
Ukraine. Experiments were conducted to study the
transmission of dangerous diseases by ectoparasites,
such as lice and fleas. It is clear even to non-specialists
that such experiments are among the most reckless, as
they do not provide any means of controlling further
developments in the situation. Similar research, using
fleas and lice as bioweapons agents, were carried out in
1940s by the notorious Unit 731 of the Japanese army,

The analysis of the materials confirms that more
than 140 containers with bat ectoparasites were
transferred abroad from the Kharkiv biolaboratory. We
do not know the fate of those dangerous biomaterials
nor what the consequences would be if they were
to dissolve, probably over Europe, without any
international control. In any event, there is a very high
risk that they will be stolen for terrorist purposes or
sold on the black market.
Under the pretext of treating and preventing the
coronavirus disease, several thousand samples of blood
serum from patients, mostly of Slavic extraction, were
taken from Ukraine to the Walter Reed Army Institute
of Research of the United States Army. Everyone
knows how sensitive the West is about the transfer
abroad of biomaterials of Western nationals. And there
is good reason for that. In theory, biological agents
that selectively target specific ethnic groups could
be developed.
At the same time, the activities of biological
laboratories, which we have tracked since 2014, and
the so-called “reform” programme of the Ukrainian
health-care system implemented by the United States
have led to an uncontrolled increase in the incidence
of particularly dangerous and economically significant
infections in Ukraine. Cases of rubella, diphtheria and
tuberculosis are on the rise. The incidence of measles
has increased by a factor of more than 100. The World
Health Organization declared Ukraine a high-risk
country for polio outbreaks. There is also evidence that
in Kharkiv, where one such laboratory is located, 20
Ukrainian soldiers died of swine flu in January 2016
and another 200 were hospitalized. By March of the
same year, 364 people in Ukraine had died of swine
flu. In addition, the outbreak of African swine fever
has become a regular occurrence in Ukraine. In 2019,

22-284835/19

S/PV.8991

Threats to international peace and security

an outbreak of a disease that is symptomatically similar
to plague was reported.
At a time when military-biological research on
United States territory has been curtailed due to the
danger to the American people, the Kyiv authorities
have essentially agreed to turn their country into
a testing ground and to use Ukrainian citizens as
guinea pigs. These experiments, with potential risks
on a national scale, have been going on for years. We
see in this yet another confirmation of the monstrous
cynicism of Kyiv’s Western handlers, who proclaim at
every opportunity how much they care about the fate of
the Ukrainian people.
If Reuters is to be believed, the World Health
Organization recommended that Ukraine destroy their
extremely dangerous pathogens in order to avoid leaks
that could lead to the spread of disease among the
population. We do not know whether Kyiv implemented
that recommendation.
Our Ministry of Defence has materials that
confirm that all serious high-risk research in
Ukraine’s biolaboratories was carried out under the
direct supervision of United States specialists, who
had diplomatic immunity. According to our Defence
Ministry, the Kyiv regime is now hastily covering its
tracks at the request of its Western handlers so that
the Russian side does not find direct evidence that the
United States and Ukraine are violating Article 1 of
the BWC. Biological programmes are being urgently
shut down, and on 24 February, Ukraine’s Ministry of
Health set the goal of fully destroying the bioagents
in the laboratories. Our analysis of the instructions
issued to laboratory officials reveals that the order of
liquidation is aimed at their irretrievable elimination of
such materials. Our analysis shows the destruction, in
Lviv alone, of 232 containers of leptospirosis pathogen,
30 of tularaemia, 10 of brucellosis and 5 of plague.
In all, more than 320 containers were destroyed. The
nomenclature and the excessive number of biopathogens
suggest that the work was conducted as part of a military
biological programme.
I would like to
colleagues separately.

address

my

European

All these years, right next to the European Union,
there has been a testing ground for extremely dangerous
biological trials. We call upon them to think about the
very real biological threat to the people of European
countries that could result from the uncontrolled spread
6/19

11/03/2022

of bioagents from Ukraine, which, as the experience
of COVID-19 showed, is impossible to stop. In such a
scenario, all of Europe will be affected.
The representatives of the United States provide
confusing information about the involvement of the
United States in this activity in Ukraine. During a
congressional hearing on 8 March, Under Secretary
of State for Political Affairs of the United States
Victoria Nuland basically confirmed the fact that
dangerous research was being conducted in Ukrainian
biolaboratories. When asked directly by Senator Marco
Rubio about the presence of biological or chemical
weapons in Ukraine, she replied that there were
“research facilities there that should not fall into the
hands of the Russian military”.
At the same time, the State Department continues
to insist that there are no biolaboratories on Ukrainian
territory under the control of the United States. In that
connection, we would like to ask the United States
delegation — how does that fit with the 2005 agreement
between the United States Department of Defense and
the Ukrainian Ministry of Health on cooperation in the
area of the dissemination of technologies and pathogens
that could be used in the development of bioweapons?
That document is publicly available on the Internet.
According to article III of that agreement, the United
States Department of Defense can
“assist the Ministry of Health of Ukraine in joint
biological research, the identification of threats
from biological agents and the development of a
response to them”
as relates to the “dangerous pathogens located at the
facilities in Ukraine”.
I would like to stress that biological threats, by their
very nature, know no borders. No region of the world
today can feel safe. The United States supervises several
hundreds of biolaboratories in some 30 countries,
including in the Middle East, Africa and South-East
Asia, as well as along the perimeter of the former Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics. Since 2001, Washington
has flatly refused to subject these labs to international
verification, thus blocking a legally binding protocol
to the BWC about establishing an effective verification
mechanism to ensure compliance. This cannot but
suggest that the United States has something to hide.
I urge colleagues in those regions to think about what
activities Washington is conducting on their territory
and the possible consequences for their people.
22-28483

11/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

I can foresee the reaction of our Western colleagues,
who will surely claim today that all this information is
fake and Russian propaganda. But this self-indulgence
will not help the European people in the event of
outbreaks in Ukraine and neighbouring countries and
the subsequent spread of dangerous diseases beyond
their borders. The risk of that is very real, given the
interest that radical nationalist groups in Ukraine have
shown in the dangerous pathogen work carried out
there in the interests of the United States Department
of Defense.
We also know that in the event of any such incidents,
the Pentagon explicitly advised its Ukrainian protégés
to immediately accuse the armed forces of the Russian
Federation of allegedly targeting research and medical
facilities or to link such incidents to the activities of
Russian subversive groups.
The Russian Ministry of Defence continues
to analyse the biological situation in Ukraine and
emerging evidence. What we have described today is
only a small fraction of the information we have. We
will disseminate detailed information in the very near
future in official Security Council documents that
members will be able to examine.
We believe it is our duty to keep the Security
Council informed of the situation concerning United
States military biological activities in Ukraine, which
pose a genuine threat to international peace and
security. We intend to return to the topic in the near
future. We do not rule out the possibility of invoking
the mechanism of Articles V and VI of the Biological
and Toxin Weapons Convention at a later date. In the
meantime, we hope to receive answers from the United
States to the questions raised.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo and Under-SecretaryGeneral Nakamitsu for the information they provided.
I would like to make the following points.
First, we are meeting at the request of Russia
following allegations of an alleged programme for the
development of biological weapons in Ukraine. We
listened to the representative of Russia’s statement
very carefully.
Any issue with regard to weapons of mass
destruction should never be taken lightly. As we just
heard from Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu, the
United Nations is not aware of any alleged programme

S/PV. 8991

inconsistent with international treaty obligations,
including on chemical or biological weapons. We heard
about health facilities in Ukraine.
We have also repeatedly heard a firm rebuttal at
the highest levels from both the United States and
Ukraine. Therefore, Russia’s allegations are, in our
opinion, a part of its information warfare — a false
and unsubstantiated part of the usual propaganda,
disinformation and conspiracy theories coming from
Russia that are not worth our time. The Council should
not be served with fantasies or starry-eyed stories but
with independently verified and corroborated proof.
That is not the case.
However regrettable all that is, it is hardly
surprising, since absolutely everything we have heard
from Russia concerning Ukraine has been false,
fabricated or distorted. All of it is in the public space
and does not deserve mentioning, but the true Palme
d’or goes to the Russian declaration of just two days
ago, according to which Russia did not attack Ukraine.
Well, as we saw last week the General Assembly has a
different account.
In any other situation, everyone would have thought
that this was a joke, except for the fact that the joke is
destroying a country, killing civilians and responsible
for more than 2.5 million refugees and counting. That
translates into 7,000 people per hour. Reportedly, that
is also responsible for the death of several thousand
Russian soldiers, but that is an issue for Russia and
its people. It is all the more reason for an immediate
ceasefire and making the space for negotiations.
Secondly, Russia has a long and well documented
track record of using chemical weapons, including in
attempted assassinations and poisoning its own citizens,
like the jailed opposition leader, Alexei Navalny, or the
Skripals. Bellingcat reporting has brilliantly been able
to make a direct and irrefutable link of the attempted
deadly poisoning with GRU high officials.
We should therefore be very worried that in
spreading such disinformation, a crescendo of
allegations about weapons of mass destruction could
serve as yet another pretext for Russia to prepare the
ground and use chemical or biological weapons during
its ongoing invasion of Ukraine, while accusing others.
After all, Russia has accused Ukraine of genocide in
Donbas, which is ridiculous. It has also accused Kyiv
of seeking to produce nuclear weapons, which is

22-284837/19

S/PV.8991

Threats to international peace and security

outrageous. It has accused Ukraine of bombarding its
own cities, which is preposterous.
As we have heard many times here, including
yesterday (see S/PV.8990), Russia has continued to
support the regime of Bashar Al-Assad in Syria,
which has used chemical weapons against the
civilian population.
What should retain our attention and deserves our
time is the escalating situation that is wreaking havoc
on two countries, threatening a whole continent and
disrupting the entire world. Fifteen days into the brutal
invasion, the growing armoured might of Russia, with
the open complicity of Belarus, has stalled before the
steel-clad and indisputable right of a nation to defend
its land.
Russia’s goals are as abhorrent as the means it is using
to achieve them. We are horrified by the catastrophic
situation in Mariupol and other besieged cities, where
civilians are starved; the use of cluster ammunition in
urban areas, as we heard during the Under-SecretaryGeneral’s briefing; the redoubling of blind shelling and
bombardments; the more than 26 assaults on various
health-related facilities, including ambulances, as
confirmed by World Health Organization and at this
meeting; and other outrageous and amoral acts, which
constitute war crimes. Those are facts.
Nothing seems to be going as planned in Ukraine.
The unprovoked, unjustified and premeditated act of
aggression by Russia, once again with the complicity
of Belarus, lack the legal or moral grounds that, by
contrast, empower Ukrainians to fight heroically,
stand ready to die for the ideals they believe in and
the right to choose who they want to be — the shapers
of their own destiny. In that respect, we welcome the
conclusions of the European Council, which, among
other things, has welcomed Ukraine’s resolve to join
the European Union.
Our hearts are fortified by the Ukrainian
resistance — perhaps incomprehensible to the
invader — which should be seen as an inspiration and
a reminder that freedom always prevails over tyranny.
Let us not forget: if Russia makes its way into
Ukraine, it will not stop there; it will want more; and as
history reminds us, aggression works like a drug. That
is why David must and will prevail.
8/19

11/03/2022

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank our briefers for their remarks
this morning.
Russia asked the Security Council for today’s
meeting for the sole purpose of lying and spreading
disinformation and that is exactly what members have
heard from the Russian Permanent Representative.
Members also heard from Mrs. Nakamitsu that the
United Nations is not aware of any biological or
chemical weapons programmes in Ukraine.
Last month, Secretary of State Blinken (see
S/PV.8968) laid out with tragic accuracy what Russia
was about to do. He specifically warned that Russia
would manufacture a pretext for attack and even
cautioned that Russia would fabricate allegations about
chemical or biological weapons to justify its own
violent attacks against the Ukrainian people.
Today the world is watching Russia do exactly
what we warned it would do. Russia is attempting to
use the Security Council to legitimize disinformation
and deceive people to justify President Putin’s war of
choice against the Ukrainian people. And China too has
been spreading disinformation in support of Russia’s
outrageous claims. I will say this once: Ukraine does
not have a biological weapons programme. There are no
Ukrainian biological weapons laboratories supported
by the United States — not near Russia’s border
or anywhere.
Here are the facts. Ukraine owns and operates its
own public health laboratory infrastructure. Those
facilities make it possible to detect and diagnose
diseases like the coronavirus disease, thereby benefiting
us all. The United States has assisted Ukraine to do that
safely and securely. That is work that has been done
proudly, clearly and out in the open. That work has
everything to do with protecting the health of people.
It has absolutely nothing — absolutely nothing — to do
with biological weapons.
In fact, it is Russia that has long maintained
a biological weapons programme in violation of
international law. It is Russia that has a well-documented
history of using chemical weapons. It is Russia who is
the aggressor in this situation. It was Russian operatives
who poisoned Aleksey Navalny and Sergei and Yulia
Skripal with nerve agents. It is Russia that continues
to support the Al-Assad regime in Syria and shield it
from accountability when the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
22-28483

11/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

have confirmed that Al-Assad has repeatedly used
chemical weapons over the past several years.
And we are deeply concerned that Russia’s calling
for this meeting is a potential false flag effort in
action — exactly the kind we have been warning about,
including in the statement by Secretary Blinken in the
Security Council last month (see S/PV.8968). Russia
has a track record of falsely accusing other countries
of the very violations that Russia itself is perpetrating.
And given that and consistent with our previous
statements, we have serious concerns that Russia may
be planning to use chemical or biological agents against
the Ukrainian people.
The intent behind these lies seems clear and it is
deeply troubling. We believe Russia could use chemical
or biological agents for assassinations, as part of a
staged or false flag incident or to support tactical
military operations. From the beginning, our strategy
to counter Russia’s tactics has been to share what we
know with the world transparently. And candidly, we
have been right more often than we would like.
We are not going to let Russia get away with lying
to the world or staining the integrity of the Security
Council by using this forum as a venue for legitimizing
Putin’s violence. Russia has attacked homes, schools,
orphanages and hospitals. Russia has attacked civilian
infrastructure, including water and sanitation facilities.
Their forces are laying Ukrainian cities under siege.
Hundreds of thousands of civilians now do not have
access to electricity for heat or drinking water to stay
alive. Russia is the aggressor in this situation.
And despite Russia’s best efforts, the media and
everyday Ukrainians are documenting this truth on the
ground. Russia cannot paint over the front page of the
New York Times, which on Monday featured the bodies
of a Ukrainian mother and her two children who died
while trying to cross a bridge outside Kyiv in their
attempt to flee to safety. Russia cannot cover up the
work of Associated Press news reporters, who captured
a doctor attempting to resuscitate an 18-month-old,
Kirill, who died from Russian shelling in Mariupol.
Russia cannot suppress the social media post,
confirmed and amplified by CBS News, that told the
story of the 11-year-old Ukrainian boy who fled to
Slovakia, by himself, with only a passport, a plastic
bag and a phone number scrawled on his hands. Russia
cannot silence the Al-Jazeera report of Russian soldiers
terrorizing Ukrainian cities. And Ukrainian journalists

S/PV. 8991

are risking their lives every day to deliver to the world
the latest on-the-ground facts, such as Novoe Vremye
reporting on the reckless behaviour of Russian forces
towards Ukraine’s nuclear facilities.
Russia is failing in its quest to create an alternative
reality. In fact, not even Russian diplomats can keep
their propaganda straight. Just yesterday, the Kremlin’s
spokesman said he didn’t have clear information about
the Russian forces who fired on a maternity hospital.
Then the Foreign Minister himself denied that Russia
attacked Ukraine at all, right before admitting that
Russia deliberately targeted this maternity hospital in
Mariupol. Their fabrications did not matter, because the
world had already seen the searing images broadcast
on CNN of bloodied pregnant women being evacuated
from the scene of Russia’s attack on the hospital.
Even Russia’s own citizens are tiring of such lies.
Russian athletes are writing “no war” on their shoes and
on television cameras. Russian citizens are marching in
the streets and protesting Putin’s war of choice. And
even Russian state television pundits — Putin’s own
propaganda arm — have called for Putin to stop the
military action.
That is why we did not object to holding today’s
meeting. Today’s meeting has confirmed our predictions,
revealed Russia’s objectives to the world and exposed
Russia’s lies for what they are — a malicious effort to
cover for the atrocities being committed by Russia as
part of its illegal and unprovoked attack on Ukraine.
It is a page directly out of the Russian playbook, and it
will not convince us one bit.
The world is watching. Photographic and video
evidence is mounting, and Russia will be held to account
for its actions. We will not let atrocities slide. Unlike
the Russian Government — whose first instinct is to
silence — we are confident that truth and transparency
will prevail.
We call on President Putin to end this unprovoked,
unconscionable war against the Ukrainian people.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ms. DiCarlo and Mrs. Nakamitsu and for
their briefings.
I want to denounce in the strongest possible terms
the unfounded allegations made by Russia. Russia
would have us believe that chemical attacks are being
prepared in Ukraine and that there are biological
weapon research laboratories.

22-284839/19

S/PV.8991

Threats to international peace and security

Let us be serious. Russia’s lies are not fooling
anyone. They are part of a cynical disinformation
strategy and smokescreen, which Russia has turned
into a veritable weapon of war. We denounced those
irresponsible provocations just a few days ago at the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
along with 46 other States parties.
This is not the first time that Russia has spread lies
to create confusion, sow fear and above all cover up its
own responsibility. We must remember the facts: it is
Russia and not Ukraine that has used weapons of mass
destruction in recent years on European soil. It is also
Russia that is trying to cover up the Syrian regime’s
chemical attacks with disinformation.
France is very concerned that this disinformation
campaign may be a prelude to the use of a chemical or
biological weapon by Russia in Ukraine. Those weapons
are banned under international law. They must never be
used, in any context, by anyone. Russia has committed
itself to that by ratifying the Biological Weapons
Convention and the Chemical Weapons Convention.
The briefings we have heard this morning are clear.
The reality is that Russia premeditated its aggression
against a sovereign State and violated the Charter of the
United Nations. The reality internationals that Russia
has driven millions of Ukrainians into the streets,
causing the most serious humanitarian crisis in Europe
since the Second World War. It is Russia that has been
bombing Mariupol and many other Ukrainian cities and
civilian facilities on a daily basis for the past 15 days, in
violation of international humanitarian law. It is Russia
that is killing more innocent Ukrainians every day.
Neither disinformation nor vetoes can mask that
harsh reality, nor will Moscow’s laws to muzzle the press
and the voices in Russia that are speaking out against
the war. Neither Russians nor the world are fooled.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
Russia has today brought into the Security Council a
series of wild, completely baseless and irresponsible
conspiracy theories. Let me put it diplomatically. They
are utter nonsense.
There is not a shred of credible evidence that
Ukraine has a biological weapons programme. Ukraine
is a State party to the Biological and Toxin Weapons
Convention, in good standing. As we have heard, its
research facilities are established facilities, set up to
deal with public health hazards. Today’s briefers have
10/19

11/03/2022

confirmed that point. That is yet another lie in Russia’s
disinformation campaign.
They said they would not invade Ukraine; they then
invaded. Foreign Minister Lavrov then said they had not
invaded, and he repeated that absurdity yesterday. It is
a whole pack of lies. They said Ukraine was preparing a
dirty bomb. That, too, was a lie. They said yesterday that
a pregnant woman staged her injuries in the Mariupol
hospital bombing. That was a grotesque lie.
Russia is sinking to new depths today, but the
Security Council must not be dragged down with it. Let
us get back to the facts. Russia is invading Ukraine, in
violation of international law. Russia is killing hundreds
of civilians through the indiscriminate shelling of
Ukrainian cities. It is using cluster munitions and
thermobaric rockets — weapons designed to inflict
maximum damage wherever they are deployed. It
is targeting hospitals and schools and committing
war crimes.
Thousands of Russian and Ukrainian soldiers are
dead — deaths that will shatter the lives of the families
they have left behind. Some 2.5 million Ukrainians
have become refugees and 1 million children have been
forced to flee from President Putin’s invasion. This is a
war of choice that Russia needs to end.
Russia has broken its commitments under the
Charter of the United Nations, but we must not let it
subvert the multilateral system itself. As the United
Nations said today, Russia is now putting at risk the
global framework for peace and security. The Security
Council is responsible for addressing many serious
conflicts around the world. We have important work to
do. We do not sit in the Chamber to be an audience
for Russia’s domestic propaganda, and we should not
allow Russia to abuse its permanent seat to spread
disinformation and lies and pervert the purpose of the
Security Council.
Let us resolve today that the Council will remain
focused on the real threats to international peace
and security.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Nakamitsu and Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo for their briefings.
We have noted the recent statements made by
the representatives of States and wider information
regarding the biological activities relating to Ukraine.
In that context, we would like to underline the
22-28483

11/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

importance that India attaches to the Biological and
Toxin Weapons Convention (BTWC) as a key global
and non-discriminatory disarmament Convention,
prohibiting an entire category of weapons of
mass destruction.
It is important to ensure the full and effective
implementation of the BTWC, in both letter and spirit.
We also believe that any matters relating to obligations
under the BTWC should be addressed as per the
provisions of the Convention and through consultation
and cooperation between the parties concerned.
We have repeatedly expressed serious concern
about the ongoing situation in Ukraine. We sincerely
hope that the ongoing direct negotiations between
Russia and Ukraine will lead to the cessation of
hostilities. There is no alternative other than the path of
diplomacy and dialogue.
The dire humanitarian situation needs immediate
and urgent attention. We once again call upon Member
States to adhere to the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law and to respect the
sovereignty and integrity of States.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo and High Representative Nakamitsu for their
briefings and take note of the information they shared.
We also listened closely to the statement made
by the Spokesperson for the Secretary-General,
informing us that the World Health Organization has no
knowledge of any activities conducted by the Ukrainian
Government that would be contrary to its obligations
under the Biological Weapons Convention. The High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs reiterated that
point in today’s meeting.
Mexico is committed to adhering to the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production
and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and
Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction. It is a key
treaty in the United Nations disarmament regime and,
when disputes occur, they must be settled using the
mechanisms established by the Convention itself.
There is still no external verification mechanism
in place, as is the case for chemical weapons. For that
reason, we should recall that article V of the Convention
stipulates that the States parties to the Convention
undertake to consult one another and cooperate in
solving any problems that may arise in relation to the

S/PV. 8991

objective of, or in the application of the provisions of, the
Convention. Consultation and cooperation pursuant to
that article may also be undertaken through appropriate
international procedures within the framework of the
United Nations and in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations.
Mexico categorically opposes the use of biological
weapons by any actor under any circumstances, as well
as any attack on medical, scientific or care facilities
in Ukraine.
In conclusion, we reiterate the urgent call for
a ceasefire and, until that occurs, we call for the
establishment of a sustainable humanitarian pause
that ensures protection for the civilian population and
access to humanitarian assistance for those who need it,
without restrictions or exclusions.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by thanking
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Izumi Nakamitsu, and the Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Rosemary
DiCarlo, for their briefings to the Council this morning.
I also welcome the participation in this meeting of the
representative of Ukraine.
Ghana has taken due and careful note of the
briefings and the remarks of the delegations that have
spoken before us. We believe that on account of the
information before us, a determination of Ukraine’s
biological programmes can be made only after further
assessment by relevant institutions such as the World
Health Organization to establish the situation of the
biological laboratories under consideration and the
state of the infectious-disease research that was being
undertaken therein.
It is in that regard that we urge the parties to respect
the call for an unconditional and immediate ceasefire
and for the Russian Federation to withdraw all its
invading troops from the internationally recognized
borders of Ukraine, bearing in mind the incalculable
consequences that an accidental or deliberate release
of chemical or biological agents in the conflict theatre
could have not only for the populations in and around
Ukraine but also for global stability and an already
fragile security environment.
The weaponization of chemical or biological agents
in the war in Ukraine or anywhere else would be wrong
and should not even be contemplated.

22-2848311/19

S/PV.8991

Threats to international peace and security

As a State party to the Biological Weapons
Convention (BWC), we believe that the call for a
verification regime for the BWC continues to be
valid and that the elaboration of such an additional
protocol could be done in a manner that is reasonable
and sensible, especially in the light of recent global
developments, including the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
Ghana remains deeply concerned about the
escalation of military bombardments in several cities of
Ukraine, which have given rise to a rapidly deteriorating
humanitarian situation described by many as the worst
in Europe since the end of the Second World War. We
are also concerned by the transmission of the shocks
of the war in Ukraine within the global economy
and by the disproportionate impact that developing
countries and small economies are having to bear on
account of this war, many of which are already in the
throes of the COVID-19 pandemic and are contending
with the deaths of several thousand people from the
socioeconomic consequences of the pandemic, beyond
the scope of global attention. International solidarity
is therefore important even as we maintain global
cohesion and stability.
We remind the warring parties of their obligation
to respect and comply with their commitments under
international law, international humanitarian law
and human rights law. In particular, we call for the
protection of civilians and humanitarian workers in
Ukraine in accordance with the provisions of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War.
In concluding, let me recall Ghana’s long-held
view that the possession or proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, including chemical and biological
weapons, ensures neither international peace nor
national security. We all therefore have a responsibility
to ensure that we eliminate such weapons from the
present civilization that we are seeking to build.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
High Representative Izumi Nakamitsu and UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for their sober
briefings this morning.
Ireland deeply regrets the decision of the Russian
Federation to call for today’s meeting. It has done so for
no other reason than to advance baseless claims against
Ukraine and the United States.
12/19

11/03/2022

Ireland has a long-standing and clear policy
on biological, chemical and other weapons of mass
destruction. It is intolerable that Russia, as part of
its attempts to excuse its unjustifiable and unlawful
aggression against Ukraine, is making unsubstantiated
and unfounded claims against Ukraine regarding the
alleged development and possible use of biological and
chemical weapons. The prohibitions on biological and
chemical weapons must not be undermined.
Given the reckless disregard for nuclear safety and
security shown by Russian forces since the start of
the invasion, there are fears for chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear safety arising from the
invasion. This in no way, however, supports the claims
of the development of weapons of mass destruction
in Ukraine.
We are familiar with this approach by the Russian
Federation. It forms part of a long-standing pattern
by the Russian Federation to use disinformation in
multiple multilateral forums to distract, deny and cover
up its own transgressions and aggressions.
Ireland considers it unacceptable to levy such
accusations against Ukraine, a State party in good
standing to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the Biological Weapons Convention. Those
instruments are doing their vital job of ensuring the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
and no evidence has been advanced to support such
allegations in these forums. Earlier this week, 48 States,
including Ireland, challenged those unsubstantiated
claims by Russia in the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons.
I urge the Russian Federation to cease its campaign
of disinformation and not to use the Council as a
platform to spread disinformation. Such harmful
actions demean this body and its role in maintaining
international peace and security.
The Russian Federation’s invasion of Ukraine has
created a humanitarian catastrophe. In another effort
to mislead and misinform, we have been told by the
Russian Federation that the humanitarian crisis we are
seeing in Ukraine is not a result of its actions. However,
as United Nations briefers confirmed again today,
it is clear that the Russian offensive is causing the
suffering of millions, resulting in a rapidly rising toll
of internally displaced persons and refugees in need of
humanitarian assistance. Millions of people in Ukraine
22-28483

11/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

are struggling with the humanitarian consequences of
this senseless aggression.
Whatever is agreed or not agreed on humanitarian
safe passage, civilians and civilian infrastructure
must be protected. Compliance with international
humanitarian law is not optional. It is an obligation. Full,
safe and unhindered access to provide humanitarian
assistance is urgently needed.
One more time, Ireland urges the Russian
Federation
to
immediately
cease
hostilities,
unconditionally withdraw from the entire territory of
Ukraine and refrain from further threat or use of force
of any kind against Ukraine. It is beyond time to choose
dialogue and diplomacy as the only pathway to resolve
this conflict.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo and High Representative
Izumi Nakamitsu for their statements.
Two weeks ago, the Russian Federation, in blatant
violation of international law, chose to wage an outright
war against its peaceful neighbour Ukraine. We reiterate
our condemnation of that act of aggression.
A few days later, Russia misused its veto to prevent
the Security Council from fulfilling its mandate
to maintain international peace and security. And
today Russia has called for a meeting based on an
uncorroborated narrative, insinuating that Ukraine
is developing biological weapons. That impacts the
credibility of the Council.
Let us not forget the real threat to international
peace and security that we are witnessing: an illegal
war waged by the Russian Federation against another
sovereign State Member of the United Nations.
We condemn the use of cluster munitions by the
Russian Federation, confirmed here today.
The Russian invasion was preceded by fabricated
claims and unfounded allegations. It is intolerable that
Russia is now making the unsubstantiated claim that
Ukraine was preparing aggressive action with the use
of biological weapons. Similar allegations have also
emerged when it comes to the production of chemical
weapons. As we heard from the United Nations briefers,
they are not aware that Ukraine has developed or
planned to use either chemical or biological weapons.
Norway remains a staunch supporter of the
Biological Weapons Convention, which remains one

S/PV. 8991

of the pillars of disarmament and non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction regimes, together with the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and the Chemical Weapons Convention. We condemn
any use of such weapons, which would constitute a
clear violation of these conventions.
Those Conventions have established a total
ban on chemical and biological weapons. All States
parties were obliged to destroy their stocks of such
weapons when they entered into these two agreements.
Universal adherence to and full implementation of the
Conventions by all States parties are key. I would like to
remind the Council that, as a party to both conventions,
Russia must uphold its international obligations, just
as all States parties must. Chemical and biological
weapons cannot and must not be used in war.
I am deeply concerned by the growing humanitarian
crisis in Ukraine, and we are appalled by the blatant lack
of respect for international humanitarian law displayed
by the Russian military forces, in particular the blatant
disregard for their obligation to protect the Ukrainian
civilian population. Every day we see numerous reports
of the Russian shelling of homes, schools, hospitals
and other critical civilian infrastructure. This is
unacceptable and must stop.
The horrifying reports from this week’s attack on a
medical facility in Mariupol are yet another example of
the disrespect for international humanitarian law. The
space for humanitarian action must be restored, and it
must be protected in a way that ensures continuous and
sustained humanitarian access.
Russia must end this war now. We need a withdrawal
of all forces and engagement in good faith towards a
political solution. Diplomatic solutions must prevail.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
situation in Ukraine is still rapidly evolving, with
growing complexity and acuteness. What is most
needed now continues to be to intensify diplomatic
efforts, reduce tensions and bring the Ukrainian
issue back to the political-settlement track as soon as
possible while making efforts to prevent a massive
humanitarian crisis.
Stopping the fighting and hostilities is a
widespread desire of the international community.
Peace negotiations are the only viable means to
achieve that goal. Recently, Russia and Ukraine held
multiple rounds of direct talks, and their two Foreign

22-2848313/19

S/PV.8991

Threats to international peace and security

Ministers held a high-level meeting yesterday. All
these are positive steps towards achieving peace. The
international community should continue to encourage
and support Russia and Ukraine in their negotiations
and create the environment and conditions needed
for such peace talks to succeed. China will continue
to work with the international community and play its
part in de-escalating the situation and seeking peace.
China attaches great importance to biosafety and
biosecurity and consistently stands for a complete
prohibition and thorough destruction of all weapons
of mass destruction, including biological weapons;
firmly opposes the development, possession and the
use of biological and chemical weapons by any country
and under any circumstances; and encourages those
countries that have not yet destroyed their stockpiles
of chemical weapons to do so as soon as possible. The
purposes and principles of the Biological Weapons
Convention should be strictly upheld.
Biological weapons are weapons of mass
destruction. Any information or leads on military
biological activities should trigger great attention from
the international community. China has noted with
concern the relevant information released by Russia. It
is an obligation for all State parties to the Biological
Weapons Convention to uphold it. The concerns raised
by Russia should be properly addressed.
China urges relevant parties to effectively
implement their obligations under the Convention,
provide comprehensive clarification and accept a
multilateral verification. We have taken note of the
press report that the World Health Organization has
advised the Ukrainian Government to destroy the
pathogens located in the relevant laboratories in order
to prevent the spread of infectious diseases. We look
forward to receiving more specific information on this
matter. Under the current situation and for the sake
of public health, ensuring the safety and security of
relevant laboratories is of the utmost importance.
In her statement, the representative of the United
States made groundless allegations against China,
which we firmly reject. The international community
has been raising concerns about the United States
military’s own biological activities. Around the world,
the United States has 336 laboratories. This number
comes from the information provided by the United
States to the Conference of the States Parties to the
Biological Weapons Convention.
14/19

11/03/2022

The United States has said that it favours
transparency. If it believes that the relevant information
is fake, it should provide us with relevant data
and provide clarification so that the international
community can draw a conclusion for itself.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Biological weapons
were the first category of weapons of mass destruction
to be subject to a comprehensive prohibition. Article I
of the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC), adopted
in 1972, binds all State parties to the obligation to
“never in any circumstances … develop,
produce, stockpile or otherwise acquire or retain
[such weapons]”.
Brazil believes that any accusations with regard to
violations of the basic prohibitions set out by the BWC
are extremely serious and as such must be thoroughly
substantiated by solid evidence. Such evidence must
be presented to and confirmed by an independent and
impartial authority, as foreseen in Article VI of the
Biological Weapons Convention. It is unfortunate that
such investigative mechanisms are not strong enough at
the moment.
Brazil also believes that if we wish to preserve the
BWC regime, legitimate scientific and technological
research on biosafety and biosecurity should be
kept distinct and separate from possible violations
of the prohibition against the development and
production of biological weapons. Research into new
and dangerous pathogens should be subject to strict
transparency mechanisms.
Brazil has long favoured the negotiation of a
multilateral verification protocol as a complement to the
BWC, with additional measures to guarantee protection
from and security against emerging biological threats.
The situation before the Council today only reinforces
the urgency and the necessity of such a mechanism.
Brazil strongly condemns the use or threat of use
of weapons of mass destruction, including biological
and chemical weapons anywhere, by anyone, under
any circumstances.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and High Representative Nakamitsu
for their briefings. I also welcome the participation of
the representative of Ukraine.
The conflict in Ukraine continues at an unacceptable
cost to the people of Ukraine and, increasingly, to the
22-28483

11/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

entire world, as the prices of essential commodities
rise sharply. Our hearts go out to the families that have
lost loved ones, as well as to the millions of refugees
and internally displaced persons. We are also gravely
concerned that the armed conflict has not spared objects
indispensable to the survival of civilian populations,
including residential homes and health facilities, as
well as power and water infrastructure.
We have listened with deep concern to the serious
allegations of the development of biological weapons,
in contravention of the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Biological and Toxin Weapons. The Security Council,
as mandated in the Biological Weapons Convention,
is obliged to consider complaints brought forward by
any State party to the Convention regarding a breach of
the Convention. The Convention endows the Security
Council with the responsibility to consider whether to
carry out an investigation.
Should a State party formally lodge a complaint
to trigger such a process, we must make the obvious
observation that there would need to be a halt to the
armed conflict to enable an investigation. That would
then bring us to precisely the same situation we are in
today, even as Ukrainian and Russian diplomats have
just met in Antalya to explore an agreed basis for a
ceasefire. We urge them to redouble their efforts and to
make use of the willingness of many countries to lend
their every assistance to those talks.
The risks of the conflict broadening and escalating
should be taken with extreme seriousness. Its effects
are already being experienced far outside Ukraine. The
sanctions and counter-sanctions are threatening the
world food supply, and rapid energy price increases
will drive millions more people into poverty as they
struggle to recover from the impact of the coronavirus
disease. Humankind is teetering on the edge of a
precipice. The coming economic shock, if a ceasefire
is not imminently announced, will be accompanied by
political crises and more conflict situations.
With regard to the serious allegations we have
heard, whatever action is undertaken by the Security
Council should be matched by a newfound commitment
by all States parties / to the Biological Weapons
Convention. We urge its 183 States parties to seize the
opportunity of the ninth Review Conference later this
year to strengthen the biological weapons regime and

S/PV. 8991

the norms that safeguard humankind from the threat of
use of those abhorrent weapons.
Ultimately, the only way out of the crisis is to
pause the armed conflict and give to dialogue a
chance to shape a stable European security order in
which the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all
members are protected. I reaffirm Kenya’s recognition
of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Ukraine within its internationally
recognised borders.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and High
Representative Nakamitsu for their briefings and the
information provided. I also welcome the participation
of our Ukrainian colleague in this meeting.
The meeting is being held in a context marked by
the risk of the use of weapons of mass destruction.
The serious reciprocal accusations from all sides
of this table regarding the continuing risk of the use
of chemical weapons in connection with ongoing
testing programmes do not bode well for humankind.
My country calls on the parties to adhere fully to
the relevant provisions of the Biological Weapons
Convention, which strictly prohibits the use of broadspectrum weapons, as well as their development,
production and stockpiling.
As a State party to the Biological Weapons
Conventions, my country reaffirms its opposition to
the use of any form of biological weapons whatsoever.
We call on the belligerents to refrain from using such
weapons and to respect international humanitarian law.
Gabon reiterates its commitment to the peaceful
settlement of disputes between States Members of the
United Nations. We continue to call on the parties to
de-escalate and to engage in the ongoing negotiations
in order to put an end to the suffering of the civilian
population, which has paid a heavy price since the
hostilities in Ukraine began.
It is essential that the Council rise above the
logic of confrontation and condemnation to seek a
credible solution in order to avoid a conflagration with
unpredictable consequences. Diplomacy must regain
the upper hand. That is a requirement and, indeed,
a matter of urgency if we want to restore peace and
security in Ukraine.
We must offer a genuine alternative to the
deafening language of weapons and threats of the use of

22-2848315/19

S/PV.8991

Threats to international peace and security

11/03/2022

unconventional weapons. The Security Council cannot
and must not be the place for exchanging invectives
and reaffirming rivalries. It is now more crucial than
ever that the Council reconcile itself with its vocation
as a solution-maker for the settlement of conflicts
and crises.

On the other hand, every day we hear about the
atrocities of the Russian army, its daily attacks on
hospitals, kindergartens and maternity hospitals, using
cluster bombs, which had been repeatedly refuted by
our Ministry of Defence. Maternity Hospital No. 1 in
Mariupol has become common parlance in that regard.

The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.

Let me ask those present this: did they listen to what
we said here in the Chamber on Monday, 7 March, when
we said that militants and radicals had converted that
building into a firing point (see S/PV.8988). We warned
about that even then. Apparently, they did not listen, or
they do not want to hear what we said. Did they see the
photographs of the building of the maternity hospital,
allegedly destroyed by a bomb? What can be seen there
is a building without windows, but it is not destroyed.
Here are the photographs.

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): What conclusions can be drawn from our
discussion today? As we expected, first and foremost
of our Western colleagues, not one of them addressed
the substance of the issue we put forward. While my
American colleague was throwing thunderbolts and
accusing us, as we expected, of spreading propaganda,
two things came to mind.
First, I wish to recall a Russian proverb, according
to which a guilty mind is never at ease. The louder the
voices that attempt to shift the blame onto us, the greater
our conviction that we hit the nail on the head when
discussing their rather nefarious activities in Ukraine.
Secondly, I remember another story that has been
mentioned on various occasions and in various contexts
about the notorious vial presented by Mr. Colin Powell
here in this very Chamber (see S/PV.4701), which
became the foundation for the United States invasion
of Iraq. That led to untold levels of suffering, leaving
behind many victims and great destruction, which then
reverberated throughout the entire region, including in
the form of a terrorist organization known as Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant.
That is the real Palme d’or, as our Albanian
colleague said today. Many members stated that they
were unaware of military biological programmes
in Ukraine. That does not mean that they do not, in
actual fact, exist. A military development is a secret
enterprise, and those who involved would not report on
it to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
I also recall that Iraq and Mosul were razed to the
ground, leaving thousands of civilians buried under the
rubble. That was done by the forces of the coalition,
headed by the United States. The bodies remained
there for several months. I do not recall righteous ire on
the part of colleagues about that. We raised this issue
many times in the Security Council, but it died and was
buried. People prefer not to recall that.
16/19

Can they imagine what would have happened to a
building, as well as to those inside it, if it were struck
by a bomb or missile? What would have happened to it?
We have the photos and videos from inside the building.
Here they are. They show just that there is disorder,
overturned furniture and untouched, intact chairs. Once
again, can they imagine what kind of destruction would
have remained in the wake of a building hit by a rocket
or a bomb? They can ask military specialists. They will
tell them. They have already said that they show the
pictures of a crater near the building that resulted from
an exploded mine. Here is this photo.
At the same time, we are being told about the
17 wounded in the building — and, incidentally, not
a single death. By way of evidence, what is shown
here is a fabricated picture of a Ukrainian blogger,
Marianna Podgurskaya. It was taken by an Associated
Press stringer, Evgeniy Maloletka. That female blogger
is using two different kinds of make-up to present
herself as two different women in the photographs. The
network users themselves revealed that.
We are dismayed by the dirty campaign to blame
us for intentionally shelling civilian infrastructure. We
are being accused of propaganda and fakes, while the
accusers ignore a huge number of fakes that are being
turned out in special centres in Ukraine and in the West
so as to conduct a special psychological operation.
Meanwhile, they are coyly silent about the fact that they
have basically shut off their access to Russian sources
of information. These days, we are discovering a great
deal of new things about the freedom of speech that
they allegedly champion.
22-28483

11/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

I would now like to respond to my United Kingdom
colleague, who, as usual, quoted Minister Lavrov
incompletely when he said that we did not start the war.
She was not the only one to mention that. Those are
the exact words: we did not start this war; we want to
end it. It is true that the war was not started by us. It
was started eight years ago by the Kyiv authorities in
Donbas.
Yesterday, a video was uploaded on the Internet in
which Ukrainians in military uniform near Kharkiv,
as it is said in the video, are reportedly shooting down
what is supposed to be a Russian military aircraft, using
a mobile rocket launcher. Right next to it is a car, which
they apparently used to get there. Here is a picture — a
white Toyota bearing a United Nations logo. We already
asked the representative of the Secretariat this question,
and the answer was that United Nations cars are not
being used by the Ukrainian Territorial Defence Forces.
United Nations vehicles were previously reported to
be used in Kramatorsk. We insist that that incident be
investigated by the United Nations. Even if it turns out
that it was not a United Nations vehicle, using a United
Nations logo on a car that is being used for military
activities is unacceptable.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of the United States of America has asked for the floor
to make a further statement.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I know that the Russian representative
expects me to respond, but we are not going to give any
more air time to the lies that those present are hearing
today. It is beneath the Security Council. There is only
one aggressor here, and that is Russia. We hope that it
will be able to find it in its conscience to end the attacks
and stop the suffering of the Ukrainian people.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I thank you, Mr. President,
Council members, Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
and High Representative Nakamitsu. I should also
acknowledge the presence of a separate category
here — a representative of the aggressor State who
sits in the seat of the Soviet Union in the Security
Council, the status of which was recognized by General
Assembly resolution ES-11/1, and that is the status of
aggressor State.

S/PV. 8991

There is already a long record of Russian lies
established here in the Council. The recollection of
the items of lies over the past two weeks alone will
perhaps take an hour or so. But let me mention just a
couple — the lowest of the lowest. I will not hesitate
to mention them again after the representative sitting
in the Soviet seat just referred to them. Let me quote
his kingpin, Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov, who,
indeed, yesterday said:
“We do not plan to attack other countries. We
did not attack Ukraine either.”
Yesterday, an outlet of the Russian lies, the Russian
Embassy in London, tweeted that a pregnant woman in
the maternity hospital attacked in Mariupol was wearing
make-up and was playing the roles of pregnant women.
Indeed, Moscow and the Russian Ambassador here are
struggling to get the story straight. In the immediate
aftermath of the strike on Wednesday, Kremlin
spokesman Peskov told Reuters: “Russian forces do not
fire on civilian targets.” On Thursday, he told reporters
that the Kremlin would look into the incident “because
you and I do not have clear information about what
happened there”. Following a meeting with the Foreign
Minister in Turkey on Thursday, Foreign Minister
Lavrov took a different stance, as he claimed, without
evidence, that the hospital in Mariupol was a warranted
target because the building had been seized long ago by
Ukrainian armed groups.
Let me share some very good news. Ms. Mariana,
the pregnant woman, gave birth to a healthy daughter
last night. Her name is Veronica. Here she is, with her
father — regardless of the Russian lies about her, her
family and the incident.
Whatever the gentleman in the Soviet seat may say
in reply, he knows that it is probably useless. We need
to hear directly from the mastermind of the war crimes
committed thus far. As we established, he was out of
the loop on many occasions, with no clue of what was
happening on the ground.
We know quite well that the manic obsession with
which Putin fantasizes about non-existent biological
or chemical weapons or hazards in Ukraine is very
dangerous. It may actually point at Russia preparing
another horrific false-flag operation.
What else is he going to use against Ukraine — cruise
missiles, multiple rocket launchers, heavy aerial
bombs? We have already experienced all of those. What

22-2848317/19

S/PV.8991

Threats to international peace and security

is next? Ammonia? Phosphorus? And what will be the
next target? Another residential building? Another
maternity hospital? Another school? Or maybe another
cultural heritage site? Russian troops have already hit
all of those sites.
By calling this meeting, the aggressor State has
once again shot itself in the foot. Ukraine runs a health
system that is in full compliance with its international
obligations and cooperates fully with all international
organizations. The rest is the insane delirium of Putin
and his henchmen, including the Russian Mission to the
United Nations. Russia does not give a monkey’s about
the safety of its own citizens, including thousands of
decomposing bodies of Russian soldiers sent by Putin
to Ukraine to this ongoing carnage.
I regret that the Security Council is now being
manipulated by the Russian Federation to promote
such an insane delirium. This reflects the Russian
Federation’s total disregard of the members of the
Security Council. In addition, it is detrimental to the
Council’s credibility.
What indeed has to be addressed by the Council are
the war crimes and crimes against humanity that Russia
is committing on a daily basis since 24 February — the
day when the war in Europe, unleashed by Russia,
started. Among the most recent examples that shocked
the world is the Russian air strike that destroyed the
maternity hospital, which has been mentioned many
times today.
Russia’s indiscriminate shelling and air strikes
have almost destroyed Mariupol, one of the most
beautiful cities on the Sea of Azov, and have killed
1,582 civilian residents of that city, according to the
local administration. For the first time since the Second
World War, people are being buried in mass graves in
Ukrainian cities.
I would like to ask the gentleman in the Soviet
seat — if he is really connected to Moscow, to please
ask for the release of the kidnapped mayor of the city
of Melitopol and to help us get him back from the arms
of the invaders.
Kharkiv, Chernihiv, Sumy, Izyum, Okhtyrka,
Volnovakha and many other Ukrainian cities are being
razed to the ground. Documents and maps seized by
the Ukrainian troops from Russian prisoners of war
confirm that bombardments of residential areas had
been planned in advance. Captured Russian pilots at
18/19

11/03/2022

today’s press conference in Kyiv have confirmed that
they deliberately dropped bombs on residential areas.
The number of civilians killed by Russian troops exceeds
military losses. Many people have lost their homes.
More than 1.5 million have left Ukraine — almost
2 million — across the western border. Hundreds of
thousands, if not millions, became internally displaced
persons. From Kharkiv alone, 600,000 people were
evacuated by train.
The main efforts are now focused on ensuring
the safe passage of civilians through humanitarian
corridors. Unfortunately, the arrangements are often
violated by the Russian troops. Awful pictures and
footage taken near the destroyed bridge in Irpin
showing dead civilians, including entire families who
tried to flee the occupied areas have circled — and
horrified — the globe. Russia must not use civilians
as hostages and human shields. By exposing cities to
indiscriminate shelling and creating a dire humanitarian
situation and then deliberately shelling civilians during
evacuation from besieged Ukrainian cities, Russia
is forcing civilians to flee their homes and providing
only a corridor to its territory or to Belarus. The socalled “green corridors”, proposed by the aggressor
for sending people to Russia and Belarus could be
considered forcible deportation of protected persons, in
accordance with international humanitarian law.
Ukrainian people are being killed and Ukrainian
cities are being destroyed while we are compelled to
listen to the absurd Russian fabrications in the Security
Council — created in a desperate attempt to whitewash
the war against Ukraine. Russian aggression threatens
us all, and there is an urgent need to be resolute in
countering Russia’s uncivilized, barbaric and mean
actions. The sooner the aggressor is stopped and held
accountable for its crimes, the safer our world will be.
I cannot end my statement without reading several
paragraphs from an open letter from 194 Nobel laureates:
“The undersigned Nobel laureates voice
our support for the Ukrainian people and the
free and independent state of Ukraine as it faces
Russian aggression.
“In a move that recalls the infamous attack of
Nazi Germany on Poland in 1939 (using similar
tricks of feigned provocation) ... the government
of the Russian Federation, led by President
Putin, has launched an unprovoked military
aggression — nothing else but a war — against its
22-28483

11/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

neighbour, Ukraine. We choose our words carefully
here, for we do not believe the Russian people have
a role in this aggression.

S/PV. 8991

“We join in condemning these military actions
and President Putin’s essential denial of the
legitimacy of Ukraine’s existence.”

“We respect the calm and the strength of the
Ukrainian people. We are with you. Our hearts go
out to the families and friends of all, Ukrainians
and Russians, who have died and been injured
already. May peace come to this piece of our
beautiful world.”

It goes on to say:

The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

22-2848319/19
