S/PV.8343

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8343rd meeting

Thursday, 6 September 2018, 11.40 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
Letter dated 13 March 2018 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2018/218)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-27723 (E)
*1827723*

S/PV.8343

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

The meeting was called to order at 11.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 13 March 2018 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2018/218)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I want to thank you,
Madam President, for scheduling this meeting today at
short notice following the announcements in the United
Kingdom yesterday.
When the Security Council last met on this issue,
on 18 April (see S/PV.8237), I undertook to update
the Council in the light of significant developments.
My Prime Minister’s full statement to Parliament
was circulated to the Security Council as document
S/2018/814. As the British Prime Minister announced
yesterday in Parliament, the United Kingdom has
reached a significant conclusion in the Salisbury
chemical weapons investigation. I will come to that
later, but first I will provide a brief summary of what
happened in Salisbury earlier this year.
On Sunday, 4 March, Sergei Skripal and his
daughter Yulia were found unconscious on a bench
in the city centre after being poisoned by a Novichok
nerve agent. Detective Sergeant Nick Bailey, a Wiltshire
police officer, was also seriously ill after having been
exposed to a nerve agent. Following that attack, the
United Kingdom notified the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and invited
it to confirm the identity of the substance involved,
while we briefed members of the Security Council. The
OPCW’s independent expert laboratories confirmed
the United Kingdom’s identification of the Novichok
nerve agent.
Thankfully, the Skripals are recovering. But, on
30 June, 44 year-old mother of three, Dawn Sturgess,
fell ill in the nearby town of Amesbury after being
exposed to Novichok. Sadly, she died on 8 July. Her
partner, Charlie Rowley was also exposed to the nerve
2/14

06/09/2018

agent and became seriously ill. Police have identified
that Sturgess and Rowley came into contact with a
counterfeit perfume bottle that had been discarded
in Salisbury. Tests of that bottle after its recovery by
police confirmed it contained a significant amount of
highly lethal Novichok nerve agent.
On 4 September, the OPCW’s independent expert
laboratories again confirmed the United Kingdom’s
identification of the Novichok nerve agent with a very
high level of purity. I remind Council members that the
very high level of purity means that it will have been
made by a State.
The inquiry into the Amesbury incident has now
been formally linked by the police with the attempted
murder of the Skripals. Independent experts of the
OPCW have confirmed the identifications as Novichok
nerve agents, and it is the exact same chemical that was
used in both attacks.
It stretches credulity that the identification of
such a nerve agent twice in close proximity could be
a coincidence. We have previously shared with the
Council the information about the Russian foliant
programme from the 2000s, but to recap briefly, there
was development of Novichok outside the Chemical
Weapons Convention, and Russian agents were trained
in assassination techniques, including the use of such
agents on door handles.
In the United Kingdom, the police are independent
of Government, and they have been conducting a
painstaking forensic investigation. That investigation
has involved approximately 250 detectives, who have
trawled through more than 11,000 hours of closedcircuit television (CCTV) footage and have taken more
than 1,400 statements. Working around the clock, they
have carried out painstaking and methodical work to
ascertain exactly which individuals were responsible
and the methods they used to carry out the attack.
That evidence has been independently reviewed by
the Crown Prosecution Service, and it has concluded
there is a sufficient basis to bring charges. We have thus
independently concluded that there is enough evidence
to bring charges against two Russian nationals for the
following crimes: conspiracy to murder Sergei Skripal;
attempted murder of Sergei and Yulia Skripal and
Detective Sergeant Nick Bailey; use and possession of
Novichok; and causing grievous bodily harm with intent
to Yulia Skripal and Nick Bailey. The investigation into
the murder of Dawn Sturgess remains ongoing.
18-27723

06/09/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

The evidence reveals the following. It shows the
arrival of two individuals travelling under the names
of Alexander Petrov and Ruslan Boshirov to the United
Kingdom from Russia. CCTV and other evidence
records their travel to and from Salisbury and, crucially,
there are images that clearly places them in the vicinity
of the Skripal’s house at 11:58 a.m. on Sunday, 4 March.
That was moments before the attack took place, which
involved placing the substance on the Skripal’s front
door handle. Should any Council member wish, we can
share copies of those images. Furthermore, testing of
the hotel where the pair stayed in London revealed the
presence of traces of the Novichok substance in their
hotel room.
Based on a thorough analysis of our intelligence,
the United Kingdom Government has concluded that the
two individuals named by the police investigation are
in fact officers from the Russian Military Intelligence
Service, also known as the GRU. That is a body of the
Russian State.
When we briefed the Council before, we attributed
responsibility to Russia on the basis of technical
means, operational experience — and I recall the case
of Litvinenko here — and motive. Russian statements
have said that former Russian agents are, if you like,
fair game for assassination. Those arguments have now
been firmly reinforced by the clear evidence of the
involvement of identified Russian nationals travelling
to the United Kingdom from Moscow and returning
there on Russian passports. That evidence has been
sufficient for our independent prosecuting authorities
to bring criminal charges in relation to the Salisbury
attack and to issue European arrest warrants.
Those two individuals are no longer in the United
Kingdom. Were they with us, those two suspects, within
United Kingdom jurisdiction, would be liable to arrest
on a clear basis in law for their attempted murder crimes.
It is clear that the Russian State does not permit the
extradition of Russian nationals, and I understand that
is a prohibition in the Russian Constitution. Therefore,
with respect to those two individuals, we have obtained
a European arrest warrant and we will shortly issue
an INTERPOL Red Notice. Should either of those
individuals ever gain travel outside Russia, we will take
every step open to us to detain them, extradite them and
bring them to face justice in the United Kingdom.
We responded at the time to Russian behaviour
robustly. The Council will recall that we were joined

S/PV. 8343

by 28 partners and NATO in expelling more than 150
Russian intelligence officers. That was a proportionate
and direct response to deter and degrade Russia’s
ability to conduct further operations in future and to
reduce its ability to use the GRU network to cause our
citizens harm.
We have clear evidence of Russian State
involvement in what happened in Salisbury and the
use of chemical warfare — reckless involvement
endangering the lives of many citizens, and reckless
involvement engangering the universal prohibition on
the use of chemical weapons.
As the Council has discussed before, there is an
established pattern of maligned Russian behaviour
perpetrated by military and intelligence agencies
overseas, examples of which are the October 2016
coup attempt in Montenegro, the June 2017 NotPetya
cyberattack, which caused an estimated $1.2 billion
in damage worldwide, and other cyberattacks. The
GRU has time and again been responsible for Russian
interference in other countries’ affairs, and most
recently we saw a United States indictments of GRU
individuals in relation to the 2016 Democratic National
Committee hack. Now, in the light of the evidence from
Salisbury, we see that GRU activity also encompasses
the use of an illegal military-grade nerve agent on
European soil.
The five permanent members of the Security
Council (P-5) bear a particular responsibility to uphold
global norms and international law, and all the more so
where weapons of mass destruction are concerned. One
P-5 member has not upheld those important norms. One
P-5 member has but undertaken a pattern of behaviour
that showed that it tried to murder the Skripals, played
dice with the lives of the people of Salisbury and
work in a parallel universe where the normal rules of
international affairs are inverted.
That is a direct challenge to the rules-based
international system, which has kept all of us safe,
including Russia, since 1945. In the face of such
behaviour, the international community needs to
continue to defend the laws, norms and institutions
that safeguard our citizens against chemical weapons
and safeguard them against the threat of hostile
foreign interference. That is why the British Prime
Minister yesterday set out the importance of using
transparent multilateral mechanisms to identify and
hold malign actors to account. Allow me to summarize

18-277233/14

S/PV.8343

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

06/09/2018

the steps that we believe should now be taken by the
international community.

and security, an atrocity crime and a flagrant violation
of the respective non-proliferation regime.

We need to work together to strengthen the
Chemical Weapons Convention against the use of
chemical weapons around the world, which we saw most
recently violated on the streets of the United Kingdom.
We need to build further the capability of the OPCW to
attribute the use of chemical weapons. There can be no
place for such incidents as Salisbury again. We need to
shine a light on the use of State agencies to undermine
the rule of law and interfere in the domestic lives of
other countries’ citizens. And we need to make the best
use of our established methods, including sanctions, in
curbing threats to our societies and our ways of life.

We therefore reiterate our call on the parties
concerned to cooperate fully with the investigations
and anything else related to this delicate matter,
especially through the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and other competent bodies,
in line with the principle of the peaceful settlement
of disputes. We stress the urgent need to determine
responsibility and the corresponding sanctions, within
the framework of the rule of law and due process.

As Theresa May emphasized yesterday, the United
Kingdom has no quarrel with the Russian people. We
continue to hold out hope that we will once again enjoy
a strong partnership with the Government of that great
nation. We fought alongside Russian troops in the
Second World War. But we will respond robustly when
our security is threatened, the lives of our citizens are
endangered and the norms and rules of international
law and the international system are flouted in such a
brazen and reckless manner.
We stand with our partners and allies. We are
determined to continue to disrupt together the hostile
activities of foreign intelligence networks on our
territories. We will uphold the prohibition of chemical
weapons. We will protect our citizens. And we will
defend ourselves from all forms of maligned State
activity directed against us and our societies.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
information that the representative of the United
Kingdom shared with us on the investigations conducted
and evidence found, of which we take careful note.
We would like to reiterate our deep concern about
the use of a nerve agent in public spaces in the United
Kingdom, which claimed the life of an innocent woman
and seriously endangered the lives of at least four other
people. We express our condolences and solidarity with
the victims and with the people of the United Kingdom
that were potentially exposed to the chemical agent
in question.
Peru resolutely condemns all use of chemical
weapons. We consider that such a practice constitutes in
and of itself constitutes a threat to international peace
4/14

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the United States presidency for convening this
meeting. I also thank the United Kingdom for this very
timely update on the results of the British investigation
into the exposure of three individuals to a military
nerve agent in Salisbury last March. At the outset, on
behalf of France, I would like to reiterate the solidarity
expressed by our most senior officials to our British
friends in the aftermath of the hostile act on 4 March.
The British police investigation has now come to
an end. I would like to commend the United Kingdom’s
commitment to transparency and the way in which it
has conducted the investigation in conjunction with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), whose exemplary work I also commend. I will
say a few words about what happened, before briefly
turning to the more general issues.
The facts are clear: the results of the British
investigation, combined with those of the OPCW,
confirm the initial analysis, which we agree with, on
the absence of any plausible explanation other than that
Russia is responsible. Everything lines up. A powerful
chemical agent, Novichok, which is considered to be
produced by the military, was indeed used in Salisbury
against Sergei Skripal and his daughter, and later in
Amesbury. I note the British conclusion that such an
operation could have been launched and approved only
at a sufficiently high level of the Russian State. We have
taken note of the issuance by the British justice system
of arrest warrants against the two Russian military
intelligence officers identified by the British police,
and we are prepared to cooperate with its services.
In the light of those very serious elements, I wish
to express my country’s deep concern and reiterate our
condemnation of such acts, which are unacceptable.
We have unanimously reaffirmed that position to
our partners in NATO and the European Union.
18-27723

06/09/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

Those actions endanger the safety of many civilians,
undermine the safety of one of our closest allies, are
contrary to the rules of international law and flout all
the principles of mutual cooperation and respect to
which we are committed.
The use of chemical weapons should in no way be
considered an option at the beginning of the twentyfirst century. The re-emergence of those weapons
challenges our collective security system in a way that
we cannot accept. It is the Council’s responsibility to
protect the chemical non-proliferation regime, and
with it our collective security system. We ask Russia,
a member of the Security Council, to respond to
all the questions that are raised. We also call on the
Council and all our partners, including Russia, to
firmly commit themselves to protecting the Chemical
Weapons Convention and to reaffirming the prohibition
on the use of chemical weapons.
To that end, we must strengthen the capacity of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
to ensure that it is able to fulfil its mandate. The
implementation of the decision adopted by the Special
Session of the Conference of the States Parties to Review
the Operation of the Chemical Weapons Convention,
held in June following the major incidents in Duma and
Salisbury, must serve as our road map. That meeting of
the States Parties to the Convention also showed that
the majority of the international community shares our
concerns about the risk with regard to the chemical
non-proliferation regime being called into question and
supports the principle of strengthening the Convention’s
means of protection.
It is essential to provide the international community
with an investigation and accountability mechanism
for all cases of the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
Such an instrument is essential for the protection of the
chemical non-proliferation regime, and we have long
encouraged Russia to take that path. We will return to
that topic this afternoon during our meeting on Syria.
As the President of the Republic, Mr. Emmanuel
Macron, recently recalled, France is resolutely engaged
with and committed to the protection of the Chemical
Weapons Convention regime, and it is fully determined.
We have just reaffirmed that, together with our British,
American, German and Canadian partners.
In the same spirit, we want the European Union
to adopt a sanctions regime against individuals and
entities involved in the proliferation or use of chemical

S/PV. 8343

weapons. The Council can count on France’s full and
complete commitment in that regard.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting. I would also
like to thank Ambassador Karen Pierce for the detailed
update on the investigation into the attempted murder of
Sergei and Yulia Skripal in Salisbury, which involved
a nerve agent. We greatly appreciate the transparency
of the United Kingdom in this process. We continue
to express our full solidarity with the British people
and the British Government, as well as our readiness
to support our close ally and European partner in
taking actions to respond to the shared threat posed by
chemical weapons.
Since the beginning, we have condemned that
unprecedented attack, which is the first of its kind in
Europe after the Second World War. We call on Russia
to fully cooperate with the British Government and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW).
The British investigation concluded that the
evidence available is sufficient to state that individuals
related to the Russian State are responsible for the
attack in Salisbury. Poland has full confidence in the
professionalism of the British police and investigating
authorities. We believe that the actions taken by the
United Kingdom constitute a significant step forward
towards ensuring that the use of chemical weapons will
not go unanswered.
Let me also reiterate that Poland continues to
commend the OPCW and its experts who participated in
the technical assistance visit for their outstanding work
to determine the facts on the ground in a professional
and impartial manner.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
listened carefully to the important and detailed
briefing by the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, Ambassador Karen Pierce, with regard to
the latest results of the investigations into the Salisbury
incident on 4 March. Those investigations recently
identified the potential perpetrators.
I would like to commend the comprehensive and
professional manner in which the investigations to
identify the perpetrators of that heinous crime were
carried out. I reiterate our confidence in all the actions
and measures taken by the United Kingdom as part of
the investigations into that incident.

18-277235/14

S/PV.8343

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

In that regard, we underscore our principled position
in condemning the use of chemical weapons — by any
party, at any time and wherever it may occur — as a
grave violation of international law. We stress the need
to hold those responsible for such use accountable,
whether they be individuals, entities, groups or
Governments. We also condemn the production,
acquisition, stockpiling, possession or direct and
indirect transfer of such weapons, pursuant to Article 1
of the Chemical Weapons Convention, which the State
of Kuwait joined in 1997.
We express our confidence in the professionalism,
independence and transparency of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. We underscore
the need to build up its capacity and potential in order
to carry out its tasks and shoulder its responsibilities.
That would strengthen the non-proliferation regime in
the area of investigating the use of such weapons and
identifying those responsible for violating it.
In conclusion, we stress the need to uphold
international law and norms and to maintain
international peace and security, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations. We urge all the parties
concerned to cooperate with all the investigations under
way with regard to this incident.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the update
provided by the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom on the investigation into the chemical-weapon
attack that took place in Salisbury and the subsequent
poisoning in Amesbury last month.
I will make three points. First, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands condemns the use of chemical weapons
and stands in solidarity with the United Kingdom.
Secondly, issuing criminal charges is a significant
new development that supports and strengthens our
earlier conclusions. Thirdly, the Russian Federation
should cooperate to establish the full truth and
ensure accountability.
First of all, I would like to repeat, clearly and
unequivocally, that the Kingdom of the Netherlands
condemns the use of chemical weapons anytime,
anywhere and under any circumstances. Let me
reiterate our full support for the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the important
work it does for us. As the United Kingdom is faced
with the reckless use of chemical weapons on its own
6/14

06/09/2018

soil, the Netherlands stands in firm solidarity with our
neighbour, ally and friend.
Secondly, during previous meetings, the Kingdom
of the Netherlands expressed its shock about the
reckless attack with a military grade nerve agent on
British soil, which exposed innocent civilians to great
risks. Since then, we learned that the attack resulted in
even more victims, one of whom, Ms. Dawn Sturgess,
did not survive. We express our sincere condolences
to her loved ones. Issuing criminal charges is an
important step that brings us closer to establishing the
full truth so that justice can be served. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands has full confidence in the investigation
carried out by the British authorities and in the fairness
and impartiality of the British justice system.
Thirdly, now that the perpetrators of this
horrendous act have been identified, they must be
brought to justice. Therefore, we call on all States to
cooperate to ensure that the two suspects have their
day in court in the United Kingdom and to bring the
full truth to light about how the attack was carried out.
Those who bear responsibility must be held to account.
I would like to recall that, on 22 March, the European
Council condemned in the strongest possible terms the
attack in Salisbury. European leaders unanimously
agreed with the assessment of the British Government
about the responsibility of the Russian Federation. That
assessment has now been confirmed by the criminal
investigation, which has led to criminal charges filed
against two Russian individuals.
During our previous meeting, on 18 April (see
S/PV.8237), the Kingdom of the Netherlands urged the
Russian Federation to change its course from denial
to cooperation. We reiterate our call for the Russian
authorities to provide the United Kingdom with all
information to unanswered questions and to cooperate
with efforts to bring those responsible to justice.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank the United Kingdom for
its initiative to convene today’s meeting on the letter
dated 13 March 2018 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of
the Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
on behalf of Prime Minister Teresa May, addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/2018/218),
following the poisoning of Mr. Sergei Skripal and his
daughter, Yulia, in Salisbury on 4 March.
18-27723

06/09/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

Côte d’Ivoire would like to reiterate its strong
condemnation of the poisoning, which was carried out
with nerve agent, and the use of chemical weapons,
regardless of the perpetrators, whether in times of peace
or of war. The investigations conducted by the British
police have zeroed in on two individuals who have
alleged links to a Russian military intelligence agency.
The Skripal incident reminds us all about the
importance of the strict implementation of the relevant
provisions of the international non-proliferation
architecture. There is no doubt that strict respect
for international law in the area of the combating
the proliferation of chemical weapons will enable
us to prevent such acts, which constitute a threat to
international peace and security. My country calls upon
all stakeholders to show restraint and work with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
in line with the competencies entrusted to it during its
special session held on 26 and 27 June in The Hague, in
order to identify those who use chemical weapons and
bring them to justice before the competent international
judicial bodies.
The Skripal incident is a source of discord in
the Security Council. In that context, Côte d’Ivoire
remains committed to the values of dialogue, peace and
friendship among peoples and calls upon Member States
to preserve the unity of the Council, without which our
efforts to meet our goal to maintain international peace
and security would be in vain.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We thank the United
Kingdom for its timely update.
We note the significance of the new information
from the British investigation; we underline our
confidence in the British findings. We call on
Russia to change course, cooperate with the ongoing
investigation and prosecution and fully disclose any
nerve agent programmes to the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). The most
recent information provides further evidence that it is
highly likely that Russia was responsible for the attack,
as previously stated by the European Council.
We regret that, since the Council last discussed
these developments (see S/PV.8237), a British national
in Amesbury tragically died following contact with a
substance that the OPCW confirmed to be the same
Novichok nerve agent that poisoned Sergei and Yulia
Skripal. We reiterate our strong condemnation of the
use of a nerve agent on British soil and express our full

S/PV. 8343

solidarity with the United Kingdom, our close friend
and European Union partner.
Once again here in the Chamber, we condemn in
the strongest terms all use of chemical weapons, strictly
prohibited under international law. It is a common
responsibility to ensure that the chemical-weapons ban
be respected. It can be argued that permanent members
of the Security Council have special responsibilities
when it comes to curbing weapons of mass destruction.
The rules-based international system protects us all, and
we must ensure its integrity. In that regard, we reiterate
our full support for the OPCW — the independent
international organization charged with overseeing the
chemical-weapons ban.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China listened closely to the briefing by the
representative of the United Kingdom.
China categorically opposes the use of chemical
weapons by any State, organization or individual,
regardless of the circumstances or purposes. China
supports the comprehensive, objective and fair
investigation of the alleged use of a chemical weapon,
which, based on solid evidence, should lead to
findings that are factual. That has been our clear and
consistent position.
We have followed developments following the
Salisbury incident in March. We believe that relevant
issues should be addressed in accordance with the rules
and procedures of the Chemical Weapons Convention
and within the framework of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
We note the letter dated 5 September 2018 from
the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
addressed to the President of the Security Council. We
also note that the parties concerned have not reached
conclusions acceptable to all parties on issues including
who should be held responsible for the incident. In that
regard, parties should work on the basis of mutual
respect and equal consultation and resolve the issue
through dialogue.
At a time when the international community
continues to face many challenges, parties should work
with, instead of against, each other, It is important to
maintain focus on the merits of the incident and avoid
politicization and moves that could fuel tensions.
Members of the Security Council should remain united

18-277237/14

S/PV.8343

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

in a common effort to fulfil their duty to maintain
international peace and security.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Having heard
today’s update on the current situation surrounding
the investigation into this well-known incident, my
delegation would also like to share its observations on
the topic.
First, we appreciate the diligent work of the United
Kingdom on the case and the fact that it shared its
information with us. However, reviewing such a serious
matter requires additional time, in particular to study
the findings of the British investigation.
Secondly, it is difficult to arrive at an objective
assessment, especially with regard to the conclusions
based on the United Kingdom letter of 5 September. We
would appreciate receiving more concrete data before
drawing any conclusions.
Thirdly, while actions should always be taken,
decisions should not be made in haste. As we can
see, with time, we will receive increasingly specific
information pertaining to the incident, which will
eventually enable us to make a fair and objective
assessment and conclusion.
As a country that has been affected by the
consequences of the use of weapons of mass destruction,
we express our sincere solidarity with those who have
suffered and are suffering from such weapons today. We
remain firmly committed to the fight against the use of
chemical weapons and are ready to play a constructive
role in preventing such atrocious incidents.
Kazakhstan counts on the continuation of
comprehensive, objective and transparent investigations
and calls on the parties not act hastily without providing
full and irrefutable evidence of the involvement of one
side or the other.
Lastly, we think that the Council, as the main
body for ensuring international peace and security,
should remain consistent in acting on solid facts,
based on evidence, in order to make objective and
transparent decisions.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank the delegation
of the United Kingdom for its briefing and updates
on the outcome of its investigation of the Salisbury
incident. We also take note of the statement delivered
by the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom to the
Parliament, which was circulated among members
8/14

06/09/2018

of the Security Council yesterday. Furthermore, we
have seen the summary of the report on activities
carried out by the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons in support of a request for technical
assistance by the United Kingdom, which was released
two days ago.
Our position on the use of chemical weapons
is well known, and we strongly condemn any use of
chemical weapons by any State or non-State actor. It is
unacceptable and constitutes a serious violation under
international law. Nevertheless, we understand that a
number of issues still require further clarification,
and unfortunately we do not have all the necessary
information before us.
One thing is very clear, however. Cooperation
between the United Kingdom and the Russian
Federation is absolutely vital in getting to the bottom of
this issue. That should be done in good faith and a fair
manner by undertaking the necessary consultation and
exchange of information. That is what will help address
the issue once and for all in a way that would allay the
concerns of the United Kingdom and ultimately bring
those responsible to justice.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We have taken note of the
information provided today.
Bolivia reiterates its position of categorically
rejecting the use of chemical compounds as weapons,
since such use is an unjustifiable and criminal act
and a serious crime under international law and
undermines international peace and security. Their use
by whomever and in whatever circumstances is heinous
and constitutes a serious assault on human rights, the
perpetrators of which must be identified and brought
to justice.
This event sets a sensitive precedent, as it threatens
the non-proliferation regime and therefore runs contrary
to the provisions established by the Chemical Weapons
Convention. We reiterate the need for an independent,
transparent, objective, impartial and depoliticized
investigation in accordance with the current norms of
international law, mainly within the framework of the
provisions of the Chemical Weapons Convention. We
reiterate the need for an independent investigation.
With regard to the March events, it is essential
that the countries concerned turn to the corresponding
diplomatic channels so as to comply with the principles
18-27723

06/09/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

of mutual respect and bilateral cooperation, which
will enable a solution to this issue to be reached. In
that regard, making charges and accusations without
engaging in the necessary dialogue and transparent
exchange of information between the parties will not
contribute to that goal. Lastly, we call for dialogue and
respect to prevail as the situation develops.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Equatorial Guinea has followed the
developments in the events related to the use of a
chemical agent in Salisbury on 4 March with concern.
We are carefully following the current investigations
aimed at full clarification of the incident. We expect
them to be exhaustive, fair and independent, and in
accordance with the relevant international norms.
Equatorial Guinea opposes the manufacture,
storage and use of chemical weapons, which contravene
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and
advocates for their complete prohibition and destruction.
We hope that those responsible for their use, wherever
that may occur, will be brought to international justice.
We firmly condemn the attack on the lives of members
of the Skripal family in Salisbury. We stand in solidarity
with the British people, especially with the family of the
victims who died as a result of this abominable crime.
Equatorial Guinea reiterates its hope that the
parties concerned — the United Kingdom and the
Russian Federation — will display moderation and find
a way to manage the situation in an appropriate and
reasonable manner while maintaining direct contact
with one another.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea reaffirms its
conviction that the complete and effective prohibition of
chemical weapons and their destruction is a necessary
step in realizing the purposes and principles of the
Charter, especially the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We listened attentively to the statement by
our British colleague, who had promised to provide
new information on the investigation of the so-called
Skripal affair. We have also carefully studied the
statement by Britain’s Prime Minister, Theresa May,
to Parliament on the same topic. To be frank, we had
very much hoped that today we would hear something
convincing that could shed light on this mysterious
incident. Unfortunately, our hopes were once again

S/PV. 8343

disappointed. In today’s statement we heard the same
litany of lies about so-called double agents being
legitimate targets for murder by Russian special
intelligence services; about the training of Russian
special services in the handling of toxic chemicals;
about Russia’s development of military-grade chemical
agents in Russia; about cyberattacks and attempts
to engineer a coup d’état in Macedonia, and a whole
lot more. I will not list this whole crazy cocktail of
unfounded lies. Similar insinuations were heard from
the British Prime Minister yesterday.
We learned only yesterday that the heroic British
investigators released photographs of two individuals
suspected of poisoning Sergei and Yulia Skripal.
Today the British authorities are trying to proclaim it
a sensation and a turning point in the investigation.
Those individuals supposedly have Russian surnames
and citizenship, and with that degree of certainty that
is now so familiar to us, it is said to be “highly likely”
that they are part of Russia’s intelligence services. At
the same time, it was immediately assumed that the
names given were aliases. Furthermore, unlike in the
situation with the previous unsubstantiated provocation
of this type, the Litvinenko affair, the British have
stated that they do not intend to request the suspects’
extradition from Russia. Just as they have no intention
of cooperating with the Russian authorities. Indeed,
why bother with that? It does not suit London’s game
plan. In their statements today, many delegations urged
Russia to cooperate with Great Britain. But in actuality
the situation is precisely the opposite. It is we who are
asking London to cooperate, not London asking us. And
London is refusing that cooperation. London needs this
affair for one reason and one reason only, which is to
unleash hateful anti-Russian hysteria and drag other
countries into it.
The number of inconsistencies and open questions in
connection with Britain’s new so-called evidence is off
the charts. For example, the stamps on the photographs
of the suspects supplied by London in which they are
shown walking along an identical corridor, allegedly at
Gatwick Airport, are timed to coincide to a fraction of a
second. According to the data cited by Theresa May, the
suspects appeared at the Skripals’ house around noon
on 4 March, although all the earlier police reports stated
that the Skripals had left the house early that morning
and did not return. So how did they come in contact
with their house’s allegedly poisoned doorknob? It is
also hardly convincing that the suspects transported

18-277239/14

S/PV.8343

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

the mythical Novichok in an ordinary perfume bottle.
According to the published reports of experts from the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) specifically with regard to the incident in
Amesbury, the substance is so toxic and dangerous
that special protective containers have to be used to
transport it, or the person carrying it would inevitably
be the first to fall victim to it.
There is a popular joke in Russia about a character
named Uncatchable Joe. He is uncatchable not because
no one can catch him but because nobody needs him or
is even looking for him. I have a distinct feeling that
we have been presented with two such uncatchable
Joes, allegedly acting on orders from Moscow. Perhaps
someone here finds this play convincing, but to me this
new act seems just as cooked up and far-fetched as the
previous acts, some of which unfolded in this Chamber.
Our British colleagues have taken a very convenient
position. The verdict has been pronounced, the guilty
party — Russia — has been declared, the suspects’
real names are unknown, but it is alleged that they are
employees of the Russian Military Intelligence Service.
Although how that can be determined without their
names is a big puzzle to us.
We have been called on to cooperate. As I said, it
was we who asked London to cooperate, which was
categorically refused from day one. Yesterday the
British Ambassador was summoned to the Russian
Foreign Ministry, where in answer to a request, he said
that the British authorities would not hand over the
information to the Russians that the suspects would
have had to submit to the Embassy when applying
for a visa. And yet that information even includes
fingerprints, which would make identifying them much
easier than from a picture on the Internet. Not that
there is anything surprising about that. In the post-truth
world created by our Western colleagues, a world of
delirium and fakery, it is quite sufficient to pronounce
sentence before bringing a verdict and even to begin
punishment. London is not about to see this affair
through to the end. It does not need to.
Since we have met here once again to listen to
revelations from London, let us go over the broad
outlines of what we have been presented with since
the attempted murder in Salisbury on 4 March. We
have two Russian citizens who have been exposed to a
mysterious nerve agent, who are being held somewhere
and to whom neither Russian consular employees
10/14

06/09/2018

nor close relatives are permitted access, in violation
of all sorts of international legal and humanitarian
norms. That is a fact. All we saw was Yulia Skripal’s
television appearance, which aroused a lot of questions
and suspicions about the possibility that she was under
serious moral and psychological pressure.
There is a letter in the form of an ultimatum to
Russia demanding that it admit to the attempt on the
Skripals’ lives. There are also several letters from
Russia to the British authorities proposing that it be
included in the investigation and with an impressive
list of specific questions that have gone unanswered.
Lastly, there is the conclusion by the OPCW experts
that a nerve agent, whose country of origin they were
unable to establish, was used in Salisbury on 4 March.
They were unable to establish it because it is impossible
in principle.
And this is where the facts end. All the rest is
mere speculation generated by the rich imagination
and Russophobic fantasy of London officialdom. Our
British colleagues simply pay no heed to the obvious
contradictions in the investigation’s conclusions, leaked
out in calculated doses by the media, spinning new and
ever more absurd versions. I will not list them, since I
value my own time and that of Council members. I will
only say that six months down the road, it is impossible
to comprehend why Russia might want to poison the
Skripals or why it should have done it in such a strange,
recherché and illogical way. We were told that a gel was
applied to the handle, but now Theresa May says that
apparently the suspects brought it with them and used a
perfume bottle. There are a ton of such inconsistencies.
The unfounded conclusions that it was Moscow
that did all this were abundant, and were followed by
concrete sanctions. It appears that in this continuing
theatre of the absurd, the only winner is the Nina
Ricci company, whose products are getting free
advertising in their capacity as the container for the
mythical Novichok. Anyone who has not yet lost hope
of finding the perpetrators realized long ago that the
British authorities still have no evidence of Russia’s
involvement in the Salisbury incident, or in fact any
reasonable versions of what happened at all. To be
honest, we have already lost hope. For us, therefore,
the question is only what new ploys they will come
up with in London in order to avoid a really serious
investigation of the Skripal affair, rather than a
politically motivated one. Unfortunately, the so-called
sensation we were presented with today fits that simple
18-27723

06/09/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

scheme perfectly. By the way, we have no problems
with ordinary English citizens, for whom we have
sympathy and respect, and who were able to see that
during the World Cup in Russia. Our problem is only
with the British Government, which is misleading not
only the international community but its own citizens.
In conclusion, I would like to switch to more formal
language and, in summary form, state the following.
The Russian Federation firmly rejects all the groundless
accusations of its involvement in the poisoning with
toxic chemicals in the city of Salisbury in March 2018
of the Russian citizens Sergei and Yulia Skripal, as was
again reiterated by Britain’s Prime Minister Theresa
May in a speech in Parliament on 5 September. We urge
the British to show restraint. We affirm our willingness
to hold consultations in accordance with the bilateral
Consular Convention of 2 December 1965 and the
European Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal
Matters of 20 April 1959. We demand consular access
to Russian citizens who have been illegally detained by
the British authorities.
We once again in full responsibility declare that the
statements by the authorities in London, misleading the
international community, to the effect that Russia alone
could have possessed and now possesses the technical
means, practical experience and motive for the
commission of such acts using poisonous substances,
are groundless. The Russian Federation has never
developed, produced or stockpiled the toxic chemicals
referred to in the West as Novichok. The very word
“Novichok”, as well as information about the structure
and spectrum of this chemical compound, began to
appear in foreign specialized scientific literature and
applied databases based on information provided by
Soviet defectors with only indirect connections to the
former military chemical-weapon programme of the
Soviet Union. Moreover, similar development was
also being conducted in a number of other countries,
including the United Kingdom, the United States and
other Western States, and with the direct involvement
of the Porton Down laboratory in the United Kingdom.
There are volumes of specialized literature in the West
about this research. The involvement of Porton Down
is particularly important to an understanding of what
happened in the Skripal case, as used by London against
Russia and in the most recent incident, in Amesbury, in
which the victims were British citizens. The Russian
Federation appeals to all States to consider what has
occurred with full responsibility and due understanding,

S/PV. 8343

and to support our call to the British Government to
begin consultations with the Russian Federation in the
context of the Chemical Weapons Convention and the
other two aforementioned conventions.
In conclusion, what is clear from London’s
statement is that it already had all the information
presented yesterday as long ago as May. If they had
not determined the possible suspects and established
the fact that they had been in Salisbury, there would
have been no reason to search the hotel where they
stayed. Clarly, if all the so-called evidence were as
important as is claimed, it would have been published
four months ago, before the tragic events in Amesbury.
We can conclude only one thing from all of this, which
is that Downing Street is governed not by the interests
of seeing justice done but by other motives, which we
have already mentioned.
The incident on 4 March became a useful pretext
to whip up anti-Russian hysteria, and was used
to undermine our authority as a State party to the
Chemical Weapons Convention on the eve of the staged
use of chemical weapons in the Syrian city of Douma.
We are seeing a similar picture today. The statement
by Theresa May on 5 September took place on the eve
of what we might call the new political season, and
around the situation in Idlib, which is being actively
discussed, and the chemical-weapon provocation that
the militants, together with the White Helmets, have
been preparing there, and which we have warned about
more than once. We will circulate the relevant materials
on the topic of today’s meeting to the States Members
of the United Nations.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
This morning the Security Council is addressing
the use of chemical weapons for the first of two times
today. As we have done previously, the United States
expresses its unequivocal condemnation of the use of
chemical weapons, in Salisbury or anywhere else. We
stand firm in defence of the international norm against
the use of these horrific weapons, and we stand firm
with the British people.
It is easy to express outrage, of course. We do it
every day in this Chamber. What is difficult is finding
solutions. Today our British friends and colleagues
are providing us with a master class on how to stop
the spread of chemical weapons. They are creating
accountability for those who use chemical agents and

18-2772311/14

S/PV.8343

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

are providing vital support for the international norm
against the use of these deadly, illegal weapons. The
British Government is pursuing accountability for
this attack in the only way accountability can truly
be accomplished, that is, in accordance with the rule
of law.
British investigators have conducted a full and
fair investigation of what has been determined to be
the attempted killings of Sergei and Yulia Skripal and
Detective Nick Bailey. The investigators have linked
those crimes with the chemical agent that poisoned
Charlie Rowley and killed Dawn Sturgess. Prime
Minister May went into great detail about each step of
the investigation. Hundreds of detectives have analysed
thousands of hours of closed circuit television (CCTV)
footage and thousands of documents. Some things
we knew already. British investigators had already
concluded that Russia was responsible for the exposure
of hundreds of people to a deadly agent on the streets
of Salisbury. Now, thanks to the careful, methodical
work of the British authorities, no one should have any
doubts. It is actually amazing to see the clarity and
undeniability of the results.
The British Government has identified two Russian
nationals as responsible for the use of the Novichok
nerve agent on British soil and the attempted murder of
a British citizen and his daughter. Critically, the British
have also concluded that the two men are officers of
the Russian Military Intelligence Service. This was
not, as Prime Minister May said, a rogue operation.
It was a highly planned, purposely driven attack. The
British have the suspects on CCTV from their arrival
at Gatwick Airport, to their travel to the vicinity of the
Skripals’ house on the day of the attack, and finally
their departure from Heathrow back to Moscow. Every
one of us in the Chamber and listening around the
world should be chilled to the bone by the findings of
this investigation. As for the subsequent poisoning of
Charlie Rowley and the death of Dawn Sturgess, Prime
Minister May said it well:
“Were these two suspects within our jurisdiction,
there would be a clear basis in law for their arrest
for murder.”
That is how it is done. That is how individuals who
commit murder and their heinous crimes are exposed.
That is how nations that defy the international norms
that keep us all safe are held to account. That is how the
memories of those injured and killed, and the service of
12/14

06/09/2018

the first responders who cared for them, are honoured.
It now falls to us to do our part.
Rather than accept responsibility for its actions,
the Russian Government has offered only denials and
counter-accusations, anything to deflect attention
and distract from its guilt. The Russian denials have
followed a familiar script. From Crimea to Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17 to Donbas to the killing of
Litvinenko, the list goes on and on. And the song is
always the same: Russia is somehow never behind these
incidents. But no one is buying it. The most recent
British action will ensure that Russia does not get away
with this brazen attack. In direct response to Russia’s
use of chemical weapons in the Salisbury incident,
the United States has announced additional sanctions
against Russia. As we acted together with our NATO
allies and other partners, 153 Russian officials were
expelled around the world in response to the attack on
the Skripals on British soil.
While this incident was in Salisbury, who is to say it
could not have happened in Paris, Amsterdam or Addis
Ababa? We must now help our British friends find the
two Russian suspects they have identified and bring
them to face justice in the United Kingdom. Better yet,
why can the Russian Government not turn those two
murderers over to British authorities? We must fight
and win the broader battle against impunity for the use
of chemical weapons. This is a day for explanations
from Russia, and solidarity with our colleagues in the
United Kingdom.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the United Kingdom has
asked to make a further statement.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank colleagues
for the views and expressions of solidarity and support.
I also thank those colleagues who repeated their
revulsion at the use of chemical weapons wherever and
whenever it occurs. I just want to make it very clear
that the United Kingdom shares that position about
bolstering the international prohibition on the use of
chemical weapons.
I was asked a number of questions, Madam President,
so with your permission I will respond briefly.
I was asked about the investigation. I would just
like to recall for my colleagues that in the United
Kingdom, the police are independent of Government.
18-27723

06/09/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

The investigation has been independent. The one
into the murder of Dawn Sturgess, which is ongoing,
is also independent. We believe that it is methodical
and comprehensive.
I was asked about inconsistencies in the evidence
identifying the two Russian individuals as Russian
Military Intelligence Service (GRU) operatives. We
have closed-circuit television footage. We are happy
to share those images with colleagues. To take one
instance, the Russian Ambassador mentioned that
there was a time stamp in the same corridor for both
individuals. I do not know if the Ambassador has
been to Gatwick Airport. We have been to Gatwick
Airport. There are multiple identical corridors through
which people can go. That is what happened to the
two Russians. We are confident in our evidence, and
I am very happy to talk to any colleague. Indeed, any
member of the General Assembly who has doubts
about the evidence is very welcome to come and have a
briefing at the British Mission.
I was also asked about cooperation with the
Russian authorities. I would like to recall for Council
colleagues that when this episode first happened in
March, my Government went to the Russian authorities
and asked for their cooperation. We were given a reply
that the request for cooperation was null and void.
We would have been happy to collaborate with the
Russian authorities at the time. We have indicated our
willingness to do so since that point, but in fact what
we have seen is a diversion into avenues that are not
relevant to this particular case. I think that is a great
pity. The Russians also asked us if they could join the
investigation once it was under way. I have said before
in this Chamber, and I repeat it, that you do not recruit
an arsonist to put out a fire. You especially do not do
that when the fire is one that the arsonist caused.
I was asked about GRU operatives using fake
names. The names may be fake but the crimes are real.
The time for lies and discrimination has passed, and it
is now time for truth and accountability. We have not
assumed that the Russians are guilty. We have done an
investigation. The assumption of guilt over innocence
may happen in the Russian judicial system. It does not
happen in the United Kingdom’s, but I do think there is
an interesting question for the Russian authorities as to
whether the GRU operatives were incompetent in what
they did to leave traces or whether they were rogue. I
think that is an important angle to think about.

S/PV. 8343

We were accused of not granting consular access
to the Skripals. In fact, as I have told the Council, we
did pass on the details from the Russian Consulate in
London to Yulia Skripal, and it was her wishes that we
followed in all subsequent contact. I am glad to say that
Yulia is making a good recovery. We have had no other
thought in our dealings with her than her welfare and
her wishes.
We are now up to some 37 accounts from Russia as
to why and how Salisbury took place. I think that none
of them hold water. We believe that the evidence we
have presented speaks for itself, but I repeat that I am
very happy to give any Member of the United Nations
that would so wish a briefing on that. We should recall
that a woman has died, two people have narrowly
escaped death, a whole city was placed at risk, and the
global chemical-weapon non-proliferation regime has
also been placed at risk. I would hope that the Russians
would respect the Council, engage on the facts and
accept the compelling evidence of Russian complicity
in this crime.
As regards the British allegations against Russia
about Douma, I think again that this shows that many
Russian authorities work in a parallel universe where
facts and international norms are inverted. We abhor the
use of chemical weapons. We take our responsibilities
under the Chemical Weapons Convention extremely
seriously. We call on the Syrian authorities and the
Russian authorities who work with them not to use
chemical weapons against their own people and not to
repeat the experience of eastern Ghouta and Douma.
But as you, Madam, our French colleagues and the
United Kingdom have made clear, we will uphold our
international responsibilities and we will uphold the
international commitments and obligations that the
international community has laid down.
In conclusion, the world is poorer owing to the
fact that Russia, a permanent member of the Security
Council, will not join us in doing precisely that to
uphold the international order.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Unfortunately, I have not learned anything
new from my British colleague’s further statement.
We heard the same set of unsubstantiated accusations
that we have heard in previous meetings. I would like
to mention a couple of factual things. As I said about

18-2772313/14

S/PV.8343

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

consular access to Yulia and Sergei Skripal, we do
not have that access. Another significant fact is that
Yulia Skripal’s own sister, who lives in Russia and who
wanted to visit her — and Yulia had given her consent
to that — has twice been refused a visa for the United
Kingdom by the British Embassy. Does that not tell
us something?
With regard to the request that the British allegedly
made to Russia immediately after the incident, we
have already had the pleasure of commenting more
than once on the nature of that request, which was no
request at all. It was the then British Foreign Minister
Boris Johnson’s demand of the Russian Ambassador
in London that Russia admit to the crime and say
how it was committed, whether with the knowledge
of the Russian authorities or by misunderstanding or
lack of oversight. That was in fact the entire so-called
request for cooperation with Russia. There should be no
misleading of the international community here. There
was no request from the British for Russia’s cooperation
in investigating this case. On the contrary, Russia’s
repeated requests, both within the framework of the

14/14

06/09/2018

Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and in other ways, for conducting a joint investigation
with the British confirmed our readiness to engage
fully in this.
Of course, I understand that our British colleague
said that we live in parallel universes — and perhaps
some people would like us to live on another
planet — but there are no colonized planets yet, so we
must live on the one we have. And on this planet we will
have to cooperate, whether others like it or not. And
to most of the questions we have laid out — and there
are more than 40 of them — there are still no answers.
Just as there are no multiple Russian versions of what
happened, something that the British representative
tried to say today, suggesting that journalistic versions
represent the position of the Russian authorities.
We too will be happy to give a briefing to interested
delegations on how we see the situation, on what has
happened and what is now happening with Britain’s socalled investigation.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

18-27723
