VI.

13. Approves the Declaratíon of the lnternational
Seminar on an Oíl Embargo against South A frica, 11 held
at Amsterdam from 14 to 16 March 1980 under the auspices of the Special Committee against Apartheid;
14. Invites the organizations of the Unite? Na_tic:ms
system to intensify their efforts to keep pubhc opm_1on
constantly alert to the scourges of ali forms of rac1sm
and racial discrimination and of apartheid by means of
the publications of the Centre agai_nst Apartheid of the
Secretariat and other relevant bod1es;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to submít the
various studies which the General Assembly requested
to be undertaken in its resolutions 33 /99 of 16 December 1978 and 34/24 of 15 November 1979, when completed, to the General Assembly a_t its future sessions _for
consideration under the item ent1tled "lmplementatton
of the Programme for the Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Díscrimination";
16. Invites ali States, international bodies and nongovernmental organízations to intensify the campaigns
aimed at securing the release of ali political prisoners
held by the racist régimes beca~se of their ~our~ge~rns
efforts to combat apartheid, rac1sm and racial d1scnmination and at defending the right of theír peoples to
self-determination and independence;
17. Expresses its satisfaction to the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrímination, the Special
Committee against Apartheid, the United Nations
Council for Namibia, the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Ríghts of the Palestinian People and
the Commíssion on Human Rights, through its Ad Hoc
Working Group of Experts on Southern A frica, for their
contribution to the ímplementatíon of the Programme
for the Decade;
18. Decides to hold in 1983, asan important event of
the Decade a Second World Conference to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination, which, whíle reviewing and assessing the activitíes undertaken duríng
th~ Decade, should have as its main purpo_se the formulat1on of ways and means and of spectfic measures
aimed at ensuring the full and universal implementation of United Nations resolutions and decisions on
racism, racial discrimination and apartheid;
19. Invites the Economic and Social Council to
begin the preparatory work for the Con~er~nce at its
first regular session of 1981 and to subm1t Jts sugg~stions on the subject to the General Assembly at 1ts
thirty-sixth session;
20. Decides to consider at its thirty-sixth session, as
a matter of high priority, the ítem entitled "Impl~mentation of the Programme for the Decade for Act1on to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination".

63rd plenary meeting
14 November /980

35/34.

175

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third C'ommittee

Further assistance to national organizations for
the elimination of racial discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant prov1s1ons of its resolutions
3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973 and 34/24 of
11
A/35/160-S/13869, annex. For the printed text. see O/fiáal
Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fijih Year. S11pplement for
Apri/, May and June l<J80.

15 N ovember 1979 concerning the implementation of
the Programme for the Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination,
Conscious of the need to mobilize public opinion
through the media, the education sys!em_, ~ongovernmental organiza_tion~ a_nd_ o~her mst1tut1ons
against ali forms of racial d1scnmmat1on,
A ware of the importance of Governments enacting
appropriate legislation and taking other ~uita_ble. m~asures to prohibit and bring to an end racial d1scnmmation,
Recalling its resolution 34/49 of 23 ~ovember 1979
on national institutions for the promot10n and protection of human rights,
Recognizing that nat!onal non-governme~tal organizations concerned w1th ~ace ª!"Id commumty relations can play a valuable role m the 1mprovement of race
and community relations,
Calls upon ali Governments to take such steps as are
necessary to enable duly constituted national ~ongovernmental organizations, such. as ra~e-relat1ons
organizations or institutes, commumty-rel~ttons org~nizations or institutes and ali other such nat1onal bod1es,
organizations or institutes established for the elimi!lation of díscrimínation on grounds of race and for the 1mprovement of relations between races and com_munities,
to function effectively in pursuit of harmomous relations hetween races and communities.

63rd plenary meeting
14 November 1980

35/35.

Importance of the universal realization of the
right of peoples to self-determination and of the
speedy granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples for the effective guarantee
and observance of human rights
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2649 (XXV) of 30 November
1970, 2955 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972, 3070
(XXVIII) of 30 November 1973, 3246 (XXIX) of29 November 1974, 3382 (XXX) of 10 November 1975, 33/24
of29 November 1978 and 34/44 of23 November 1979,
and Security Council resolutions 418 (1977) of 4 November 1977 and 437 (1978) of 10 October 1978,
Recalling a/so its resolutions 2465 (XXlll) of 20 December 1968, 2548 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969,
2708 (XXV) of 14 December 1970, 3103 (XXVIII) of
12 December 1973 and 3314 (XXIX) of 14 December
1974 concerning the use and recruitment of mercenaries
against national liberation movements and sovereign
Sta tes,
Recalling further its relevant resolutions on the question of Palestine, in particular resolutions 3236 (XXIX)
and 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974 and 34/65 of
29 November and 12 December 1979,
Recalling resolution CM/Res. 788 (XXXV) on
Namibia adopted by the Council of Mínisters of the Organization of African Unity at its thirty-fifth ordinary
session, held at Freetown from 18 to 28 June 1980, 12
Taking note of the Political Declaration adopted by
the I irst Conference of Heads of State and Govern'· SL"c A; 35/463 and (\irr. 1. annex l.

176

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

ment of the Organization of African Unity and the
League of Arab States, held at Cairo from 7 to 9 March
l 977, 13
Considering that the activities of Israel, in particular
the denial to the Palestinian people of their right to selfdetermination and independence, constitute a serious
and increasing threat to international peace and
security,
Reaffirming its faith in the importance of the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained
in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, and bearing in mind that the international
community will this year celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the Declaration,
Reaffirming the importance of the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination,
national sovereignty and territorial integrity and of the
speedy granting of independence to colonial countries
and peoples as imperatives for the full enjoyment of ali
human rights,
Reaffirming that "bantustanization" is incompatible
with genuine independence, national unity and sovereignty and has the effect of perpetuating the power of
the white minority and the racist system of apartheid in
South Africa,
Reafjirming the obligation of ali Member States to
comply with the principies of the Charter of the United
Nations and the resolutions of the United Nations
regarding the exercise of the right to self-determination
by peoples under colonial and alien domination,
Welcoming the independence of Zimbabwe, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines and Vanuatu,
Reaffirming the national unity and territorial integrity
of the Comoros,
Indignant at the continued violations of the human
rights of the peoples still under colonial and foreign
domination and alien subjugation, the continuation of
the illegal occupation of Namibia and South Africa's attempts to dismember its territory, the perpetuation of
the racist minority régime in southern Africa and the
denial to the Palestinian people of their inalienable
national rights,
l. Ca/Is upon ali States to implement fully and
faithfully the resolutions of the United N ations regarding the exercise of the right to self-determination by peoples under colonial and alien domination;
2. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of peoples
for independence, territorial integrity, national unity
and liberation from colonial and foreign domination
and foreign occupation by ali available means, including
armed struggle;
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples
of Namibia, of the Palestinian people and of ali
peoples under alien and colonial domination to selfdetermination, national independence, territorial integrity, national unity and sovereignty without externa!
interference;
4. Takes note with satisfaction of decision
AHG/Dec.118 (XVII) on the question of Western
Sabara adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity at its
seventeenth ordinary session, held at Freetown from
l to 4 July 1980, 14
"A/32/61, annex l.
14
See A/35/463/Corr.1, annex 11.

5. Takes note of the contacts made by the Government of the Comeros and the Government of France in
the search for a just solution to the integration of the
Comorian island of Mayotte into the Comoros in accordance with the resolutions of the Organization of
African Unity and the United Nations on this question;
6. Condemns the policy of "bantustanization" and
reiterates its support for the oppressed people of South
Africa in their just and legitimate struggle against the
racist minority régime in Pretoria;
7. Reaffirms that the practice of using mercenaries
against national liberation movements and sovereign
States constitutes a criminal act and that the mercenaries themselves are criminals, and calls upon the Governments of ali countries to enact legislation declaring
the recruitment, financing and training ofmercenaries in
their territories, and the transit of mercenaries through
their territories, to be punishable offences, and prohibiting their nationals from serving as mercenaries, and to
report on such legislation to the Secretary-General;
8. Condemns the policies of those members of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and of other countries ':"hose political, economic, military, nuclear,
strateg1c, cultural and sporting relations with the racist
minority régimes in southern Africa and elsewhere encourag~ those régimes to persist in their suppression of
the asp1rations of peoples for self-determination and independence;
9. Again demands the immediate application of the
mandatory arms embargo against South Africa, imposed under Security Council resolution 418 (1977), by
ali countries, particularly by those countries that maintain military and nuclear co-operation with the racist
Pretoria régime and continue to supply related matériel
to that régime;
10. Strongly condemns ali Governments which do
not recognize the right to self-determination and independence of ali peoples still under colonial and foreign
domination and alien subjugation, notably the peoples
of Africa and the Palestinian people;
11. Strongly condemns the ever-increasing massacres
of innocent and defenceless people, including women and
children, by the racist minority régime of South Africa in
its desperate attempt to thwart the legitimate demands
of the people;
12. Further condemns the expansionist activities of
Israel in the Middle East, as well as the continuous bombing of civilian Arab and, in particular, Palestinian populations and the destruction of their villages and encampments, which constitute a serious obstacle to the
realization of self-determination and independence of
the Palestinian people;
13. Urges ali States, specialized agencies, competent
organizations of the United Nations system and other
international organizations to extend their support to
the Palestinian people through its representative, the
Palestine Liberation Organization, in its struggle to
restore its right to self-determination and independence
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations;
14. Demands the immediate and unconditional
release of ali persons detained or imprisoned as a result
of their struggle for self-determination and independence, full respect for their fundamental individual rights
and the observance of article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 15 under which no one shall be
subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment;
"Resolution 217 A (111).

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

15. Demands the immediate release of children
detained in Namibian and South African prisons;
16. Reiterates its appreciation for the material and
other forins of assistance that peoples under colcnial
and foreign rule continue to receive from Governments,
United Nations agencies and intergovernmental organizations, and calls for a maximization of this assistance;
17. Further calls for a maximization of ali forms of
assistance give11 by ali States, appropriate United Nations
organs, specialized agencies and non-governmental
organizations to the victims of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid through their national liberation
movements recognized by the Organization of African
Unity;
18. Takes note of Economic and Social Council
decision 1979 /39 of 10 May 1979, by which the Council
decided that the two studies on the historical and
current development of the right to self-determination
on the basis of the Charter of the United Nations and
other instruments adopted by United Nations organs,
with particular reference to the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms, 1ó and
on the implementation of United Nations resolutions
relating to the right of peoples under colonial and
foreign domination to self-determination 17 should be
printed and given the widest possible circulation, including in Arabic;
19. Demands that ali Member States, specialized
agencies and competent organizations of the United
Nations systern do their utmost to ensure the full implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and to intensify their efforts to support peoples under colonial,
foreign and racist domination in their just struggle for
self-determination and independence:
20. Requests the Secretary-General to give maximum publicity to the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and to
give the widest possible publicity to the struggle being
waged by oppressed peoples for the realization of their
self-determination and national independence;
21. Decides to consider this item again at its thirtysixth session on the basis of the reports that Governments, United Nations agencies and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations have been requested to submit concerning the strengthening of assistance to colonial Territories and peoples under
foreign domination and control.
63rd plenary meeting
14 November 1980
B

The General Assembly,
Reafjirming the importance, for the effective guarantee and observance of human rights, of the universal
realization •OÍ the right of peoples to self-determination
and the speedy granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples, principies enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, in the International Covenants on Human Rights 18 and in the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV) of 14 December 1960,
"E/CN.4/Sub.2/404 (vols. 1-lll).
17
E/CN.4/Sub.2/405/Rev. l; the study was published under the
title The Right to Self-Determination (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.79.XIV.5).
" Resolution 2200 A (XX 1), annex.

177

Welcoming the progressive exercise of the right of
self-determination by peoples formerly under colonial
and alien domination and their emergence into sovereign statehood and independence,
Deep/y concerned that the right of self-determination
of a growing number of sovereign peoples and nations is
being threatened or suppressed through acts of foreign
military intervention or foreign occupation,
Further concerned that an increasing number of people have been uprooted from their homes and have
become refugees as a consequence of such actions,
Noting the relevant resolutions regarding the violation
of the right to self-determination and of other human
rights of peoples as a result of military intervention and
foreign aggression and occupation, adopted by the
Commission on Hu man Rights at its thirty-sixth session, 'º
l. Reaffirms that the universal realization of the
right of peoples to self-determination and the speedy
granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples are a fundamental condition for the. effective
guarantee and observance of human rights and for the
preservation and promotion of such rights in various
parts of the world:
2. Declares its firm opposition to acts of foreign
military intervention, aggression and occupation, since
they result in the suppression of the right to selfdetermination and other human rights of peoples in various
parts of the world:
3. Calls upon those States responsible for such acts
to cease their military intervention and occupation of
foreign countries and territories, to cease ali acts of repression, discrimination, exploitation and maltreatment of the peoples concerned, including innocent men,
women and children, particularly the brutal and inhuman methods reportedly employed for the purpose;
4. Deplores the plight of the hundreds of thousands
of refugees and displaced persons who have been uprooted by the aforementioned acts and reaffirms their
right to return voluntarily to their homes;
5. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
continue to give special attention to the violation of thc
right of self-determination and other human right,
resulting from foreign military aggression, interventi0,
or occupation:
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report on this
issue to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session
under the item entitled "lmportance of the universal
realizati9n of the right of peoples to self-determination
and of the speedy granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples for the effective guarantee and observance of human rights".
63rd plenary meeting
14 November 1980
35/38.

Status of the lnternational Convention on the
::::limination of Ali Forms of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, 3135 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, 3225
(XXIX) of6 November 1974, 3381 (XXX) of 10 November 1975, 31/79 of 13 December 1976, 32/11 of
"See Official Records o/ the Economic and Social Counci/, !980.
Supplement No. 3 (E/19X0il.1 and Corr.l), chap. XXVI, secl. A.
