United Nations

A/RES/64/57

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 January 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 96 (p)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 2 December 2009
[on the report of the First Committee (A/64/391)]

64/57. Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the
implementation of nuclear disarmament commitments
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 63/58 of 2 December 2008,
Reiterating its grave concern at the danger to humanity posed by the
possibility that nuclear weapons could be used,
Noting with satisfaction the renewed interest in nuclear disarmament on the
part of international leaders expressed, inter alia, during the Security Council
summit on nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament held on 24 September
2009, and underlining in this regard the urgent need for concrete, transparent,
verifiable and irreversible steps to realize the goal of a world free of nuclear
weapons,
Reaffirming that nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are
mutually reinforcing processes requiring urgent irreversible progress on both fronts,
Recognizing the continued vital importance of the early entry into force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty 1 to the advancement of nuclear
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation objectives, and welcoming the recent
ratifications of the Treaty by Lebanon, Liberia, Malawi, Mozambique and
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
0F

Recalling that the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in its final document, inter alia, reaffirmed
the conviction that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones enhances global
and regional peace and security, strengthens the nuclear non-proliferation regime
and contributes towards realizing the objectives of nuclear disarmament, 2
1F

Welcoming the entry into force, on 21 March 2009, of the Treaty on a NuclearWeapon-Free Zone in Central Asia and the entry into force, on 15 July 2009, of the
_______________
1

See resolution 50/245.
See 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Final Document, vols. I–III (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I–IV)), vol. I, part I.
2

09-46525

*0946525*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/57

Treaty of Pelindaba, 3 which establishes a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa, and
expressing the hope that these important steps will be followed by concerted
international efforts to create nuclear-weapon-free zones in other areas in the world,
especially in the Middle East,
2F

Recalling the decisions entitled “Strengthening the review process for the
Treaty”, “Principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament”
and “Extension of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons” and the
resolution on the Middle East, all of which were adopted at the 1995 Review and
Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons 4 and the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 5
3F

4F

Recalling also the unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States to
accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals, leading to nuclear
disarmament, in accordance with commitments made under article VI of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 6
5F

Welcoming the progress towards a follow-up agreement to the Strategic Arms
Reduction Treaty, 7 as reflected in recent statements made by the Presidents of the
Russian Federation and of the United States of America,
6F

Welcoming also the outcome of the third session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 8 at which the Committee adopted the
provisional agenda and decisions relating to the organization of the work of the
Review Conference,
7F

Welcoming further the recent positive developments in the Conference on
Disarmament, which led to the adoption of a programme of work on 29 May 2009,
1.
Continues to emphasize the central role of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons6 and its universality in achieving nuclear
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation, and calls upon all States parties to
respect their obligations;
Calls upon all States to comply fully with all commitments made
2.
regarding nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation and not to act in any
way that may compromise either cause or that may lead to a new nuclear arms race;
Reaffirms that the outcome of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties
3.
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons5 sets out the agreed
process for systematic and progressive efforts towards nuclear disarmament, and in
this regard renews its call upon the nuclear-weapon States to accelerate the
implementation of the practical steps towards nuclear disarmament that were agreed
upon at the 2000 Review Conference, thereby contributing to a safer world for all;
_______________
3

A/50/426, annex.
See 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2), annex.
5
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final
Document, vols. I-III (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I–IV)).
6
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
7
The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 16: 1991 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.92.IX.1), appendix II.
8
NPT/CONF.2010/1.
4

2

A/RES/64/57

4.
Reiterates its call upon all States parties to spare no effort to achieve the
universality of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and in this
regard urges India, Israel and Pakistan to accede to the Treaty as non-nuclearweapon States promptly and without conditions;
Urges the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to rescind its
5.
announced withdrawal from the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, to re-establish cooperation with the International Atomic Energy Agency
and to rejoin the Six-Party Talks, with a view to achieving the denuclearization of
the Korean Peninsula in a peaceful manner;
Calls upon all Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
6.
Weapons to spare no effort to ensure a successful and constructive outcome of the
2010 Review Conference;
Stresses that the outcome of the 2010 Review Conference should build
7.
upon the positive results reached at the 1995 and 2000 Conferences, contribute
significantly to the concrete implementation of the outcomes of both Conferences,
advance the objective of a nuclear-weapon-free world, strengthen the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in all its aspects and contribute to achieving
its full implementation and universality;
Calls upon all States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
8.
Nuclear Weapons to work towards the full implementation of the resolution on the
Middle East adopted at the 1995 Review Conference;
Calls upon the States members of the Conference on Disarmament to
9.
pursue continued positive developments in that forum, in order to maintain the
momentum that led to the adoption of a programme of work on 29 May 2009, and
spare no efforts to ensure an early start to the substantive work of the Conference at
the beginning of its 2010 session;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fifth session the
item entitled “Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the
implementation of nuclear disarmament commitments” and to review the
implementation of the present resolution at that session.
55th plenary meeting
2 December 2009

3
