60

General As11embly-Twentleth S-loa

the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples ;25
2. Urgently requests the Government of Spain, as
the administering Power, to take immediately all necessary measures for the liberation of the Territories of
Ifni and Spanish Sahara from colonial domination and,
to this end, to enter into negotiations on the problems
relating to sovereignty presented by these two Territories;
3. Requests the Special Committee to report on the
implementation of the present resolution to the General Assembly at its twenty-first session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit this
resolution to the administering Power.
1398th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.

2073 (XX). Question of Oman
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Ad H oc Committee on Oman, 26
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 and 1948 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963,
Having heard the statements made by the representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain an<l
Northern Ireland and by the petitioners,
Deeply concerned at the serious situation arising from
colonial policies and foreign intervention by the United
Kingdom in the Territory,
1. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on Oman and expresses appreciation to the
Committee for its efforts ;
2. Deplores the attitude of the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the authorities in the Territory for refusing to
co-operate with the Ad Hoe Committee on Oman and
for not facilitating its visit to the Territory;
3. Recognizes the inalienable right of the people
of the Territory as a whole to self-determination and
independence in accordance with their freely expressed
wishes;
4. Considers that the colonial presence of the United
Kingdom in its various forms prevents the people of
the Territory from exercising their rights to selfdetermination and independence ;
5. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom to effect immediately the implementation in the
Territory of the following measures :
(a) Cessation of all repressive actions against the
people of the Territory;
( b) Withdrawal of British troops;
( c) Release of political prisoners and political detainees and return of political exiles to the Territory;
( d) Elimination of British domination in any form ;
6. Invites the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to examine the situation in the Territory;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to take, in consultation with the Special Committee, appropriate
measures for the implementation of the present resolu20 Ibid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.1), chapter IX, para. 112.
2 6 Jbid., annex No. 16. document A/5846.

tion and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its twenty-first session.
1399th plenary meeting,
17 DecembPr 1965.

2074 (XX). Question of Soutli West Afriea
The General Assembly,
Having considered the chapters of th reports of the
Special Committee on the Sit11ation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Mandated Territory of South West
Africa, 27
Having studied the report of the Special Committee
on the implications of the activities of the mining
industry and of the other international companies
having interests in South Vv est Africa, 28
Having heard the statements of the petitioners,
Having examined the situation in South \Vest Africa,
i\1indful of the obligations of the United Nations
towards the peoples of South West Africa,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting oi
Tndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling further its resolutions 1702 (XVI) of 19
December 1961, 1805 (XV II ) of 14 Decern her 1962
and 1899 (XVIII) of 13 November 1963, as well as
the resolutions adopted on 21 May 196429 and 17 June
1965 30 by the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples,
Noting with regret the policy of the Government of
South Africa to circumvent the political and economic
rights of the indigenous people of South West Africa
through a large-scale settle111ent of foreign immigrants,
Noting with deep concern the serious threat to international peace and security in that part of Africa, which
has been further aggravated by the racist rebellion in
Southern Rhodesia,
1. Approves the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
fndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to South West Africa ;
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
of the Special Committee contained in its report on
the implications of the activities of the mining industry
and of the other international companies having interests in South West Africa;
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
South \Vest Africa to freedom and independence, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);
4. Condemns the policies of apartheid and racial
discrimination practised by the Government of South
Africa in South \Vest Africa, which constitute :i cnme
against humanity;
27 Ibid., annex No. 8 (part I) (A/5800/Rev.1), chapter IV:
ibid., Twentieth Session, A11nexes, addendnm to agenda ik111
23 (A/6000/Rev.l), chapter IV.
·
2 8 Ibid., Nineteenth Srssion, Annrxcs, annex No. 16, d()Cllment A/5840.
2 9 Ibid., annex >lo. 8 (part I) (A/5800/Rev.1), chapter lV.
para. 232.
So //Jid., Twentieth Sessim1, Annexes, addendum to agenda
item 23 (A/6000/Rev.1 ), chaptl'r IV, para. 285.

Re90Jution11 adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

5. Considers that any attempt to partition the Territory or to take any unilateral action, directly or indirectly, preparatory thereto constitutes a violation of
the Mandate and of resolution 1514 (XV);
6. Considers further that any attempt to annex a
part or the whole of the Territory of South West
Africa constitutes an act of aggression;
7. Calls upon the Government of South Africa to
remove immediately all bases and other military installations located in the Territory of South West Africa
and to refrain from utilizing the Territory in any way
whatsoever as a military base for internal or external
purposes;
8. Condemns the policies of financial interests operating in South West Africa, which mercilessly exploit
human and material resources and impede the progress
Qf the Territory and the right of the people to freedom
and independence;
9. Condemns the policy of the Government of South
Africa to circumvent the political and economic rights
of the indigenous people of the Territory through a
large-scale settlement of foreign immigrants in the
Territory;
10. Condemns the Government of South Africa for
its refusal to co-operate with the United Nations in
implementing the Declaration on the Granting of Tnclependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
11. Requests all States to take immediate action to
carry out paragraph 7 of General Assembly resolution
1899 (XVIII);
12. Appeals to all States to give the indigenous
people of South West Africa all necessary moral ancl
material support in their legitimate struggle for freedom
and independence;
13. Requests the Security Council to keep watch
over the critical situation prevailing in South West
Africa in the light of the ninth preambular paragraph
of the present resolution.
1400th plenary meeting,
17 December 1965.
2075

(XX). Petitions concerning South West
Africa

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the special responsibilities of the
United Nations with regard to South \Vest Africa,
Noting that the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples has received and ex:1mined 142 petitions
concerning South West Africa, in accordance with
paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution 1805
(XVII) of 14 December 1962 and paragraph 8 (a)
of Assembly resolution rnqg ( XVIII) of 13 November
1963,
Noting further that these petitions relate, inter alia,
to the general situation in and recent develdpments
concerning South \Vest 1\ frica, the recommendations
of the Odendaal Comniiss:lm,31 the activities of mining
:rnd other international companies having interests in
the Territory, the arrests of political leaders and restrictions on political activity in the Territory, South West
African refogees in Rechnanaland. the ejection of Afri31 Commission of Enquiry into South \\'est Africa Affairs.
established in 1962 by the Republic of South Africa under tlw
rhairmanship of Mr. F. 1T. O<lendaal.

61

cans from urban areas, and the non-implementation
of Ccner:11 Assembly resolutions concerning South West
Africa,
1. Notrs that the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples has taken these petitions into account in
its consideration of the situation in South West Africa;
2. Draws the attention of the petitioners concerned
to the reports submitted by the Special Coi:nmittee concerning the Territory 32 and to the resolutions adopted
bv the General Assembly at its twentieth session on
the qnrstion of South West Africa, as well as the reports
.
.
SS
of the Secretary-General rebtmg
to t he T erntory.
1400th plenary merting,
17 fll'fnnber 1965.
2076

(XX). Special e(lncational and training
programmes for South West Africa

The General Assembly,
Rrral!inr; its resolution 1705 (XVI) of 19 December
I% 1. by ~hich it established a United Nations Special
Training Programme for Sonth \Vest Africans,
!! m•ing considered the reports of the Secretary( ~enrral submitted in accord:mce with paragraph 5 of
Ceneral Assemblv resolution 1901 (XVIII) of 13 No,·ernher 1963. 31 ·
Noting that few applicants for training u~der the
~pecial Training Programme possess ciualificat10ns that
would enable them to enter colleges or universities,
Considerinq the need to widen the scope of educational opportimities to include secondary, technical and
teacher training and to make it available to the largest
possible number of South \Vest Africans,
Taking note of the difficulties encountered hy persons residing inside the Territory in taking advantage
()f the benefits available under the programmes, particuhrly in securing the necessary travel documents,
1. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have made scholarships and travel grants avail;1 hie for the use of South West Africans ;
2. Invites those Member States offering scholarships
and those which might subsequently do so to consider
including in their offers scholarships for secondary
t>duc:ition and for vocationa 1 and technical training;
3. Further invites Member States to give symp:ithetic consideration to requests by the Srcretary-General
for the placement in their secondary, vocational or technical schools of candidates who have been awarded
scholarships under the Speci:il Training- Progr:imme
for South West Africans:
4. Once again requests all Member States, and in
particular South Africa. to facilitate in every possible
way the travel of South West Africans seeking to avail
themselves of educational opportunities provided under
the Programme;
a2 Official Rf'cords of the (;cneral Assembly, Nineteenth
Annexes, annex No. 8 (part T) (A/5800/Rev.1).
c;,apttcr IV: ibid., annex No. 15. dornment A/5840; ibid ..
Twentieth Session, Anncxrs, arldendnm to agenda item 23
I A/6000/Rev.l), chapter IV.
33 [bid .. Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 15, doCllrnents A/5690 and Add.1-3 and A/5781: ibid., Twentieth
Session, Annexes, agenda items 69 and 70, documents A/5782
and _;\,ld.l, A/60.15 and Adcl.1-4 and A/6080 and Add.1 and 2.
34 l/Jid .. Twrntieth Session. Annr.-rcs. agenda items 69 and
iO. <lorunwnts A 1~7fl_? and A,l<l. I : ibid , dornmrnts A/6O80
and Add.l anrl 2,
S1°ssia11.
