UNITED

NATiONS

Distr.
GENERAL

SECURITY
COUNCIL

s/5 0 95
20 March 1962
ENGLISH

ORIGINAL:

SPANISH

LETTER DATED 19 MARCH 1962 PECM THE PERMANRNT REPRESENTATl,l:C OF
CUBA ADDEESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

In accordance ivith the provisions of rule 38 of the provisional rules
of procedure of the Security Council, I have the honour to subuit the enclosed
draft resolution and to request its imllediate circulation.
I have the honour to be, etc.
(Signed)

62-05533

Dr. lVlario Gal'cia Inchaustegui,
AJ..lbassado:'
Permanent Representative

I ...

S/5095
English
Page 2
Cuba:

draft resolution

TIle Security Council,
In accordance 'Ivith Article 96 (1) of the Charter)
Decides to request the International Court of Justice to give an advisory
opinion on the following questions:
1.

Is the OrGanization of American States, under the terms of its

Charter) a reGional agency within the meaning of Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter and do its activities have to be compatible with the
Purposes and Principles of the United Nations?
2.

Under the United Nations Charter, does the Organization of h:lericnn

States have the right as a regional agency to take the enforcement action
provided in Article 53 of the United Nations Charter without the authorization
of the Security Council?

3.

Can the expression "enforcement action" in Article 53 of the

United Nations Charter be considered to include the measures provided for in
Article 41 of the United Nations Charter?

Is the list of these measures in

Article 41 exhaustive?

4.

Does the Charter' of the Organization of American States provide for

any procedure for exp'elling a State mel.lber of the Organization, in l)al'ticular
because of its social system?

5.

Can the provisions of the Charter of the Organization of AL1erican

States and the Inter-A~erican Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance be considered
to take precedence over the obligationu of Member States under the United
Nations Charter?

6.

Is one of the main principles of the United Nations Charter that

lnembership in the United Nations is open to States which meet the requirements
of Article 4 of the Charter, irrespective of their system?

/ ...

S/5 095
English
Pac;e :5

7.

In the light of the replies to the foregoing questions are, or are not,

the resolutions adopted at Punta del Este at the Eighth Meeting of Consultation
of American Ministers of Foreign Affairs relating ·JO the expulsion or a
state member or the regional agency because of its social system and the
t~~ing of

other elnnorcement action against it, without the authorization of

the Security Council) consistent with the provisions of the United Nations
Charter, the Charter of the Organization of .American States and the Treaty
of Rio?
Also decides to request the Irrternational Court of Justice to give priority
to the consideration of this matter.
