130

General Assembly

tocols designed to protect the environment in every
respect and further urges Governments to promote the
conclusion of such conventions and protocols;
8. Calls upon the United Nations Environment Programme to co-operate fully in the preparatory process
for the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, to be held in 1981;
9. Welcomes the establishment of the Regional
Trust Fund for the Protection of the Mediterranean Sea
against Pollution and the Trust Fund for the <:onventi?n
on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild
Fauna and Flora;
10. Appeals to all Governments to contribute_ or
increase their contribution to the Fund of the Umted
Nations Environment Programme so as to meet the
approved target set by the Governing Council in its
decision 6/13 of 24 May 1978. 130
107th plenary meeting
18 December 1979
34/189.

Acceleration of the transfer of real resources
to developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October
1970, containing the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade,
3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974, c~mtaining the Declaration and the Programn:e of Action ~n
the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order and 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of
States,
Recalling also its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation, in which it, inter alia, called for an
increased, predictable, continuous and increasingly assured flow of concessional financial resources for development on more favourable terms and conditions,
Recalling further its resolutions 3489 (XXX) of 12
December 1975, 31/174 of 21 December 1976, 32/
181 of 19 December 1977 and 33/136 of 19 December
1978 on the acceleration of the transfer of real resources to developing countries,
Recalling also resolution 129 (V), adopted by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
at its fifth session, held at Manila from 7 May to 3 June
1979,137
Deeply concerned at the fact that the recent performance of the developed countries, taken as a group,
with respect to the 0.7 per cent target of official development assistance has not increased substantially despite repeated commitments to increase progressively
and substantially their official development assistance,
Noting with satisfaction that a few developed countries have attained and in some cases exceeded the target of 0. 7 per cent,
Convinced of the urgent necessity of a considerable
and sustained increase in the transfer of real resources,
both concessional and non-concessional, to developing
countries and improved access of those countries to
188 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/33/25), annex I.
111 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14), part
one, sect. A.

Thirty-fourth Session

capital markets, in support of their development objectives and priorities,
Convinced also that such transfer of real resources to
developing countries consti!utes an important contribution to a balanced and eqmtable process of global economic development,
Bearing in mind that substantial consultations are
needed to implement fully paragraph 10 of General
Assembly resolution 33/ 136,
1. Takes note of the background report of the
Secretary-General on increased transfer of real resources, 138 prepared by the secretariat of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development;
2. Endorses the agreed conclusions o~ the trans~er
of resources in real terms to developing countnes
reached on 31 January 1979 by the Committee of ~he
Whole Established under General Assembly Resolution
32/ 174;1:!9
3. Endorses the decisions and recommendat!ons
contained in resolution 129 (V) of the United N attons
Conference on Trade and Development; 137
4. Affirms, in this connexion, the importanc~ of the
question of a review of the present system of international financial co-operation in the context of world
trade and development and co1;1sideration o~ w~ys and
means in this context to make 1t more effective in contributing to the development of devel?ping count~ies,
which is now on the agenda, in~e~ aha, of t~e m1;1th
session of the Committee on Inv1S1bles and Fmancing
Related to Trade, urges all States members of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to consider actively this question with a view to reachin~ satisfactory decisions, taking into account, inter alia, the
proposals of the Group of Seventy-seven, 1 • 0 and requests
the Trade and Development Board to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on progress
made on this question;
5. Urges that steps should be taken for the full _and
expeditious implementation of the recommendations
made by the Development Committee at its 6th me~~ing,
held at Manila on 3 October 1976, 141 so as to fac1htate
access of developing countries to private capital markets
and help overcome obstacles impeding access of developing countries to those markets, including any pres~nt
administrative or institutional obstacles, and that capital
market countries should consider establishing programmes to provide technical assistance to developing
countries seeking access to private capital markets;
6. Calls upon all countries, in particular developed
donor countries, and multilateral development institutions to implement on an urgent basis the agreed conclusions and the decisions and recommendations referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 above;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, with respect to
his report on increased transfer of real resources, to engage in further and intensified consultations with Governments and within the United Nations system on the
expansion of the volume of resource transfers to deA/34/493 and Corr.I.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 34 (A/34/34), part one, para. 13.
uo See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14),
annex I.C, document TD/L.197.
141 See International Monetary Fund, Annual Report 1977
(Washington, D.C.), appendix ID, press communiqu6 of the
Joint Ministerial Committee of the Boards of Governors of the
World Bank and the Fund on the Transfer of Real Resources
to Developing Countries (Development Committee), para. 6.
13s

139

V.

Resolutions adopted on the npora of the Second Committee

veloping countries and to include the results of those
consultations in his analytical report to the General
Assembly at its special session in 1980 called for in Assembly resolution 33/198 of 29 January 1979.
108th plenary meeting
18 December 1979
34/190.

United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (SVI) of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September
1975 on development and international economic
co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 33/148 of 20 December
1978, by which it decided to convene an international
conference on new and renewable sources of energy in
1981 under the auspices of the United Nations,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1979/66 of 3 August 1979,
Bearing in mind its resolution 33/134 of 19 December 1978 on the United Nations Conference on Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries,
Bearing in mind in particular the critical role which
new and renewable sources of energy can play in increasing the industrial, technological, production and
distribution capacities of developing countries as well as
in enhancing research and development in this field,
Taking note of the progress reports of the SecretaryGeneral142 and the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of
Energy143 on the preparations for the Conference,
1. Decides that the United Nations Conference on
New and Renewable Sources of Energy shall be held at
Nairobi in August 1981;
2. Decides to designate as the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations Conference on New and
Renewable Sources of Energy the Committee on Natural
Resources, meeting for this purpose in sessions open to
the participation of all States as full members within
the framework of General Assembly resolution 33/148,
and decides that the Preparatory Committee shall report
to the Assembly through the Economic and Social
Council;
3. Decides also that the working languages of the
Preparatory Committee shall be those of the General
Assembly;
4. Decides further to schedule two sessions of the
Preparatory Committee in 1980, the first to be held
early in the year and the second to be held in time to
facilitate the submission of the Committee's report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session through the
Economic and Social Council at its second regular
session of 1980;
5. Requests the Preparatory Committee to include
in its report recommendations concerning the duration
of the Conference, specific dates, invitations and draft
agenda for the Conference and the work programme of
the Committee for 1981;
HIA/34/585.

m A/C.2/34/15.

131

6. Decides that the technical panels appointed by
the Secretary-General in accordance with resolution
33/148 should prepare their interim reports in time for
consideration by the Preparatory Committee at its second session of 1980;
7. Considers that adequate arrangements should be
made to ensure equally detailed consideration for those
new and renewable sources of energy for which no technical panels have been created, namely, peat and draught
animal power;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to make the
necessary arrangements to co-operate with the Government of Kenya with a view to holding the Conference
there, to submit to the Conference all relevant documentation and to arrange for the necessary staff, facilities and services;
9. Recommends that States should designate national focal points which will co-ordinate preparations
for the Conference at the national level and provide a
link to the Conference secretariat in its preparatory
activities;
10. Invites, in addition to the organizations mentioned in paragraph 7 of resolution 33/148, interested
intergovernmental organizations, in particular regional
organizations, and interested non-governmental organizations to contribute to the preparations for the Conference in an appropriate manner;
11. Requests the Secretary-General and the concerned organs, organizations and specialized agencies of
the United Nations system to identify and submit a report for consideration by the General Assembly at its
thirty-fifth session on the ways in which, {)ending the
holding of the Conference, the United Nations system
can more effectively assist Member States, in particular
the developing countries, in the area of new and renewable sources of energy, with particular attention, inter
alia, to:
(a) Concrete measures for the transfer of relevant
technology to developing countries;
(b) Exchange of research and information on the
latest developments and experiences in the practical application of new and renewable sources of energy;
(c) Provision of appropriate technical assistance, as
necessary, to the designated national focal points in the
preparations for the Conference;
(d) Provision of financial assistance for the measures listed above;
12. Requests the Secretary-General and the organs,
organizations and bodies within the United Nations system to provide appropriate assistance, including technical assistance, to developing countries, at their request
and in accordance with established procedures, in their
preparations for the Conference at the national level
through their national focal points and at the subregional, regional, interregional and global levels, using,
inter alia, existing resources to the greatest extent
possible;
13. Also invites Governments in a position to do so
to provide similar assistance;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to accelerate
preparations for the Conference also through a programme of public information activities designed to ensure world-wide awareness of the importance of the
Conference and its objectives;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session a report on
the preparations for the Conference, including recommendations for a detailed programme and calendar of
