UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/40
29 July 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3804th meeting of the Security Council, held on 29 July 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in the Middle East", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has noted with appreciation the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
of 16 July 1997 (S/1997/550 and Corr.1) submitted in conformity with
resolution 1095 (1997) of 28 January 1997.
"The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to the full
sovereignty, political independence, territorial integrity and national
unity of Lebanon within its internationally recognized boundaries. In this
context, the Council asserts that all States shall refrain from the threat
or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence
of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the
United Nations.
"As the Security Council extends the mandate of UNIFIL for a further
interim period on the basis of resolution 425 (1978), the Council again
stresses the urgent need for the implementation of that resolution in all
its aspects. It reiterates its full support for the Taif Agreement and for
the continued efforts of the Lebanese Government to consolidate peace,
national unity and security in the country, while successfully carrying out
the reconstruction process. The Council commends the Lebanese Government
for its successful effort to extend its authority in the south of the
country in full coordination with UNIFIL.
"The Security Council expresses its concern over the continuing
violence in southern Lebanon, regrets the loss of civilian life, and urges
all parties to exercise restraint.
"The Security Council takes this opportunity to express its
appreciation for the continuing efforts of the Secretary-General and his
staff in this regard. The Council notes with deep concern the high level
of casualties which UNIFIL has suffered and pays a special tribute to all

97-20550 (E)

290797

/...

S/PRST/1997/40
English
Page 2

those who gave their life while serving in UNIFIL. It commends UNIFIL's
troops and troop-contributing countries for their sacrifices and commitment
to the cause of international peace and security under difficult
circumstances."

-----
