5

Reeolutiona adopted on reporta of the Fint Committee
611 (VII). The Tuniaian question
The General Assembly,
Having debated the question proposed by thirteen
Member States in document A/2152,
Mindful of the necessity of developing friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle! of equal rights and self-determination of peoples,
Considering that the United Nations, as a centre for
harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of
their common ends under the Charter, should strive
towards removing any causes and factors of misunderstanding among Member States, thus reasserting
the general principles of co-operation in the maintenance of international peace and security,
I. Expresses its confidence that, in pursuance of
its proclaimed policies, the Government of France will
endeavour to further the effective development of the
free institutions oi the Tunisian people, in conformity
with the Purposes and Principles of the Charter;
2. Expresses the hope that the parties will continue negoti'ations on an urgent basis with a view to
bringing about self-government for Tunisians in the
light of the relevant provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations;

3. Appeals to the parties concerned to conduct their
relations and settle their disputes in accordance with
the spirit of ~he Charter and to refrain from any acts
or measures likely to aggravate the present tension.
404th plenary meeting,
17 December 1952.

612 (VII). The question of Morocco
The General Assembly,
Having d_ebated the "Question of Morocco", as proposed by thirteen Member States in document A/2175,
J:lindful of the _necessity of developing friendly rel~ttans among nations based on . respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples,
Considering that the United Nations as a centre for
hatmonizing the actions of nations i; the attainment
of their common ends under the Charter should strive
towards removing any causes or factors' of misunderstanding a!-llo!lg Member States, thus reasserting the
general prmc1ples of co-operation in the maintenance
of international peace and security,
l. E:rpresses the confidence that, in pursuance of
its proclaimed policies, the Government of France will
endeavour to further the fundamental liberties of the
people of Morocco, in conformity with the Purposes
and Principles of the Chart~r ;

2. . £~presses the hope tha! the parties will continue
negottat1ons on an urgent basis towards developing the
fr~e political institutions of the people of Morocco
with due regard to legitimate rights and interests un~
der tl~e established norms and practices of the law
of nations;
3.

Appeals to the parties to conduct their i:elations

in an atmosphere of goodwill, mutual confidence and
respect and to settle their disputes in accordance with
the spirit of the Charter, thus refraining from any acts
or measures likely to aggravate the present tension.
407th plenary meeting,
19 December 1952

613 (VII). Question of an appeal to the Powers
signatories to the Moscow Declaration of I
November 1943 for the enrly fulfilment of
their pledges towards Austria
The General Assembly,
Recalling the terms of resolution 190 (III) of 3 November 1948, whereby an appeal was made to the great
Powers to renew their efforts to compose their di fferences and establish a lasting peace.
Recalling the terms of the Moscow Declaration 5 of
1 November 1943, wherebv the Governments of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America recognized that Austria
should be re-established as a free and independent
State,
Recalling further that the Government of France
joined the three above-mentioned Governments in the
said declaration as of 16 November 1943, 6
Considerir.g that, in the spirit of the said declaration,
the four Powers accepted the responsibility of reestablishing a free and independent Austria, and, to
that end, have entered into negotiations towards the
conclusion of an Austrian treaty,
Noting with concern that those negotiations, which
have been under way intermittently since 1947, have
hitherto failed to bring about the proposed objective,
Taking into account that such a state of affairs, still
prevailing after a lapse of seven years since the liberation of Austria at the end of the Second World War,
and arising from the inconclusive stage of the aforementioned negotiations, does constitute a source of
deep disappointment for the Austrian people, who have
by themselves made successful efforts towards the
restoration and democratic reconstruction of their
country,
Recognizing that only through the unhampered exercise by the Austrian people of their freedom and
independence can these efforts attain full realization,
Taking further into account that such a state of
affairs hinders the full participation by Austria -in the
normal and peaceful relations of the community of nations and the full exercise of the powers inherent in its
sovereignty,
s See United Nations Docu,nents, 1941-1945, Moscow ConCommunique, NO'llember 1, 1943, Declaration 011
Austria, p. 15, Royal Institute of International Affairs, London
and New York.
8 See Recueil de Te.-rtes a /'usage des Conftrences de la
Paix, Premiere parlie, Documents glnirarix. I/, Declaration
d" Comite franfais de la liberation nationale relative a
l'indlpendance de I' Autric/1e, p. 5, lmprimerit National, de
France, 1947.
fertttce,

____________
6

. _________. __ _

General J.~,-8evmth SeNion

Having in mind that the solution of this problem
would constitute an important step towards the elimination of other areas of disagreement and therefore
towards the creation of conditions favourable to the
accomplishment of world peace,
Desiring to contribute to the strengthening of international peace and security and the developing of
friendly relations among nations in conformity with
the Purposes and Principles of the Charter,

Addr,sses a• eanust · app,al to the Governments
concerned to make a renewed and urgent effort to
reach agreement on the terms of an Austrian treaty
with a view to an early termination of the occupation
of Austria and the full exercise by Austria of the
powers inherent in its sovereignty.
