64

General .A.1embl;r-Sixteenth Session

who died with him in the service of the United Nations
as a result of the air crash :
Mr. Heinrich A. Wieschhoff,
Mr. Vladimir Fabry,
Mr. William Ranallo,
Miss Alice Lalande,
Mr. Harold M. Julien,
Mr. Serge L. Barrau,
Mr. Francis Eivers,
Mr. S. 0. Hjelte,
Mr. P. E. Persson,
Mr. Per Hallonquist,
Mr. Nils-Eric Aahreus,
Mr. Lars Litton,
.
Mr. Nils Goran Wilhelmsson,
Mr. Harold Noork,
Mr. Karl Erik Rosen;
2. Offers its sincere condolences and deep sympathy
to the families of Mr. Hammarskjold and the other
victims;
3. Decides that an investigation of an international
character, under the auspices of the United Nations,
should be held immediately into all the conditions and
circumstances surrounding this tragedy, and more particularly as to:
(a) Why the flight had to be undertaken at night
without escort ;
( b) Why its arrival at N dola was unduly delayed,
as reported ;
( c) Whether the aircraft, after having established
contact with the tower at N dola lost that contact, and
the fact of its having crashed did not become known
until several hours afterwards, and if so, why;
(d) Whether the aircraft, after the damage it was
reported to have suffered earlier from firing by aircraft
hostile to the United Nations, was in a proper condition
for use;
4. Further decides to appoint a Commission of five
eminent persons to carry out such an investigation, and
request the Commission to report its findings to the
President of the General Assembly within three months
of its appointment;
5. Requests all Governments and parties concerned
and the appropriate specialized agencies of the United
Nations to extend their full co-operation and assistance
to the said Commission in making this investigation;
6. Decides to consider, in the appropriate Committee
during the current session, the question of offering
suitable remuneration to the families of the victims of
this grave tragedy.
1042nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1961.

*

* *

At its 1074th plenar:::,, meeting, on 8 December 1961, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the President of the
Assembly, appointed the members of the Commission established
under paragraph 4 of the above resolution.
The Commission is composed as follows: Mr. S. B. Jones
(Sierra 'Leone), Mr. Raul Quijano (Argentina), Mr. Alfred
Emil Sandstrom (Sweden), Mr. Rishikesh Shaha (Nepal) and
Mr. Nikola Srzentic (Yugoslavia).

1630 (XVI). Admission of the Mongolian People's
Republic to membership in the United
Nations
The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 25 October 1961 that the Mongolian People's Republic should be admitted to membership in the
United Nations, 3
.
Having considered the application for membership of
the Mongolian People's Republic,4
Decides to admit the Mongolian People's Republic to
membership in the United Nations.
1043rd plenary meeting,
27 October 1961.
1631 (XVI). Admission of the Islamic Republic
of Mauritania to membership in the United
Nations
The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 25 October 1%1 that the Islamic Republic
of Mauritania should be admitted to membership in the
United Nations,11
Having considered the application for membership
of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, 6
Decides to admit the Islamic Republic of Mauritania
to membership in the United Nations.
1043rd plenary meeting,
27 October 1961.
1640 (XVI). Appointment of an acting
Secretary-General
The General Assembly,
Acting in accordance with the recommendation of the
Security Council of 3 November 1961,7
Appoints His Excellency U Thant as Acting Secretary-General of the United Nations for a term of office
ending on 10 April 1963.
1046th plenary meeting,
3 November 1961.
1650 (XVI). The status of Algerians imprisoned
in France
The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned at the grave international repercussions and the serious threat to the prospects of a negotiated, peaceful settlement of the Algerian question in
consequence of the hunger strike of thousands of Algerians imprisoned in France,
• Ibid., document A/4940.
'See documents A/687 and Add.I; Official Records of the
Security Council, First Year, Second Series, Supplement No. 4,
annex 6, document S/95, and Ibid., Twelfth Year, Supplement
for July, August and September 1957, documents S/3873 and
Add.I.
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixteenth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 92, document A/4941.
• Ibid., document A/4604.
• Ibid., Annexes, separate fascicle (Appointment of an acting
Secretary-General), document A/4953.
