VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and Treatment of Offenders ex.pressed the belief that the
draft convention should be finalized at the earliest possible
time, 72
1. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution
1981/37 of 8 May 1981, by which tht: Council authorized
an open-ended working group of the Commission on Human
Rights to meet for a period of one week prior to the thirtyeighth session of the Commission to complete the work on
a draft convention;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to complete as a matter of highest priority, at its thirty-eighth
session, the drafting of a convention against torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
with a view to submitting a draft, including provisions for
the effective implementation of the future convention, to
the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment".
73rd plenary meeting
25 November 1981
36/61.

Draft Code of Medical Ethics

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, as unanimously adopted in General Assembly resolution 3452
(XXX) of 9 December 197 5.
Recalling its resolution 31/85 of 13 December 1976, in
which it invited the World Health Organization to prepare
a draft code of medical ethics relevant to the protection of
persons subjected to any form of detention or imprisonment
against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Expressing its appreciation to the Executive Board of the
World Health Organization which, at its six.ty-third session
in January 1979, endorsed the principles set forth in a report
entitled "Development of codes of medical ethics" containing, in an annex., a draft body of principles prepared by
the Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences and entitled "Principles of medical ethics relevant to
the role of health personnel in the protection of persons
against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment",
Recalling also resolution I I adopted on 5 September 1980
by the Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, in which the Congress expressed the hope that the General Assembly would
adopt the draft Code, subject to any amendments which
might appear to be necessary. 72
Taking note with appreciation of the Guidelines for Medical Doctors concerning Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in relation to Detention and Imprisonment, adopted by the twenty-ninth
World Medical Assembly, held in Tokyo in October 1975.
Bearing, in mind Economic and Social Council resolution
1981/27 of 6 May 1981, in which the Council recommended
that the General Assembly should take measures to finalize
a draft Code at its thirty-six.th session,

72
See Sixth United Nations Conf?ress on the Prevention of Crime and
the Treatment of Offenders, Caracas. 25 August-5 September I 980: Report
prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations publication. Sales No.

E.81.IV.4), chap. I, sect. B.

175

Recognizing that throughout the world significant medical
activities are increasingly being performed by health personnel other than physicians. such as physicians' assistants.
physical therapists and nurse practitioners,
Alarmed that not infrequently members of the medical
profession or other health personnel are engaged in activities
which are difficult to reconcile with medical ethics,
Convinced of the need to set standards in this field which
ought to be implemented by members of the medical profession and other health personnel as well as by government
officials,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the comments on the
proposed principles of medical ethics endorsed by the Executive Board of the World Health Organization which were
received by the Secretary-General from Governments, specialized agencies and non-governmental organizations; 73
2. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate among
Member States for their further comments the revised draft
principles of medical ethics set forth in the annex. to the
present resolution;
3. Decides to consider this question at its thirty-seventh
session with a view to adopting the draft Principles of Medical Ethics relevant to the role of health personnel in the
protection of persons against torture and other cruel. inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
73rd plenary meeting
25 November /98/
ANNEX
Draft Principles of Medical Ethics relevant to the role of health personnel in the protection of persons against torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
Prisoners and detainees have the same rights to the protection of
physical or mental health and the treatment of disease as those who are
not in prison or detained.
2. It is a gross contravention of medical ethics for health personnel.
in particular physicians, having clinical responsibility for prisoners or detainees, to engage, actively or passively, in acts which constitute participation in, complicity in, incitement to or attempts to commit. torture or
other cruel. inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. 74
3
It is a contravention of medical ethics for health personnel, in
particular physicians. to be involved in any relationship with prisoners or
detainees that is not a medical relationship in the sense that its purpose is
the protection or improvement of the physical or mental health of the
prisoner or detainee.
4. It is also a contravention of medical ethics for health personnel.
in particular physicians:
(al To apply their knowledge and skills in order to assist in methods
of interrogation:
(/,) To certify prisoners or detainees tit for any form of punishment
that may adversely affect physical or mental health.
~
Participation of health personnel. in particular physicians, in any
procedure for restraining prisoners or detainees, is not in conformity with
medical ethics unless it is detem1ined by purely medical criteria in a manner
which presents no hazarJ to the health of prisoners or detainee, and is
necessary for the physical or mental health and safety of the prisoner
himself and/or of his fellow prisoners or detainees or of his guardians

6
There may be no derogation from the foregoing principles nn an 1
ground whatsoever. including public emergency.

"See A/35/372 and Add.1--1. A/36/140 and Add.1-4.
'" For the purpose of the present Declaration, torture means any act by
which severe pain or suffering. whether physical or mental. is intentionally
inflicted by. or at the instigation of. a publi,· official on a person for such
purposes as obtaining from him or a third person information or confession,
punishing him for an act he has committed or is suspected of having
committed, or intimidating him or other persons: it does not include pain
or suffering arising only from. inherent in or incidental to lawful sanctions
to the extent consistent with the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment
of Prisoners. Torture con,titutes an aggravated and deliberate form ol cruel.
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

176

36/77.

International Year of Disabled Persons

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/ 123 of 16 December I 976, by
which it proclaimed the year 1981 International Year of
Disabled Persons,
Recalling also its resolutions 32/133 of 16 December
1977, by which it established the Advisory Committee for
the International Year of Disabled Persons, 33/170 of 20
December 1978, 34/154 of 17 December 1979, in which
it, inter alia, decided to expand the theme of the International Year of Disabled Persons to "Full participation and
equality", and 35/133 of 11 December 1980,
Deeply concerned that no less than five hundred million
persons are estimated to suffer from disability of one form
or another, of whom four hundred million are estimated to
be in the developing countries,
Reiterating the continuing need to promote the realization
of the right of disabled persons to participate fully in the
social life and development of their societies and to enjoy
living conditions equal to those of other citizens, as well
as an equal share in the improvements in living conditions
resulting from social and economic development,
Recognizing that the observance of the International Year
of Disabled Persons has contributed to the attainment of
these objectives,
Recognizing also that a large number of disabled persons
are victims of war and other forms of violence, and that the
International Year of Disabled Persons has contributed towards the reaffirmation of the need for continued and reinforced co-operation among nations for world peace,
Believing that the activities undertaken by the international community in observing the International Year of
Disabled Persons constitute a first essential step towards the
achievement of the objectives of the Year,
Convinced that the timely and significant impetus generated by the activities of the International Year of Disabled
Persons should be maintained and reinforced with appropriate follow-up action at all levels,
Taking note of the efforts of Member States during the
International Year of Disabled Persons to improve the conditions and well-being of the disabled,
Expressing its satisfaction at the convening of the World
Symposium of Experts on Technical Co-operation among
Developing Countries and Technical Assistance in Disability Prevention and Rehabilitation of Disabled Persons at
Vienna from 12 to 23 October 1981, 75
Also expressing its satisfaction at the convening of the
World Conference on Actions and Strategies on Education,
Disability Prevention and Integration of Disabled Persons
at Torremolinos, Spain, from 2 to 7 November I 981, 70
organized by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization in observance of the Year,
Taking note with appreciation of the progress made in
the elaboration of a World Programme of Action concerning
Disabled Persons, 77
Having considered the report of the Secretary-GeneraF 8
on the implementation of General Assembly resolution 35/
133,
Having also considered the report of the Advisory Committee for the International Year of Disabled Persons on its
third session, 79
"See A/36/471/Add.3.
1
• See A/36/766.
77
See A/36/471/Add. I, annex, sect. II.
78
A/36/4 7 I.
79
A/36/471/ Add. I, annex.

I. Expresses its satisfaction to all Member States that
elaborated national policies and programmes for the implementation of the objectives of the International Year of
Disabled Persons; ·
2. Takes note of the activities undertaken by organizations of the United Nations system and the relevant nongovernmental organizations in the observance of the International Year of Disabled Persons;
3. Urges Member States to make every effort to consolidate and build further on the results of the International
Year of Disabled Persons in order to secure prevention of
disability, rehabilitation and full integration of the disabled
in the society and, in this respect, to consider maintaining,
where appropriate, the national committees or similar bodies
estahlished for the Year;
4. Again invites Member States to submit national reports to the Secretary-General on their implementation of
the Plan of Action for the International Year of Disabled
Persons and, in particular, to consider elaborating, on the
basis of their experiences, national long-term programmes
of action in the field of disability;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to convene in 1982
a meeting of the Advisory Committee of the International
Year of Disabled Persons to finalize the draft World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons, in the light
of comments by Member States. international organizations
and relevant non-governmental organizations, with a view
to its adoption by the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session;
6. Requests the Advisory Committee to consider at its
fourth session the advisability of proclaiming the period
1983-1992 the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons
and to submit its views to the General Assembly at its thirtyseventh session;
7. Requests the Advisory Committee to study the possibility of creating an optional international identity card for
disabled persons with the purpose of facilitating their international travel;
8. Urges the Secretary-General to take the necessary
measures to assure the successful follow-up of the International Year of Disabled Persons, in particular the finalization of the World Programme of Action concerning
Disabled Persons;
9. Also requests the Secretary-General and the heads
of specialized agencies and other relevant organizations of
the United Nations system to ensure the necessary co-operation and co-ordination of their activities relating to the
disabled;
10. Further requests the regional commissions to give
high priority to the formulation and implementation of regional programmes related to equalization of opportunities
for disabled persons, as well as prevention and rehabilitation, and urges the specialized agencies and relevant organizations of the United Nations system to continue the
implementation of such programmes;
11. Invites relevant non-governmental organizations to
continue and expand their programmes related to the disabled in order to maintain the momentum given by the
International Year of Disabled Persons;
12. Welcomes the contributions made by Governments
and private sources to the United Nations Trust Fund for
the International Year of Disabled Persons and appeals for
further voluntary contributions which would facilitate the
follow-up of the Year;
13. Calls upon the Secretary-General to use an appropriate portion of those voluntary contributions to support
and strengthen activities in the developing countries related
to the International Year of Disabled Persons, including the
strengthening of organizations of disabled persons:

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

14. Urges the Secretary-General, the specialized agencies and other United Nations bodies and organizations to
undertake or expedite the measures already under way to
improve employment opportunities for disabled persons
within these bodies at all levels and to improve access to
their building and facilities and to their information sources;
15. Invites Member States to promote close and effec
tive co-operation between developed and developing countries through a transfer of technology and of the results of
research and exchanges of information on the prevention
of disability and the rehabilitation of disabled persons;
16. Also calls upon the Secretary-General and the heads
of the specialized agencies to take all necessary measures
to strengthen and expand technical co-operation activities
in developing countries relating to the disabled, especially
in the areas of prevention of disability, rehabilitation and
integration of disabled in their societies. with particular
emphasis on the need to develop and strengthen indigenous
capacities and capabilities;
17. Stresses the importance of strengthening support
services for the exchange of technical information and transfer of technology and know-how, as well as other activities
for the development of technical co-operation in the fields
of prevention, rehabilitation and equalization of opportunities in developing countries, and notes with appreciation
the offer of the Government of Yugoslavia to contribute in
this direction, 80
18. - Invites, as a matter of priority. Member States. organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, as
well as the governmental and non-governmental organizations concerned and the mass media, to continue to undertake public information programmes, including the
continuation of the present information activities of the
Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs
of the Secretariat for the national committees, with a view
to making all sections of the population increasingly aware
of issues relating to the disabled;
19. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session an item entitled "World Programme
of Action concerning Disabled Persons" and requests the
Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at that
session on the implementation of the present resolution.
89th plenarv meetint.:
8 Decemher 198/

36/124.

International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/42 of 25 November 1980 re
lating to the International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa, held at Geneva on 9 and IO April 1981 .
Taking note of resolution CM/Res. 868 (XXXVII) regarding the Conference and its follow-up, adopted by the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity
at its thirty-seventh ordinary session. held at Nairobi from
15 to 26 June 1981, 81
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the Conference 82 and the report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of his Office.' 1

0
•
A/36/711 .
" See A/361534, annex I
82
A/36/316.

83 Official Records of" the G,·neml A.1·.,,·m/,/1-, l11irtr-1·i.rth Ses•w11.

plement No. 12 (1\/.lh/12)

·'"I'

177

Grm·elv concerned at the growing number of refugees on
the Afric-an continent, who now constitute over half the
population of refugees in the world.
Regretting that. in spite of the efforts made, the assistance
provided to the growing number of African refugees is still
very inadequate.
A ware of the economic and social burden imposed on
African countries of asylum by the growing influx of refugees and its consequences for their de~elopm~nt _an? of the
heavy sacrifices made by them, despite their hm1ted resources. to alleviate the plight of those refugees.
Recognizing, therefore. the need of the cou~tries ~)f asylum for adequate human. technical and financial assistance
to enable them properly to shoulder their increased responsibilities and assume the additional burden which the presence of refugees represents for their economies.
Recot.:nizing further the need to assist similarly the countries of origin in the voluntary repatriation and resettlement_
of returnees, as set out in the procedures of the Office ot
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Convinced that the attendance of high-ranking officials
and representatives of ninety-nine count~ies _and over one
hundred twenty non-governmental orgamzat10ns at the International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa
hears evidence to the fact that the Conference drew international public attention to the situation and needs of African
refugees,
I. Commends the initiative taken by the three sponsors
of the International Conference on Assistance to Refugees
in Africa-the Organization of African Unity. the United
Nations and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees---to maintain their close co-operation properly to define the follow-~p actions that will be
called for, and invites them to contrnue and develop their
tripartite consultations and co-operation at all appropriate
levels. so that the Conference funds are channelled to pnority projects and put to the best use;
2. Reiterates its congratulations to the Secretary-Genend of the United Nations for his efforts towards the preparation of the International Conference on Assistance to
Refugees in Africa in close consultation with the SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of African Unity and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, as well as for
his personal concern for African refugee problems and for
the very able manner in which he presided over the Conference. thus bringing it to a successful end;
3. Erpresses its appreciation and gratitude to all donor
countries and to the international community at large for
their very positive response to the appeal for assistance to
African refugees and for their contribution to the assistance
to refugees in Africa;
4. Urges the international community to continue to
support the annual programmes of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and of other
United Nations agencies co-operating with that Office on
behalf of refugees in Africa:
5
Calls upon the pertinent development-oriented organizations and agencies of the United Nations system to
envisage, at the stages of conception and implementation,
all concerted efforts and co-ordinated actions aimed at harmonizing assistance programmes in the countries of asylum
as well as in the countries of origin during the repatriation
process. and current or future development programmes,
,o that the potentialities of refugees or returnees may constitute an advantage rather than a burden on national
development;
o. R1·quests the Secretary-General. in close co-operation with the Secretary-General of the Organization of Africa" f lpitv ;ind the l 1nitcd Nations High Commissioner for
