UNITED

?

NATIONS

THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR
th
MEETING:

NEW

26 OCTOBER

1977

YORK

CONTENTS
ProvisionaI

agenda (S/Agenda/2039)

Adoption

of the agenda

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . I . . . _. . . . . . . . . , . .

Page
1

. . . . .. . . , .

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent
Representative
of Tunisia to
the United
Nations
addressed to the President
of the Security
Council
(S/12420)
. .._..............,............,.............

1

?
$1.

i

S/PV.2039

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/, . .) are normally published in ciu:+rterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the d(XWWJnt
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutiom ard Decisitm (~.f’th’
S?curi(v Cuurrcil. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to re~o!kltiWs
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2039TH

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday,

26 October

President: Mr. Rikhi JAIPAL (India).

1977, at 10.30 a.m.

conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

3. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table, I invite the representatives of Botswana,
Guinea and Viet Nam to take the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber on the usual understanding that they will be invited to take a place at the
Council table when they wish to address the Council.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2039)

At the irktation oj’ the President, Mr. Tlou (Botswana),
Mr. Camara (Guinea) and Mr. Dinh Ba Thi (Viet Nam) took
the places reserved for them at the side or the Council
chamber.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/ 12420)

4. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the representative of Senegal. 1 invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
5. Mr. KAMARA (Senegal) (interpretation from French):
First of all, 1 should like to address to you, Mr. Freddent,
the congratulations of the delegation of Senegal on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. As
stated yesterday, at this time when we are discussing the
painful problem of South Africa, you are undoubtedly one
of those best equipped to assist in finding a solution. Your
country, India, was very early made aware of the questions
of apartheid and racial discrimination in South Africa, since
the long-gone days when Mahatma Gandhi himself raised
his protest against their effects. The Senegalese delegation
accordingly has every hope that these meetings under your
guidance will achieve the best possible results.

The meeting was called to order at II. 20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12420)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken by the Council at its earlier meetings, I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Togo and Tunisia to take the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.

6. This series of meetings of the Security Council to
examine the situation in South Africa can be regarded as a
continuation of the meetings held at the end of March
1977, pursuant to the recommendation of the General
Assembly last year. That recommendation was reiterated at
the meeting of the Council of Ministers of the Organization
of African Unity held at Libreville in June and July of 1977
in its resolution CM/Res.554 (XXIX). It gave a mandate to
the African Group in New York to work for a reopening of
the debate in the Council and to help ensure that the
debate would achieve the aims set by the General Assembly. The painful events that have recently occurred in
South Africa, reminding the world brutally of the grave
potential dangers that are daily created and nourished by
the rCgime of apartheid, led to the holding of these
meetings sooner than we expected.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bedjaoui (Algeria),
Mr. Garba
(Nigeria),
Mr. Baroody
(Saudi
Arabia),
Mr. Kamara (Senegal), Mr. Kodjovi (Togo) and Mr. Mestiri
(Tunisia) took the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the members
of the Council that letters have been received from the
representatives of Botswana, Guinea and Viet Nam in which
they have requested that they should be invited to
participate in the discussion of the question on the agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, 1 propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in

7. However, it must be said immediately that the development of the situation in southern Africa in general, and in
1

--

South Africa in particular, is not unexpected, and is in fact
governed by an irrefutable logic in both the turn of events
and in the actions and reactions of the various parties.

thereby dcmonstrdting their total lack of power. The black
organisations were able to impose their views in regard to
these two points. They then decided to pass to a higher
degree of organisation and to assume genuine responsibilitics. The newspaper Le Mondc described the situation
in the following way on 29 July:

8. Let us recall the most recent facts that have caused the
wave of emotion and concern now being voiced all over the
world by Covernmcnts and by all men and women who
love peace and justice.

“Rejecting the structures imposed by the Government,
the blacks are trying to rebuild responsible groupings.

9. On I8 October last, the South African police arrested,
in the towns of Durban, Cape Town and Johannesburg,
many notable figures or members of the anti-aparcheicl and
Black Consciousness movements. On that same day, the
Government Cnzette published announcements prohibiting
the publication of the two major black newspapers, Tllc
World and We&end World, and prohibiting the activities of
18 organisations known for their stand against Pretoria’s
policies. These organizations include practically all those
comprising the black students and the parents of black
students, as well as the Federation of Black Wotncn, the
black journalists union, a writers’ association, and so on.

“At the end of June, some 50 delegates representing
Black Consciousness . . met under the auspices of the
African daily The World, ‘to solve Sowcto’s problems’.
“Ten members of the Assembly were elected to
establish a new municipal council. . . That was the first
initiative of this kind taken by the black South Africans.”
13. The results of the work of the Committee of Ten,
which were made public, set forth detailed methods to bc
used in electing a Soweto municipal council of 50 members;
it was to be basically a decision-making body. The council
was to appoint an administrative comtnittee to deal with
such questions as pass laws and the budget. Bach year, it
was to appoint a mayor and his assistant. Another team of
10 members was to be established to study Soweto’s needs
and possible ways of financing measures to meet them; the
Cotnmittce of Ten had already established the cost of
changing Soweto into a modern city. According to the same
article in Lc Mu/z&, the Committee of Ten went even
further, suggesting that assistance should be requested from
the Organization of African Unity, the International Monetary Fund and various countries.

10. Most of those arrested belong to the Black Consciousness movement, whose leader was Stcvc Uiko, killed in
prison on 12 September, and also to the Committee of Ten,
a body set up about four months ago, which demanded and
worked for real autonomy for the municipality of Soweto.
11. Arrests and searches are continuing and in&de even
the whites who express sympathy for the cause of the
blacks. This wave of repression, of a scope never before
known in South Africa, gave rise to numerous protests as
soon as it became known, first of all within the country
itself. Thus Beyers Naude, the President of the Christian
Institute-who
did not know that he hitnself had been
banned-declared:

14. Pretoria’s categorical opposition did not prevent the
black organizations from working out the process For the
putting into effect of this machinery, which, in the end,
was to take practical form in the establishment of parallel
black power, as a reaction against the bankruptcy and
disqualification of white power and to oppose that power.

“This is a terrible and sad clay for South Africa . _ . It is
a shocking act that proves that the Government is acting
in desperation to stop the favourable trend of real
change.”

1.5. At the same time, further initiatives were taken to fill
the other gaps and deficiencies in the Soutl~ African rigime,
gaps and deficiencies which sotne regard as the result of the
particular circumstances but which, in any case, cannot be
overcome because of the stubbornness and blind obstinacy
of that rCgime, ready to do anything to survive.

Reverend Sam Bu ti, President of the South African Council
of Churches, stated that hc was “shocked to see that the
Government had no rcspcct for the feelings of blacks”.
These two men of the cloth have posed the problem in its
true tcrtns for South Africa: on the one hand, the refusal of
Pretoria to “respect the feelings of the blacks” and, on the
other, its efforts to “stop the favourable trend of real
change”.

16. The most recent initiative-that of 16 October-was
perhaps the last straw and led to the series of repressive
measures with which we are now dealing. On that day,
2,000 teachers and parents of students decided, according
to an Agence France-Presse dispatch of 20 October “to
establish a fund, with contributions from the black community, to ensure the survival of the teachers who had
resigned- about 500 in number-and to organize a system
of parallel education for the young Africans who were
refusing to return to their classes so long as there was
separate education”.

12. Last June, there took place one of the most significant
events in the development of the struggle of the black
South Africans against apartheid. The present situation is
certainly the direct result of that event. At a time when the
action agajnst “Bantu education” was continuing, with a
boycott of the schools in all the large black suburbs of the
country, the rents in Sowcto were increased, which led the
blacks to harden their position even more ancl also further
strengthened Lhc unity among their various organizations.
The latter, on the initiative of the students, not only
opposed the increase in rents but also demanded the
resignation of the members of the Soweto Municipal
Council, who had not been able to oppose this increase,

17. We do not think that sufficient attention has been
paid to those events, which made clear the healthy
direction of the black national movement inside the
country and, at the same time, render the Vorster r6gimc

2

even more guilty. It is worth while recalling the philosophy
of the Black Consciousness movement. According to its
leaders, it involves

goodwill made towards it, has not yet decided to give
effective support to the plan which has received the
endorsementof the United Nations.

“the awareness by the blacks”-which
means all those
suffering from a[lartheid -“of the need to regroup in
order to free themselves from the forces that have been
keeping them in a state of perpetual servitude. . . The
blacks must find their own identity and regain their own
values, rejecting the system of values that has made the
black man a stranger in his own country and dehuinanized him”.

21. But the Pretoria regime has been able to act in this
unique way and to refuse to comply with resolutionsand
decisionsof the GeneralAssemblyand the Security Council
only becauseof the indulgence shown toward it by some
large countries. Because of its enormous wealth and
potential, South Africa has been the recipient of assistance
and support which continue to be given and which has
enabled it to pursue with impunity these actions which
have beencondemnedin words elsewhere.

18. The highly significant actions of the followers of the
Black Consciousness movement, the courageous struggle of
the Soweto students, challenging the very foundations of
the npnrtlzeid r@gime, the attitude of the white liberals, the
not inconsiderable activity of the liberation movements
outside the country, the African National Congress and the
Pan Africanist Congress, all that explains the rcckiess and
bloody reactions of the South African rCgime and its
attempt to halt the favourable trend towards genuine
change.

22. The bloody Sharpeville massacres
of 1960 were, in
fact, merely an episodeintended to stem the rising tide of
the claims of the black people of South Africa who are
supported by all the other peoplesof Africa, including
those still under foreign domination. That is an objective
reality that South Africa knowsvery well, becauseit helped
to delay as long as possiblethe achievementof independence by the recently liberated Statesof southernAfricaMozambique and Angola-which up to then had servedas
its springboard.

19. At a time when the Security Council must decide on
the measures to be taken, it should bear in mind that if
those measures are to be significant they must, among other
things, constitute real assistance to the non-white communities of South Africa and their organizations, their righl
to live. to organize and to struggle. In doing that, the
Council will be acting in a manner consistent, on the one
hand, with General Assembly resolution 3411 C (XXX) of
28 November 1975, which proclaims that the United
Nations and the international community have a special
responsibility towards the oppressed people of South Africa
and their liberation movements, and, OIJ the other hand,
with the Programme of Action against Aparthid,
adopted
by the General Assembly on 9 November 1976, which
reaffirms “that their struggle for the total eradication of
apartheid. . . is fully legitimate” [resolutiorz
31/6 J,
almex/. This barbarous, anti-scientific ideology has been
thoroughly denounced within the world Organization. It
hasbeencondemnedin unequivocaland the harshestterms.
The Programmeof Action againstApartheid states:

23. Today, reduced to envisagingthe forthcoming independence of Zimbabwe and Namibia whose people are
pressingon with their increasinglysuccessfularmedstruggle, South Africa hasarmed itself to the teeth. Thereisno
longer any doubt about its nuclear capability. It is
redoubling its repressiveacts within its frontiers against
Coloured peoples’organizations and its acts of aggression
and threats outside its frontiers againstindependentAfrican
States.
24. This activity on the part of South Africa continues
although the international community has already taken
various steps to persuade it to renounce its policy of
qmrtlreicl
and accept majority tule, the only viable solutions to the problemswhich South Africa is facing.To cite
only the most outstanding of those initiatives: on 21
December 1965, the General Assemblyadopted the Jnternational Convention OIJ the Elimination of AH Formsof
Racial Discrimination, which entered into force on 4 January 1969; on 30 November 1973, it adopted the Internatlonal Convention on the Suppressionand Punishmentof
the Crime of Apmtheid,
which entered into force on J8
July
1976; and on 9 November 1976, at its thirty-first
session, it adopted the Programme of Action against
Apartlzcid, which
it recommendedto alI Govcrninents,
organizations and individuals. That detailed text coversa
number of important matters with regardto which a series
of measuresis proposed in support of the struggleof the
black nationalists of South
Africa and to increasethe
isolation of that country. A new programmeof action has
been submitted to the General Assembly at its thirtysecondsessionby the World Conferencefor Action against
Apartheid that washeld last August at Lagos.

“Apartheid,
like slavery, must be eradicatedbecauseit
isa crime againsthumanity.
“Apurthitl
must be eradicatedbecauseit is an affront
IO human dignity and a grave threat to international
peaceand security.”

There is IJO need to cite other condemnationsor eve11 to
describehere how that ideology is translated into deeds.
The mcmbcrsof the Council are fully awareof all this.
20. The South African rCgimc, which institutionalized
hasmadeits caseeven worst by rebelling:igainst
the international community through its assumptionof
false positions of strengtll--positiol]s which arc indeed
ridiculouswhen one considersthat, with regardto Namibia,
an international Territory that is illegally occupied, the
challengeis to the United Nations itself. With regardto the
Rhodesianquestion, South Africa, despite the gesturesof

apartheid,

25. I think it is significant to point out that even the
United Nations Conference on Desertification, held at
Nairobi in August and September 1977 which wasessentially a scientific conference,in its resolution 5, condemned
3

“the policy of bantustanization,
which, by grouping
together in restricted areas of poor land the very great
majority of the black population of South Africa, gives
rise to excessive pressure on that land, which is a very
serious factor in desertification and degradation of the
environment”.1

that State at a moment when. in Belgrade, the second
session of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in
Europe is being held, a Conference whose Final Act of
Helsinki contains so many promises regarding respect for
human rights.
31. The Western Powers now have more than one reason
to be convinced that, without exerting pressure and taking
effective reprisals, they wal not be able to break down the
stubbornness, arrogance and madness of the Vorster rbgime.
In response to an interview given by the Vice-President of
the United States, the South African Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Pik Botha, recently-on
18 October, in fact--gave a
reply, reported by Agence France-Presse, that was certainly
not over-burdened with diplomatic niceties and that I hope
I may be forgiven for quoting. Botha simply described the
President of the United States and his Secretary of State as
“moralists pontificating from their platforms to the applause of a crowd of followers”. He ended by saying that
“in spite of the threat of sanctions, the whites are
determined to survive”.

26. This chorus of condemnation, that has been going on
for the last 30 years, since the Malan Party was created, has
increased in volume with the events of last week. In
London, the Commonwealth
Committee on Southern
Africa has threatened to impose an embargo on oil destined
for South Africa if the latter does not cease to supply
tiodesia with oil. The United States and the Netherlands
have decided to recall their ambassadors at Pretoria for
consultations. The Secretary-General of the United Nations
has declared that the measures adopted by the Government
of Sauth Africa can only aggravate the situation. The
countries of the European Economic Community and the
United States intend to assume a common stand on South
Africa by the end of November 1977. In South Africa
itself, the editors of 14 newspapers have expressed their
“profound condemnation of the arbitrary action of the
Government”.

32. Obviously nobody suggests to serious-minded countries that they should define their governmental policies in
the light of such replies clearly dictated by emotion. But J
felt that that reply should be cited here since it comes from
a spokesman of the apartheid r6gime at Pretoria and
indicates the true state of mind of the Afrikaners.

27. Many other voices have ben raised and continue to be
heard condemning what is happening in that country. But
the reactions of the South African Government leave no
doubt about its determination to continue its acts of
repression and violence.

33. Let us turn now to the proposals on how our debate
should conclude.

28. We recall that that Government has often suggested to
the Western Powers that they should support it out of a
spirit of solidarity. At least that is what becomes apparent
in the many statements and replies made by South African
leaders to Western leaders. One of the most significant is
John Vorster’s reply of 5 August last, in which he claims to
be warning the President of the [Jnited States regarding the
policy that his country has adopted towards South Africa.
Addressing the President whom he calls the “leader of the
free world”, Vorster asked him “not to prevent South
Africa from playing its role in the free world”. “Why”, he
asks, “make an enemy of the only country that can be
counted on should a crisis arise’? ” Because of its implications, that is an incriminating statement which should lead
the Western Powers to make further efforts ta improve
their credibility. They have a chance to do so in connexion
with the initiatives they have taken to facilitate “a
progressive transformation
of the South African society
with a view to creating conditions for a majority r8gime”.

34. The international community has already done much
to set in motion in South Africa a process of democratic
transformation
leading to a progressive attenuation and
eventual disappearance of apartheid. But we must all
acknowledge that this has had no significant effect on the
Vorsler rkgime. On the contrary, that rkgime, by hardening
its position, has redoubled the defensive reactions of the
Coloured population, and appears more and more intent on
pursuing and intensifying its escalation of violence and
repression.
35. We agree whole-heartedly
with the South African
liberation movements that their people’s liberation is
primarily in their own hands. But, confronted with an
ironclad monster armed with sophisticated weaponry that it
has been helped to acquire and which it will doubtless put
to savage use when it feels itself with its back to the wall,
the international community must take effective measures
while there is still time. Tomorrow may be too late. There
may be open insurrection or civil war, for all of southern
Africa could be immediately affected by what happens in
South Africa because of the position South Africa occupies
in that region.

29. Doubtless, at the end of this debate, the direction and
the orientation that those nations intend to take will show
us just how determined they are to free South Africa of
apartkid. We shall then be able to measure their willingness
to give effective assistance to men who are struggling
peacefully in their own countries merely to achieve
recognition of their basic human rights.

36. The Senegalese delegation believes, therefore, that the
adoption and implementation of the four draft resolutions
which have been before the Security Council since late
March 1977 /S/12309 to S/12312/ might now be considered the minimum that we might expect from the
Council. Those drafts could be updated to include, for
example, mention of the new situation prevailing in South
Africa, They should also further emphasize the measures

30. It is a bitter irony of fate that the Western Powers
which have always give assistance to South Africa are today
having their own sincerity put to the test by the regime of
1 A/CONP.74/36.

chap.

II.

4

1

relating to a binding amls embargo, cessation of investments and the blocking of promotion of trade with South
Africa. Furthermore, new time-limits would be set to allow
for the implementation of the resolutions. Operative
paragraph 5 of draft resolution S/l 2310 should make
specific ment.ion of a precise date on which the Security
Council will consider appropriate action under all the
provisions of the Charter, including Articles 39 to 46 of
Chapter VII, in case of non-compliance with paragraph 3 on
South Africa’s obligations to the Organization.

Nations efforts to prevent the danger of the spread of
nuclear weaponsthroughout our planet.
41. The Soviet Union, together with all African and other
countries, strongly condemnsthe acts of the South African
racist authorities and categorically demandsan immediate
end to them. The whole world, the international community and the United Nationshave long condemnedand
stigmatized the racist apartheid policy of South Africa as
the gravest crime against humanity. The latest events in
South Africa require that the international communityand, in the first instance, the Security Council-should take
the most resolute and urgent measuresto call a halt to the
crimina1policy of apartheid pursuedby the South African
authorities,

37. The Senegalese delegation supports these draft resolutions and considers that the measuresadvocated in them,
if supportedby the whole international community, could
open the way to a new stageleadingto a transformation of
South African society and the elimination of apartheid.

42. In my delegation’sview, the representativesof African
countries have placed before the Security Council a series
of important and, in this situation, necessaryproposals,the
main points of which are that the Council should once
again demand that the South African racistsshouldcease
their repression and violence against the opponents of
apartheid, releaseall those imprisoned for speakingout
againstapartheid and desistfrom the policy of bantustanization. It is proposed that the Council shouldonce again
bring urn the question of putting an end to the unprecedented hostile incursionsand provocationsmountedby the
South African regimeagainstAfrican countries andpeoples,
and of removing the threat of its armedintervention against
neighbouringindependent African States.

38. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): The Soviet
Union, like many other countries, was outraged by the
latest crimesof the racist regimeof South Africa againstthe
African population of the country. We entirely share the
alarmthat hasbeenexpressedhere by representativesof the
African countries and the national liberation movements
over the situation in that stronghold of colonialism and
racismresulting from the repressivemeasurestaken by the
Pretoria regime.It is the firm belief of my delegation that
those acts by the South African racists representa further
challengeto the efforts of the international community and
the decisionsof the United Nations and other international
organizations in this field to eliminate the vestiges of
colonialism.

43. All this is necessaryand important, but it may fairly
be asked whether it can be expected that the racist regime
of South Africa, which, accordingto the termsof General
Assembly resolution 3411 G (XXX), hasbeenrecognizedas
illegal and as having no right to represent the people of
South Africa, will heed the decisionsof the Security
Council if those decisions are not backed by others
providing for the imposition of certain sanctionsagainst
that regime. Experience suggests
a negative reply to that
question. It is therefore quite natural that representativesof
the African countries should bring before the Council the
question of the need to adopt enforcement measures
against the rCgime in South Africa as provided for in
Chapter VII of the Charter. We consider that the time for
this hascome and, indeed, camea long while ago.

39. The systemof violence and repression,which hasbeen
elevated by the South African regime to the level of State
policy, and its acts of aggressionagainst sovereignAfrican
Stateshave createda situation in that part of the world that
posesa direct threat to peace and security. The Soweto
tragedy was a vivid example of what that policy leads to
inside the country. The South African authorities are
intensifying their racial oppressionand resorting to acts of
massiverepressionand, as recent events have shown, even
to the physical annihilation of Africans. Suffice it to recall
the fact known to all that, in the last few months, about 50
Africans who had expressed strong protest against the
policies and practices of apartheid have died in South
African gaolswithout even standingtrial. The shotsfired at
Soweto and in other African settlements,the angry protests
of millions of indigenousinhabitants boundedinto reservations and ghettosand the tragic fate of those in the clutches
of apartheid have torn the maskfrom the true face of the
racistregimeof South Africa.

44. As is known, the General Assembly has repeatedly
demanded that ail States shouldentirely refrain from any
co-operation with the criminal racist regime in South
Africa, including co-operation in the military sphere.
Unfortunately it must be noted that the obstinatecontinuation of the policy of apartheid by the South African racists
inside the country and of acts of aggressionagainstother
countries is basedon the assistance
and support that they
receive from outside. It hasto be noted that some Western
countries continue to ignore the numerous appealsand
decisionsof the United Nations for an end to co-operation
with South Africa, It is not enoughto condemnthe racist
regime for its repressiveand terrorist actions againstthe
indigenous population; it is essentialthat those countries
should stop giving it political, diplomatic, economic and
military assistance
and support.

40. There is seriousconcern at the continuous improvement of the Pretoria regime’smilitary machine and the
equipment of its armed forces with modern military
technology. The racistsof the Republic of South Africa are
feverishly building up their military potential, and even
reachingfor nuclear weapons. The intention of the South
African raciststo acquire weaponsof massdestruction is a
challengeto Africa and to the whole world. It is contrary to
the decisionsof the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity urging that the continent of Africa should be
regardedasa nuclear-freezone, and contrary alsoto United
5

-

45. Calling for a dialogue with the Government of South
Africa instead of complying with the decisions of the
United Nations is tantamount to connivance with racism
and the policy of apartheid. Appeals of this kind have been
heard at the United Nations before. We should like to recall
that the vain hopes for reasonable behaviour from the
Pretoria rCgime have been utterly dashed. Any delay has
been used by the apartheid rbgime merely in order to
intensify the harshness of its racist policy and to step up its
repressions and terrorism against the indigenous population
of the country. The latest events have amply borne out this
self-evident truth.
46. That is why the delegation of the Soviet Union favours
the immediate adoption by the Council of effective
decisions, If no effective measures are taken now, with a
view to producing a substantial change in the situation,
then the Council and those of its members that oppose such
measures will be assuming a heavy burden of responsibility
for the future.
47. So far as the delegation of the Soviet Union is
concerned, it endorses the demand of the African countries
for a mandatory embargo on arms shipments to South
Africa and for the adoption of economic and other
sanctions. The Soviet Union, not in words but in deeds, is
prepared to take the most effective measures aimed at
bringing about the final, definitive and irreversible elimination of the policy of apartheid in all its manifestations. As
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union,
Mr. Gromyko,
recently stated before the Genera1
Assembly:
“The sooner we do away with this anachronism of our
age-colonialism, racism and apartkid--the
cleaner will
be the air in Africa and the world at large, and the greater
will be the range of action for the policy of ddtente. This
is what was called for by the historic Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples adopted by the United Nations 17 years ago.“2
48. In supporting the position and the proposals of the
African countries, my delegation would like to reaffirm
once again that the Soviet Union has always been and will
remain on the side of the courageous fighters against racism
and apartheid and, together with the peoples of Africa and
progressjve people in all countries, will continue to give
them active assistance and to support them in their noble
and just struggle for freedotn and independence. This is
fully in keeping with the position of principle of our
country, as reaffirmed by the twenty-fifth Congress of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union. As was declared at
that Congress by the General Secretary of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union,
Comrade Brezhnev, the complete elimination of all vestiges
of the system of colonial oppression, of the infringement of
the equality of rights and the independence of peoples, and
of all hotbeds of colonialism and racism, is one of the most
important international tasks of the Soviet Union.
49. Mr. AKHUND
(Pakistan): Mr. President, as 1 am
speaking for the first time in the Council this month, I

should like to express to you my personal appreciation of
the dedication and equanimity with which you have been
guiding our proceedings this month on the very full agenda
we have before us, wish you success in what remains to be
done and assure you of the co-operation of my delegation.
50. The Security Council has been seized of the question
of South Africa since 1960, when the massacre at
Sharpeville aroused the conscience of the world and at last
awoke all members of the Council to the potential danger
to international peace and security posed by the situation
in South A.frica. Since then, the winds of change have
bIown away the great empires which dominated the
continent of Africa and other parts of the world. In those
17 years, the doctrine and practice of upartlzeid have been
condemned aver and over again in ever more stern language
by all the countries of the world and in every possible
forum. No one argues any more that the systematic
usurpation of the rights of the black people of South Africa
by a minority is a matter that lies within the domestic
jurisdiction of that Country,
S1. The continued occupation of Namibia by South Africa
was held to be illegal by the International Court of
Justice.3 South Africa stands virtually expelled from the
United Nations and is publicly reprimanded by countries
with which it claims to have affinities of spirii and culture
and which have been among its closest friends, supporters
and allies. But in South Africa itself little seetns to have
changed in these 17 years of turmoil and transformation.
f’ctty apartheid with its daily indignities and injustices has
scarcely been modified; it is, on the contrary, encompassed
in the greater apartheid of bantustans, which is but another
name for the usurpation by a racist minority of the political
rights of the majority and the economic resources of the
country.
52. The massacre of Sharpeville has been echoed in the
killings of Soweto. The brutal murder of Steve Biko while
in custody is the most dramatic of numerous such officially
authorised or condoned murders of political prisoners.
53. Despite sanctions, the economy of Southern Rhodesia
continues to grow and flourish and has never run short of
oil to grease its wheels: nor is the Smith rCgime short of
arms to protect its illegal usurpation. South Africa has
provided inspiration and abetment, open support and secret
help to the illegal Smith rCgimc in Southern Rhodesia.
54. South Africa’s own illegal occupation of Namibia
continues and, while the Turnhalle effort has been halted,
the South African aim remains the same, namely, to install
there a government which will bc essentially subsetvient to
South Africa and will not interfere with the continued
exploitation by South African and other outside interests
of the rich resources of the Territory.
55. South Africa has now developed nuclear capability-surely not by its own unaided efforts. The intervention of
the two super-Powers to stop South Africa carrying out a
3 I,egal Cormcptences
jbr States o{ the Cor~timted
Presence 01
Sotrfh Africa
i/z Namibia
(South
West Africa)
tlotr~~ithstalldiI1R
5krriit.s
Council
Rcsolutiotl
2 76 (19701, Adi?so,:l~ Opinion,
I. CL!.
Reports 19 71) p. 16.

nuclear explosion was a good thing, but Mr. Vorster now
declares that he has given no commitment as to the future.
I,In any case, whether or not South Africa carries out a test
explosion, it is too late, we fear, to undo what has
happened: the acquisition of an uncontrolled and unsafeguarded nuclear option by that internationally irresponsible
and dangerously irrational country.
56. The Security Council last considered the question of
South Africa in March of this year, at which time the
sponsors of the four draft resolutions which are still before
the Council were persuaded not to push them to the vote.
Some members of the Council who had been engaged in
negotiations with the Vorstcr rCgime in connexion with the
issues of Namibia and Southern Rhodesia and who
appeared to discern signs of flexibility in Mr. Vorster’s
approach felt that the adoption of those draft resolutions
might jeopardize the success of those negotiations. After
last week’s announcement of a series of measures of
unprececlentcd severity against the opponents of the
regime, the most sanguine among us must surely have little
doubt left as to the South African regime’s real intentions.
57. The United Nations has from its very inception been
concerned with the question of racial discrimination in
South Africa and I am proud to be able to say that my
country, together with your own, Mr. President, was among
the first to bring the matter to the attention of the
Organization. The world community has been concerned
with South Africa not because it is the only country which
practises racial discrimination but because there that
pernicious practice has taken the form of a social dogma
and a political doctrine which are entrenched in its
constitution, whose animus is to bc found in every law,
regulation and act of government of that country, and
which distort and destroy normal relationships between
human beings. Nor is this simply a manifestation of the
fundamentalism of the Boer or of the so-called laager
mentality, though undoubtedly such ideas and attitudes
thrive in the environment created by apartheid.
58. We must bc concerned with racism as a social
phenomenon, but South African racism is more than that;
it is a doctrine which provides cover for an economic
system which promotes the exploitation of all the resources
of that vast and rich country for the benefit of the peopIe
of a particular race and ruthlessly exploits the labour of the
black majority to the same end, reducing the black people
to the position of hclots and slaves, depriving them of equal
opportunity in education, employment and every other
field and subjecting them to a treatment of systematizcd
humiliation and indignity. Finally, the situation is of
concern to the world because it posts a threat to its peace
and security, a threat which, as l have said, has now
assumed a more dangerous dimension by reason of South
Africa’s acquisition of nuclear capability.
59. It is unfortunate that, even while condemning the evils
of qartheid, recognizing the injustice and untenability of
the system and conscious of the danger it poses to world
peace and security, we seem to remain divided now as we
have been ever since the matter was brought before the
United Nations over methods of dealing with the issue.
There are those who counsel patience and would put their

trust in the slow evolution of events and ideas bringing
about change. Even when they recognize that time has not
brought any essential change in the South African situation
and that time is indeed now running out, they urge a
step-by-step approach, holding it wise to deal first with the
problems of Rhodesia and Namibia before tackling the
problem of South Africa itself. On the other hand, there arc
those who believe that only through struggle and sacrifice
and the shedding of blood can freedom be won and
injustice undone.
60. That is indeed the lessonof history, for, without the
sustainedstruggleand sacrifice of millions of peopleunder
colonial rule, the great and powerful colonial empires
would not have fallen, nor would the apparentry peaceful
transfer of power in some colonial territories have taken
place. It is the sacrificesof the children of Soweto and of
thosewho have defied the r&ime and braved its prisonsand
the treacherousdeath which sometimesawaits them there
that have brought about some semblanceof flexibility in
the policiesof the apartheid r6gime.It is the very success
of
their struggle and the fear of its impending triumph that
have provoked the Vorster regime to close in upon itself
and to unleash a new wave of repression against its
opponents.
61. The struggle will not stop. We all know that. It will
not wait upon events or on the slow evolution of
diplomatic interventions and negotiations. What
Mr. Vorster’s latest actions have done is to tell the freedom
fighters of Azania that their way is the only way.
62. By his actioris, Mr. Vorster defies the world community but also confronts the Security Council with its
responsibilities.The latest actionsof South Africa underline
the fact that the time has come to go beyond verbal
denunciations towards a policy of action. Pragmaticdiplomacy has not succeeded so far in disentangling the
questions of Southern Rhodesia and Namibia from the
heart of the crisis,the problem of South Africa itself. South
Africa standsisolated from the rest of mankind, but the
international community has yet to take measureswhich
would make it realize and bear the full consequencesof
that isolation.
63. My delegationbelievesthat the Security Council must
now consider action which would bring to bear on South
Africa in an effective manner the full weight of the world’s
disapproval of its policies. If the Council fails to act
effectively and unanimously at this juncture, the task of
finding a permanentand long-term solution to the problems
of southern Africa will be mademore, not less,difficult. It
is important that the failure and bankruptcy of the policies
followed by the apartheid rCgimeshould be brought home
to the people, black and white, of South Africa. It is
important above all that the Council should take steps
which will demonstrate the seriousnesswith which the
Council asa whole and its membersintend to pursuetheir
declaredaims.
64. The PRESJDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Viet Nam. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

--

65. Mr. DINH BA THI (Viet Nam) (interpretatiuiz ~bx’n
French): Mr. President, I should like to express my thanks
to you for allowing me to speak in this important debate on
the situation in South Africa.
66. In its meetings from 21 to 29 March last, the Security
Council was unable to take any decision on the four draft
resolutions
sponsored
by Benin, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and Mauritius [S/J2309 to S/12312/ because
the Western States members of the Council asked for time
in order to persuade the Pretoria regime. Seven months
have now elapsed. Yet that regime has merely gained time
to step up its repression of the black majority, to create
new bantustans and to continue with impunity its policies
of intervention and aggression against the neighbouring
countries. Are we therefore to conclude that the promises
of persuasion were simply manoeuvres to rescue the rkgime
of apart/&
from the sanctions called for in the four draft
resolutions?

world. At the same time, the Western Powers members of
the Security Council have made their so-called initiatives,
which are intended to lead to a negotiated solution of the
problem of Namibia. But this is only a new manoeuvre
intended to deceive public opinion, to delay the implementation of previous Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 385 (1976), and to hinder the adoption by the
Council of the new draft resolutions on sanctions to be
applied against the Pretoria r&gime in conformity with the
terms of Chapter VII of the Charter. The true aim of these
“initiatives”
is merely to safeguard the strategic and
economic interests of those countries to the detriment of
the national interests of the Namibian people.
69. We do not oppose a negotiated solution. However, we
find it difficult to share the view of those who believe that
certain Western Powers are sincerely eager to achieve a
negotiated settlement. The situation in southern Africa and
other regions of the world over the last decades has proved
that our doubts are well founded.

67. The most recent developments in the situation in
South Africa have confirmed that interpretation and have,
furthermore, brought out the following facts. First, the
Pretoria rCgime, with the assistance of its Western allies, is
continuing to strengthen its military potential and its
repressive machinery, to terrorize savagely all elements
hostile to its apartheid policy, to rescind the most
elementary legal rights of the black majority and to practise
its policies as the regional gendarme of imperialism.
Secondly, the United States, the United Kingdom and some
other Western countries continue to link their economic,
strategic and other interests even more closely to those of
the Pretoria rkgime. It becomes obvious, therefore, that the
egotistical interests of those countries stand as the main
obstacle to the possible adoption by the Security Council
of determined measures to be applied against the apartheid
rCgime pursuant to the terms of the Charter. We must stress
that the uparflzeicl rBgime is, by its nature, a repressive
regime, and any effort to use persuasion as a pretext to
delay the adoption of coercive measures against that rEgime
can be considered as nothing but a simple manoeuvre
intended to lull world public opinion. Thirdly, the international community has never been more conscious than
today of the drama of South Africa, and it has spared no
effort to join with the South African people in the struggle
to establjsh a democratic majority rhgime there. The
sanctions advocated in the four draft resolutions submitted
to the Council for adoption could give extremely valuable
assistance to that struggle. In the light of these considerations, my delegation supports all the sanctions provided for
in the draft resolutions and will support all efforts to ensure
the effective implementation of such measures.

70. In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate its
unreserved support of the peoples of southern Africa
against the greatest scourge of humanity, namely, apartheid. It is high time for the international community to
adopt more energetic measures in support of that struggle
and to put a stop to any effort at rescuing the Vorster
rigime.
71. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Botswana. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
72. Mr. TLOU (Botswana): Mr. President, allow me to
extend to you my very warm congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. It is pleasing, and indeed very appropriate, that
a man of your immense diplomatic skill and experience, a
man who represents a country whose long and unflinching
fight against apartheid is a matter of public record, should
preside over this crucial debate.
73. The sad events for which the racist rtgime in South
Africa was responsible during the past week serve to remind
us once again, in a very painful way, that the situation in
South Africa poses a great danger to the people of South
Africa, to the whole southern African region, to the African
continent and, indeed, to the international community as a
whole.
74. Africa has on several occasions warned of this explosive situation and called upon the international community
to arrest its development before it upsets the stability and
peace of our continent and threatens international peace
and security. African leaders have formulated blueprints for
peaceful change in South Africa. As we all know, South
Africa has disdainfully ignored those peaceful efforts. While
the international community hesitated and temporized,
while Africa talked peace, apartheid South Africa continued to fashion and perfect its apparatus of oppression in
open defiance of the overwhelming wish of the international community.

68. In playing the role of regional gendarme of imperialism, the Pretoria rCgimc benefits constantly from the
economic and military assistance, including the technical
assistance, provided by the Western countries that allows it
to manufacture the most sophisticated modern weaponry,
to strengthen its rCgime of uparthrid, of repression and
exploitation of the people of southern Africa in Namibia,
to strengthen the illegal rCgime of Ian Smith in Zimbabwe
and to continue its policies of intervention and aggression
against the front-line countries of Africa. All this spells a
grave threat to peace and security in Africa and in the

75. So late in the day, it is not necessary for me to dwell
here at length on the events of last week, for they are well
8

known to all of us: the usual bannings or detentions of
individuals and organizations and the banning of newspapers, in this particular case the only two papers catering
for the black people of South Africa, Z%e Work/ and
We&ml’ World. It is important to note that in South
Africa, perhaps more than in any other country in the
world, civic organizationsmean a lot; they are the only
groupingsto which Africans can belong since they cannot
organizeany political parties.The ruthlessbanningof these
organisations,which the racist rulers of South Africa have
now declaredto be permanent, hasdeprived the blacks of
the only forums where they could meet and share ideas
about how they could run their lives as best they possibly
could under the cruel dehumanizingapartfzcicl system.

80. NOW, when the leadersof the apartheid State openly
and frankly declarethat they havenever contemplated,nor
do they now, nor will they in the future, contemplate
dismantling upartfzeici, when they assert boldly and arrogantly that they are ready to defendapartheid evenif they
he
to stand alone in the world, we must take them
seriously, for they arc articulating dangerousfeelingsand
prejudices deeply imbcdded in their distorted senseof
history.

76. The dreadful events of the past few days correctly
arousethe indignation of the international community as
they go against the norms of all civilized standards.
llowever, viewed historically, in the context of the tragic
blood-stainedhistory of South Africa, they are scarcely
surprising.
77. Ever since the settlement of Europeans in South
Africa 300 years ago, oppression, exclusion from the
political process,banishmentof individuals and organizations, murdersand executions have persisted. Long before
the events of last week, long before Soweto, long before
Sharpeville,hundredsof other martyrs fell. We can recall,
for example,the braveChief Langalibalcleof Zululand--and
there were severalothers-who, together with his followers
resistedthe oppressors,fought them from the mountains
and was finally captured and detained on the now
notorious Robben Island as early as 1879. Many heroes
have since followed him to that island. These are the
unsungheroes,but their silent graves and the folklore of
the blacksof South Africa still bear testimony to the long
history of struggleby the people of South Africa. Their
memory and heroic deeds continue to inspire their descendantsto carry on the struggle where their predecessors
left off.
78. The history of South Africa is replete with examples
of repressiveactssuch asthose of last week. Such actshave
aroused the indigation of the international community
before. There wasgreat angerat the time of the Sharpeville
massacres
in 1960, aswe all recall. What wasthe outcome,
one may ask? Once the shooting had died down and the
peoplehad buried their dead, the world soon outgrew its
angerand businessresumedas usual. Moral condemnations
and short-lived indignation alone have not succeededin
ending uparthcid. On the contrary, South Africa has
bccomceven morebold and more repressiveasit recognjzes
that condemnation alone unaccompanied by concrete
action is ineffective. Let the indignation generatedby the
events of last week galvanize the international community
into taking such action aswill force South Africa to retreat
from its recklessbrinkmanship.

81. About one thing we arc certain. The will of a people
who love and cherishtheir freedomcannot be dampenedby
rcprcssion. Throughout history, man has at times faced
cannon and bayonets with bare handswhen a choicehas
had to be made between perpetual enslavement and
freedom. If the opposite were true, then after Sharpeville
there would not have been a Soweto; but there were many
more Sowctos than Sharpevilles.Thus the harsh action of
the apart/?&l State during the past week will succeedonly
in forcing the people of South Africa to deviseother more
effective methocls of resistance. In time, the people of
South Africa will rise again in protest against their
oppressors.
82. I should like to refer in passingto the timely warning
voiced by the representative of the PanAfricanist Congress
when he addressedthe Council the other day /2036th
meeting/. He pointed out that two weeksago the Vorster
rkgime falsely accused Botswana and Mozambique of
training South African freedom fighters and stated that
such utterances were familiar preludes to unprovoked
aggression.
83. Yes, indeed, South Africa hasalleged that Botswana
trains guerrillas for what they call “urban terrorism”.
These, as my Government has pointed out, are baseless
accusationsclearly designedto divert attention from South
Africa’s internal problems. Nevertheless,false as these
allegationsare, they must be taken seriously for, in their
desperation, the racist minority rigimes will alwaystry to
find scapegoats.The events of lastweek testify to this.
84. Indeed, within the past three weeks, on two separate
occasions, South African soldiershave illegally entered
Botswana territory, a very seriousmatter of which my
Government is at presentseized.This goesto show that the
rCgime is active beyond its borders and that, in its
desperation, it will stop at nothing. Aggressionssimilarto
those it launched against Angola and Zambia can be
repeatedelsewhere.
85. The ‘situation in southern Africa already threatens
international peace and security. With repressionat its
worst within South Arrica itself, with the critical situations
in Southern Rhodesiaand Namibia, situationswhich have
persisted for so long because South Africa is heavily
involved in these two Territories, there cannot be any
doubt that a racial war whose resultscan only be ghastly
can break out at any time now unlessthe international
community actsswiftly to avert it. The sacredduty to avert
this possiblecatastropherestswith this augustbody.

79. To thosewho entertained the hope that South Africa,
with time andmoral persuasion,would voluntarily abandon
apartheid, the events of last week should amply demonstrate that those hopes were misplaced. The lessor~sof
South African history demonstratethat suchhopeshave no
basiswhatsoever.

86. In arriving at a solution to this problem, the Security
Council should now act unanimously and resolutr.ly. The
9

solution should match the gravity
of the situation, with due
regard for the fact that llithcrto South Africa has ignored
all the resolutions of the United Nations and that the IIO~CS
of those who had cxpectecl, in the face of overwhelming
wichce to the contrary, that South Arrica would voluntarily abandon its qxwt/wid
system
have been dashed.TIE
Charter provides for peaceful but resolute solutions. The
credibility of the Council is at stake winless, in your
collcctivc wisdom, you emerge from this debate with
positive decisions which will help LIS to solve the problem of

87, South Africa cannot stand alone in this interdependent world, despiteits pronouncementsto the contrary. So
far, the rdgimchas disregardedUnited Nations decisionsin
the full knowledge that it could count on the support of
certain membersof the Security Council. WC urge all the
membersof this augustbody to refrain from any action
that will give comfort to the apartheid r6gimcat Pretoria.
Let your decision be worthy of the trust the people of
South Africa have in the United Nations.

apartl~cid.

c

I

10
--

Lit]10

in United

Nations,New

York

Price:

JUS.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

77-70001-October

1978-2,200
