United Nations

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6347th meeting
Tuesday, 29 June 2010, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Heller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Bühler
Ms. Marinčić
Mr. Böhlke
Ms. Guo Xiaomei
Ms. Tétreau
Mrs. Onanga
Mr. Wada
Mr. Assaf
Mr. Edokpa
Mr. Kuzmin
Mrs. Tansu-Seçkin
Mr. Muhumuza
Mr. Wilson
Ms. McCleod

Agenda
The promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security
Letter dated 18 June 2010 from the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/322)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-42851 (E)

*1042851*

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Denmark.
Mr. Staur (Denmark): Allow me first of all to
express our appreciation to Mexico for organizing this
important event, building upon the first thematic
debate on strengthening international law held under
the Danish presidency of the Council back in 2006 (see
S/PV.5474).
Allow me also to thank the Mexican presidency
for its excellent concept note (S/2010/322) which
addresses three important issues in building the rule of
law both nationally and internationally.
My first point is the key message which we are
re-emphasizing today, namely, the interlinkage between
international law and the maintenance of peace and
security. This is not an abstract notion, but a clear
expression of the Council's conviction and intent — the
conviction that a rules-based international community
promotes peace and stability, and the intent of the
Council to be guided by international law in all aspects
of its work on conflict resolution.
Denmark believes that the case for the
interrelationship between law and security is made
every day. Together with many other States and
organizations, we seek to do our part in promoting
international law. In the Copenhagen Process on the
Handling of Detainees, for instance, we seek to
elaborate principles to address the challenges in regard
to detention in armed conflict.
The second point of the concept note points to
another central issue for the strengthening of
international law — that international justice and the
peaceful settlement of disputes are key to
operationalizing the rule of law and to promoting peace
and security. The International Court of Justice has real
value in preventing the escalation of conflict, and
increasingly so. The settlement of what may seem a
trivial boundary issue may, in fact, have the effect of
solving a territorial dispute which, left open, could
devolve into serious tensions and conflict. Let me take
this opportunity to also congratulate the Court on its
election today of a new member, Ms. Xue Hanqin.
Other international courts are gaining prominence
as well. The central issue of fighting impunity remains
high on the agenda, and just a few weeks ago the first

2

International Criminal Court (ICC) Review Conference
was completed in Kampala. The Conference
resoundingly reaffirmed the ICC's position as the
universal permanent criminal court. The stocktaking
exercise at the Kampala Conference focused, among
other issues, on the question of complementarity —
how to ensure that national jurisdictions will be able to
deal with mass atrocities without the need for
international courts. This is a prime example of how
the rule of law, at both the national and international
levels, can be integrated and become mutually
reinforcing. The ICC is a court of last resort. No one
wants to disempower national jurisdictions or to
overburden the Court, and the joint effort, including of
donor countries, in building national capacity in this
area creates a win-win situation.
Significantly for this body, the Review
Conference also adopted a consensus decision on the
crime of aggression. This issue goes to the core of the
relationship between the Security Council and the ICC,
and Denmark wishes to express its appreciation for the
constructive role played, including by Security Council
members, in finding a compromise acceptable to all in
Kampala.
With respect to the third issue — that of sanctions
regimes — Denmark welcomes the important decisions
taken by the Security Council to strengthen the legal
framework for the sanctions regimes by enhancing the
transparency and fairness of listing and de-listing
procedures. We are especially pleased to see that the
establishment of an Ombudsperson institution under
the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime — an idea
originally promoted by Denmark in 2005 — has now
become a reality. We congratulate Ms. Kimberly Prost
on her appointment to this position. However, more
needs to be done.
Procedures for listing and de-listing need to be
kept under constant review, and Denmark will continue
to push for even more transparent and even fairer
procedures within the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
regime, as well as other United Nations sanctions
regimes. Denmark still firmly believes that only
through respect for human rights can the sanctions
regimes obtain the legitimacy necessary for their
effectiveness.
The changing security environment and the rise
of non-State actors in conflicts present the international
community with new threats and challenges, of which

10-42851

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

the piracy issue is but one. Denmark is honoured to be
chairing the working group on legal issues under the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. The
seriousness with which the Council addresses these
legal issues is another striking example of the rule of
law as one element in a multi-pronged effort, which
also includes political, development and security
initiatives.
We very much welcome the work being done to
integrate these elements into all aspects of the work of
the United Nations. The Secretary-General's 2004
report on the rule of law (S/2004/616) and his 2009
report on the responsibility to protect (A/63/677) stand
out for us as prime examples of how international law
may contribute to meeting the high aspirations of this
Organization. Denmark trusts and expects the Council
to do its part in strengthening international law, and we
will continue to give our full support to the work of the
Council in this respect.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Gürber (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Four years after the last debate on the subject before
the Council today (see S/PV. 5474), the time has come
to take stock of the situation. Protection, development
and the implementation of the rule of law lie at the
very heart of the mission of the United Nations. The
Security Council is confronted daily with the challenge
of reaffirming the primacy of the rule of law in its
activities and working methods in order to strengthen
the legitimacy of its decisions.
Although the subject of rule of law is very broad,
I would like to highlight four particular aspects. First is
the promotion of the rule of law in situations of
conflict. Respect for international humanitarian law is
a crucial aspect of the rule of law in conflict situations.
The Security Council has a special role to play in this
respect, and it should consistently insist on compliance
with international humanitarian law in the specific
situations with which it is seized. This is one of the
main conclusions of the events organized by
Switzerland in Geneva and New York to mark the
sixtieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions.
Questions concerning the application and monitoring
of international humanitarian law merit in-depth
discussion. Switzerland is willing to commit itself to
this course of action.

10-42851

We welcome the latest resolution of the Security
Council on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(resolution 1894 (2009), adopted in November 2009.
We would like to see the protection of civilians
adequately reflected in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
Secondly, in regard to combating impunity and
promoting the rule of law in post-conflict situations,
societies emerging from prolonged periods of conflict
inevitably assume a heavy legacy of massive human
rights violations while in a very precarious state.
Switzerland would like to see a process of strategic
reflection take place on the lessons learned on the
subject of combining the principles on countering
impunity developed by Louis Joinet with strategies for
strengthening the rule of law in societies in transition.
Thirdly, in the area of international justice and
the peaceful settlement of disputes, Switzerland gives
top priority to promoting and ensuring respect for
international law, a true pillar of a just and peaceful
international order. The International Court of Justice
is at the heart of an international order based on the
primacy of law. Switzerland encourages all States that
have not already done so to recognize the jurisdiction
of the Court as ipso facto compulsory.
The first Review Conference of the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court has just ended. The
inclusion in the Statute of the crime of aggression is a
historic event in the development of international law.
The fact that, 65 years after the Nuremberg and Tokyo
trials, an individual can now be convicted by a
permanent international court of the crime of
aggression is without doubt a symbolic step towards a
culture of peace.
Fourthly, in regard to the effectiveness and
credibility of the sanctions system, Switzerland wishes
to underscore the usefulness of the system of targeted
sanctions. We believe that it must be preserved and
consolidated and that the option of additional
improvements should be considered. The Security
Council has responded favourably to the requests of
some countries, including Switzerland, to establish
fairer procedures. In paragraph 20 of resolution 1904
(2009), the Council decided to establish the Office of
the Ombudsperson with responsibility for receiving
complaints from individuals affected by sanctions.
Switzerland welcomes the progress made in the
sanctions regime in this area. As a result, the ability to

3

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

take into account the rights of individuals at the
international level has been improved and the
legitimacy of the sanctions system strengthened.
Switzerland will follow the implementation of the
resolution closely.
Finally, we reaffirm our support for the Rule of
Law Coordination and Resource Group, chaired by the
Deputy Secretary-General and supported by the Rule of
Law Unit.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Finland.
Mr. Viinanen (Finland): At the outset, let me
congratulate Mexico on taking up the topic of
strengthening the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Enhancing the rule of
law is a pertinent part of the work of the Security
Council in several ways. Injustice and a weak rule of
law can be consequences of conflict, but they are also
often underlying reasons why conflicts persist or break
out in the first place. Sustainable peace is built on a
foundation of justice and the strong rule of law. We are
therefore encouraged to see that the Security Council is
discussing the Secretary-General’s report of December
2006 (S/2006/980). This topic should remain high on
the Council’s agenda.

violence or financed it for their own benefit. Reaching
a peace agreement is the first step towards ending the
violence. The next steps towards a positive, sustainable
peace cannot be taken without a holistic approach, and
a much more inclusive group of people: women who
sustained communities while men were fighting,
political parties that did not engage in violence but
have a legitimate interest in how the country should be
run, those who had to flee, and those who were victims
of violence. There must be inclusive ownership of a
peace agreement and reconstruction plans if the peace
is to stick and not unfold into a new conflict.
Justice can also take many different forms, but it
is ultimately about inclusion. Impunity violates
fundamental notions of justice, which is why it is
important to see justice taking place in the form of a
trial and sentences being handed down. In some cases,
reparations may even be awarded.

I would also like to thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Migiro and Under-Secretary-General O’Brien
for their contributions to our debate today. Finland, of
course, fully aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union to be made shortly.

Here, I would like to emphasize the importance
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in the
evolution of international criminal justice. In Finland’s
view, the ICC and the Rome Statute system clearly
demonstrate that impunity for the most serious crimes
is no longer an acceptable option. We must also
remember that the ICC is a court of last resort. The
system created through the Rome Statute is based on
complementarity.
The
States
have
primary
responsibility to investigate and prosecute nationally
the most serious crimes of international concern. That
is why the system has been instrumental in
strengthening the rule of law at the national level.

The concept paper (S/2010/322) you have
provided, Mr. President, outlines a wide range of issues
for discussion today. I would like to concentrate my
remarks on two aspects that we feel are particularly
central to fostering the rule of law: the relationship
between justice and sustainable peace, and
strengthening the rule of law at the national level. It
has become almost a slogan to say that there is no
sustainable peace without justice. I would like to break
this argument into two parts and ask: What makes
peace sustainable, and what do we mean by justice in
the aftermath of the breakdown of the rule of law
during a conflict?

However, as Judge Patrick Robinson, President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, stated recently to the Council (see
S/PV.6342), in order to contribute to lasting peace,
justice must be not only retributive, but also
restorative. For victims of a conflict or long-lasting
social exclusion, it can be more important to have the
opportunity to tell their story on an equal footing with
other members of society or to hear official recognition
of wrongs committed. An essential element of
restorative justice is that the voices of the victims and
their communities are heard. We must not overlook
traditional dispute resolution mechanisms.

In trying to bring a conflict to an end, the parties
around the table are traditionally those who also have
the means to destroy a peace agreement — the warring
parties, those who carried out or commanded armed

Most important for the future of a society
recovering from war, the ground rules that broke down
during the war must be re-established: equal rights for
all citizens, mechanisms for protecting and promoting

4

10-42851

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

those rights and for settling different interests by
peaceful means. This brings me to my second point,
that strengthening the rule of law at the national level
is the most effective way to bring about a more just
society and to prevent a relapse into conflict.
Reform of the rule of law and security institutions
is essential to rebuilding the people’s trust in
Government. This has to start even before a conflict
ends. The rule of law, as narrowly defined, has to be
seen as encompassing every link in the chain, from
police to justice institutions to the enforcement of
sentences. Finland has been a strong advocate of
strengthening United Nations resources for supporting
national rule of law authorities in the immediate
aftermath of a conflict, as well as in the later stages of
development.
We are pleased that the Standing Police Capacity
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations is now
complemented
with
justice
and
corrections
professionals who are ready to deploy at short notice.
We also hope that the rule of law team foreseen in
resolution 1888 (2009), which is aimed at helping
national authorities to respond to acute situations of
sexual violence, will shortly become operational.
Finland implements that comprehensive approach
in its own crisis management and development
activities. In Afghanistan, for example, Finland
actively participates in the work of the European Union
Police Mission and has been keen to ensure that gender
aspects and wider human rights concerns are fully
taken into account. In order to complement the work
undertaken by the Mission, Finland has a bilateral
programme aimed at strengthening cooperation
between Afghan police and prosecutors.
As I noted in the beginning, the concept paper
covered a wide range of issues. We would need many
debates of this kind to discuss all of them in detail. For
example, the use of targeted sanctions by the Security
Council raises important questions concerning
guarantees of due process and the rule of law. Finland
welcomes the progress achieved in this area, in
particular resolution 1904 (2009) and the recent
appointment of Ms. Kimberly Prost as Ombudsperson
of the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee. We
call upon the Security Council to continue its work in
that regard.
Finally, we have come a long way in
strengthening the rule of law. The Security Council has

10-42851

been instrumental in the fight against impunity and has
taken remarkable steps in ensuring that due process
guarantees are also in place in its own functioning. We
should, however, tirelessly look at new ways to
integrate the wider notion of the rule of law into the
Security Council's agenda and in its daily decisions in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
In that regard, we welcome the follow-up report
on the rule of law and transitional justice requested in
the draft presidential statement to be adopted today. We
hope that the report would also assess the impact that
the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group has
had.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Nesi (Italy): Today's debate represents an
important occasion to discuss a few points that may be
extremely relevant for the future development of
United Nations action in the area of promoting and
strengthening the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security, and for international
law more broadly.
The concept paper prepared by the presidency
(S/2010/322), for which Italy thanks the delegation of
Mexico, is extremely solid and focused and invites us
to concentrate on three main issues. As Italy associates
itself with the statement that will be delivered by the
representative of the European Union, I will limit
myself to a few remarks concerning one of the three
issues raised in the concept paper, namely, the
promotion of the rule of law in conflict and postconflict situations.
As far as this issue is concerned, Italy would like
to emphasize the need for a concerted effort by all
relevant actors. We must also acknowledge that not all
situations necessarily require the same treatment, and
attention must be focused on the specificities of each
and every situation.
At the same time, we all agree on the importance
of promoting and strengthening the rule of law in the
area of security, especially in conflict and post-conflict
situations. That is the reason that Italy has been so
committed to assisting States afflicted by armed
conflicts to build up their own rule-of-law capacities.
In doing so, we believe that the international
community should spare no effort in helping them to
re-establish the rule of law in all of its aspects.

5

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

The United Nations and its specialized agencies
have in the past played — and will continue to play in
the future — a crucial role in this area. Their expertise,
neutrality and recognized capacity to have an impact
on rebuilding mutual trust, which is indeed a
prerequisite for the rule of law, are unquestionable.
Italy therefore welcomes the important initiative
of the Secretariat, which was recently approved by the
General Assembly, to strengthen the Standing Police
Capacity and to set up the new justice and corrections
standing capacity at the United Nations Logistics Base
in Brindisi. Those meaningful steps are aimed at
guaranteeing the timely deployment, in the framework
of peacekeeping operations, of qualified personnel
specialized in rule-of-law activities. Through those
means, the United Nations will be able to bridge the
gap, from the initial stages of peacekeeping operations,
between blue helmets and peacebuilders.
However, States and other international
organizations also actively contribute to this end
through the coordinated promotion of capacity building
and initiatives aimed at strengthening the backbone of
States' institutions. In that regard, we commend the
role played by the European Union and the important
work done by other international organizations such as
the International Development Law Organization. Over
the past decade, Italy has actively contributed to
programmes
concerning
border
controls,
the
improvement of legislative and judicial capacities, the
drafting of criminal codes in post-conflict areas and the
training of judicial and police personnel.
With regard to the latter, we would like to recall
the activities of the Center of Excellence for Stability
Police Units (COESPU). In four years, over 2,000
peacekeepers of different nationalities, many from
Africa, have been hosted by COESPU for training
through an integrated approach that encompasses the
rule of law as an essential element in peacekeepers'
mandates.
Another aspect of promoting the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict situations is that of not
underestimating the issue of impunity. Over the past 20
years, the international community has resorted to a
variety of instruments and institutional mechanisms to
address this issue and to re-establish the rule of law in
war-torn countries.
In that respect, Italy believes that the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and the Rome

6

Statute system are powerful instruments at the disposal
of the international community to end impunity for the
most heinous crimes of international concern. The
relationship between the ICC and the Security Council
is extremely important to reaffirming the rule of law
and can help to reinforce the stability of international
peace and security. The Council has already proven
that a positive relationship with the Court can indeed
be established, although some progress must be made
in this area.
The Rome Statute system is much more than the
mere setting up of a court of last resort. It lays down
general principles to be respected by all States and
individuals and must be implemented by the Security
Council as part of its mandate to ensure the
maintenance or restoration of peace and security.
Today, the ICC has a pivotal role to play in this area.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Your delegation,
Mr. President, is one of the champions of the
promotion of the rule of law in the United Nations. We
warmly welcome your initiative to hold an open debate
on this topic as a good opportunity to take stock of past
achievements and to look at the challenges ahead. We
will do so on the basis of the comments we made at the
debate in 2006 and in the light of the important
developments that have taken place since.
Our principled approach to the issue at hand has
not changed. We remain convinced that the best way
for the Security Council to promote international law
and the rule of law is to lead by example. We challenge
the view — and, to some extent, the conventional
wisdom — that regards the Council as a purely
political body. Its authority is based on the world's
supreme international treaty, the United Nations
Charter. The Council is legally bound by the applicable
rules of the Charter and of international law. Those
rules leave it much room to take decisions based on
political, legal and other considerations — but that
room is not without limits. It is therefore both a legal
necessity and a wise policy choice for the Council to
respect and promote international law and the rule of
law.
The Council must respect human rights, in
particular when taking action with direct impact on the
rights of individuals. In 2006, our statement focused
strongly on the need to improve sanctions procedures.

10-42851

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

We commend the Council for the tremendous progress
that it has made in that regard by reforming the
sanctions regime against the Taliban and Al-Qaida
through the adoption of resolution 1904 (2009), and we
welcome the appointment of Judge Kimberly Prost as
the first Ombudsperson. The approach taken in that
resolution may not be perfect and may not take
relevant standards of due process to their ultimate
consequence, but it is an expression of the political
will within the Council to address the legitimate
criticisms that had long been expressed against the old
system. We hope that, on the basis of that experience,
discussions on the scope of the Council’s human rights
obligations will reach new levels.
Furthermore, the Security Council must remain
vigilant in ensuring that its work remains within the
legal bounds and the spirit of its constitution, that is,
the Charter. Council decisions that are to be
implemented by Member States, in accordance with
Article 25 of the Charter, must have a clear legal
foundation. In particular, they must take into account
the balance of power among the main organs. The
Security Council should be particularly sensitive to the
General Assembly’s prerogatives as the prime
legislative organ and to the need to enhance the
perceived legitimacy of its decisions through greater
inclusion and transparency. In that connection, we
recall the many contributions made by the group of
five small States in that respect.
Cooperation with courts and tribunals, in
particular the International Criminal Court (ICC),
remains an essential tool for the Security Council in
the promotion of the rule of law. Since 2006, the
Council has further acknowledged that fact by
establishing the Special Tribunal for Lebanon and,
more recently, by moving to address the problem of
impunity for the universal crime of piracy. The past
years have also seen a further consolidation and
strengthening of the work of the International Criminal
Court. In 2006, we stated that Council referrals to the
ICC must be accompanied by sustained political
support throughout all phases of the judicial
proceedings. Today, the need for such follow-up is
more obvious than ever, as evidenced by the Court’s
recent decision on the lack of cooperation in the
situation in Darfur. The decision comes after five years
of resource-intensive judicial work on that situation
and requires a response from this Council.

10-42851

A further relevant development was the historic
decision taken by the States Parties to the ICC at the
Review Conference in Kampala. By consensus, the
Conference adopted a definition of the crime of
aggression for the purpose of the Rome Statute, as well
as the conditions under which, no earlier than 2017, the
Court may exercise jurisdiction over that crime. Once
formally activated, the Court’s jurisdiction over the
crime of aggression will give the Council a new policy
option to address the most serious forms of the illegal
use of force in contravention of the United Nations
Charter. We are encouraged to see that the draft
presidential statement that will be the outcome of this
debate contains a reference to the International
Criminal Court.
During the past four years, the Council’s
commitment to promoting both peace and justice in
conflict and post-conflict situations has received
significant new institutional support within the United
Nations. The establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Rule of Law Coordination and
Resource Group and the strengthening of the
Secretariat’s mediation capacities have greatly
contributed to a more holistic approach in that regard.
The Security Council should continue to support
efforts to strengthen domestic judicial capacities, in
particular by devising appropriate mandates and
structures for missions on the ground. The ICC Review
Conference in Kampala strongly underlined the need to
enhance the capacity of national jurisdictions to
prosecute perpetrators of the most serious international
crimes, pursuant to the principle of complementarity.
Nevertheless, the Council’s commitment to
pursuing both peace and justice has also been tested in
recent years. Such developments show that the
paradigm shift towards a positive relationship between
peace and justice has yet to take full effect and requires
sustained political support. Legally, permanent
amnesties for genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes are no longer viable. Effectively, no such
promise of amnesty can be made. Both the Security
Council and the Secretary-General, in their activities
aimed at preventing and ending conflicts, should
continue to strengthen the implementation of that
important principle. In particular, that will require a
stronger engagement of mediators and other conflict
intermediaries with issues of justice.
The topic of today’s debate is extremely rich and
complex and can hardly be appropriately addressed in a

7

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

short statement. We hope that the Council’s work on
this agenda item will continue and that it will be taken
up in a regular manner, preferably at least once a year,
on the basis of a new report of the Secretary-General
that could be submitted to both the Council and the
General Assembly at its next session.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia very much
welcomes this debate on the Council’s role in
promoting and strengthening the rule of law, and I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for your
leadership in bringing it before us.
It is, of course, self-evident that the absence of
the rule of law can be a driver of conflict. Peace is
threatened by corruption, the abuse of power,
discrimination and exclusion. Injustice obviously can
drive people to take up arms. It is therefore important,
indeed expected, that the Council periodically reflect
on its performance in the promotion and strengthening
of the rule of law as a central component of its mandate
to prevent conflict and maintain peace and security.
The Security Council clearly has a range of
powerful tools at its disposal to promote and strengthen
the rule of law, from the imposition of sanctions to the
mandating of United Nations missions with rule of law
tasks and the use of judicial mechanisms to combat
impunity. In utilizing those tools, it is again obvious
that the Council itself must demonstrate respect for the
rule of law. Consistent with the Secretary-General’s
exhortation that the United Nations as a whole must be
the model of the rule of law if it is to be effective in
promoting it, axiomatically the Council is most
legitimate and most effective when it too, of course,
submits itself to the rule of law.
There are three areas on which I would like to
focus my remarks, guided by the very helpful concept
note that Mexico has prepared (S/2010/322).
The first is the issue of targeted sanctions.
Member States have a legal obligation under the
Charter to accept and enforce sanction measures
created by the Council, pursuant to Chapter VII.
Australia takes that obligation very seriously. However,
as we have seen in recent years, the legitimacy and
effectiveness of such measures depend in large part on
perceptions of procedural fairness.

8

As such, we welcome the major improvements
that have progressively been introduced in that regard,
first in relation to the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
regime through resolutions 1822 (2008) and 1904
(2009). In particular, we welcome the appointment of
Judge Kimberly Prost of Canada as the Ombudsperson
for the Al-Qaida and Taliban regime. The creation of
that function, the ongoing review of the listings and the
publication of narrative summaries are vital steps in
improving the listing and de-listing procedures and the
legitimacy and overall effectiveness of the sanctions
measures.
Secondly,
Security
Council
peacekeeping
mandates continue to develop in recognition of the
importance of the rule of law. Rule of law components
are now a familiar aspect of peacekeeping operations,
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo to Haiti,
from Liberia to Timor Leste. Such rule of law tasks are
an illustration of the early peacebuilding activities that
are increasingly being undertaken within peacekeeping
missions and must progressively become a much more
decisive part of them. That is in recognition of the fact
that a sustainable peace must be firmly grounded in
respect for the rule of law.
The challenge, however, is of course to ensure
that effective implementation of such mandated tasks
actually happens on the ground. We understand that
work is under way within the Secretariat, in the context
of implementing the Secretary-General’s 2009 report
on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict (S/2009/304), to clarify the roles and
responsibilities of the various United Nations actors in
the rule of law area. This is clearly an important step
towards improving coherence and predictability in the
delivery of such mandates, and we would very much
encourage the very early completion of that work.
Finally, Australia is firmly committed to the need
to end impunity for the most serious crimes, and is a
strong supporter of the central role of the International
Criminal Court in this regard. The relationship between
the Court and the Council clearly has the potential to
develop into a very powerful and mutually supportive
alliance for the maintenance of international peace and
security.
Where the Security Council refers a situation to
the Court, it is beholden on the Council to use the tools
at its disposal under Chapters VI, VII and VIII of the
Charter to encourage, cajole and, if necessary, find a

10-42851

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

way to compel Member States to cooperate with the
Court. This is obviously very much a current challenge
for the Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Shin Boonam (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I should like to thank the President of the
Security Council, Ambassador Claude Heller, for
having organized this open debate on the promotion
and strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance
of international peace and security. The Security
Council has held a number of thematic debates, most
recently in June 2006, on the important issue of the
rule of law and the maintenance of international peace
and security. I believe that it is timely for the Security
Council to return to this issue, not only in order to take
stock of what has been achieved over the past four
years, but also in order to explore the further steps that
need to be taken in this area.
The Republic of Korea remains steadfast in its
commitment to promoting the rule of law as an
indispensable element of lasting peace and prosperity.
The rule of law is indeed a critical component in our
endeavours to build a durable system for peace and
prosperity, especially in conflict and post-conflict
societies.
Peace and prosperity cannot be secured if we fail
to restore confidence in the rule of law among
populations in conflict-torn societies. In this way, we
can see that rule of law programmes are inextricably
linked to the broader peacebuilding agenda. As such, I
believe that the activities of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Peacebuilding Fund are critical to
addressing the rule of law, which has become a
frequent focus of the Security Council.
The United Nations has been playing a central
role in promoting the rule of law at the national and
international levels. In the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2006/28) issued after the last open debate on
this issue in 2006 (see S/PV.5474), the Security
Council expressed its support for the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal to establish a rule of law unit within
the Secretariat. The Unit was established in the
Executive Office of the Secretary-General in 2007 to
support the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource
Group, under the leadership of the Deputy SecretaryGeneral. Furthermore, the Group adopted and
implemented a joint strategic plan for the period 2009-

10-42851

2011 in order to improve the coordination and
coherence of rule of law activities.
Last year, the Secretary-General presented his
first annual report on United Nations efforts to
strengthen engagement on the rule of law at the
national and international levels (A/64/298). My
Government welcomes all of these achievements of the
United Nations and believes that the Security Council
can further advance global efforts to strengthen the
coordination and coherence of rule of law activities
among various actors by supporting the Group and the
Unit.
My Government is deeply committed to the
peaceful settlement of disputes, as enshrined in Article
33 of the Charter of the United Nations, and we believe
that the Security Council must continue its endeavours
to help parties to resolve disputes in line with Chapter
VI of the Charter.
My Government fully supports international
efforts to end impunity and to bring to justice those
responsible for genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. Those crimes should not go
unpunished. We would like to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation of the efforts made by the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and other
international criminal tribunals, especially the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR). My Government was pleased not
only to observe the ICC’s first trial in 2009 against a
former Congolese rebel leader, but also to witness the
momentous agreement on the crime of aggression at
the Kampala Review Conference last month. We
recognize the many successes of the ICTY and ICTR to
date as significant contributions to the maintenance and
restoration of international peace and security, and
hope for smooth transitions to their residual
mechanisms. All of these achievements ensure that
justice and peace are complementary.
My Government wishes to reiterate its belief that
the Security Council sanctions regimes are important
tools for maintaining and restoring international peace
and security. Indeed, major improvements have been
made since 2006 in order to address several
fundamental concerns over the regimes in connection
with the rule of law. We would like the Security
Council to continue its efforts to improve the present

9

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

sanctions regimes so that the actual implementation of
sanctions can be more effective.
I believe that today’s open debate on the
promotion of rule of law will be very useful in helping
the Security Council to better fulfil its primary
responsibility.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to express my gratitude to your delegation,
Sir, for having convened this open debate and for the
concept paper drawn up by the Mexican Mission to
facilitate this debate (S/2010/322). My country attaches
the greatest importance to strengthening the rule of law
as a basic requirement for achieving peace and
security, both within States and at the international
level. The latter includes the actions of the Security
Council.
The concept paper identifies three aspects of
strengthening the rule of law around which it proposes
an exercise to evaluate the situation since the open
debate held by the Security Council in 2006: the
promotion of the rule of law in conflict and postconflict situations, international justice and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, and the efficiency and
credibility of sanctions regimes.
With regard to conflict and post-conflict
situations, my country believes that, when establishing
mandates, we must first address with due priority the
capacity of conflict-affected societies to ensure the rule
of law, in particular through the strengthening of
national judicial and police systems. This objective is
directly related to the work of the Security Council and
has been increasingly integrated in the mandates
approved by this body.
At the same time, with regard to situations of
armed conflict, respect for international humanitarian
law is essential to ensuring the protection of civilians
by the parties to the conflict and by United Nations
forces. Parties to a conflict are subject to the basic rule,
established long before the founding of this
Organization, that civilians must be protected from the
effects of armed conflict. My country is firmly of the
view that provisions for the protection of civilians must
be included in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

10

At the same time, it is of vital importance to
ensure that the perpetrators of serious human rights
violations face justice. Fortunately, the international
community has overcome the justice-versus-peace
paradigm in conflict and post-conflict situations, by
which political agreements used to set aside the pursuit
of justice in favour of de jure or de facto amnesties.
The current paradigm is one in which peace and justice
are not only compatible but also complementary
objectives.
In that regard, I would like to underscore the
conclusions of the exercise on stocktaking of
international criminal justice, which was undertaken in
the framework of the Review Conference of the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court that took
place in Kampala, Uganda, less than a month ago. The
main conclusion of the segment on peace and justice
was that even though in practice tensions arise between
peace and justice, there is now a positive relationship
between them. That is to say, peace efforts are not
feasible without duly incorporating the need for
ensuring justice in cases of human rights violations.
With regard to international justice and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, I would like to
emphasize that this is an issue where it is essential that
the role of the General Assembly also be taken into
account. Every year, the General Assembly addresses
the rule of law within the framework of the Sixth
Committee. At its sixty-fourth session, the General
Assembly considered an agenda item entitled “The rule
of law at the national and international levels”, which
is an issue that is directly related to international
justice and the peaceful settlement of disputes. The
peaceful settlement of disputes is one of the pillars of
today’s international community. In the outline
provided by the Charter, the International Court of
Justice plays a central role — inherited from the
Permanent Court of International Justice — as the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations.
But in the settlement of international disputes
there are also other methods, to which the Charter also
refers. In that regard, Argentina believes it relevant to
highlight the need for parties to a dispute to comply in
good faith with calls for negotiation made with a view
to peaceful resolution by the organs of the
Organization, including, of course, by the General
Assembly. Among the means at the disposal of the
Organization, we must also highlight the good offices
role that the organs of the Organization can request —

10-42851

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

and in fact do recommend — the Secretary-General to
undertake. The political will and good faith of the
parties to a dispute are also required for the successful
fulfilment of a good-offices mission of the SecretaryGeneral, and therefore also for success in resolving a
dispute.
In addition to the jurisdiction of the International
Court of Justice in contentious cases, I would also like
to highlight the Court’s consultative jurisdiction, as
done by the paper prepared by the delegation of
Mexico, which can be activated by the organs of the
United Nations.
In addition to the Court, we should also highlight
the role of other tribunals specialized in specific fields
of international law. Among those, my country would
like to point to the International Tribunal for the Law
of the Sea, which is a judicial body established by the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea as
part of its specific regime for the settlement of
controversies. My country is one of the 29 parties to
the Convention that has accepted the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal. I would also like to highlight the fundamental
role of the International Law Commission in the
codification
and
continuing
development
of
international law.
With regard to combating impunity, the
international community is experiencing remarkable
evolution in international criminal justice. That
process, which has its roots in Nuremberg and Tokyo,
moved forward with the establishment of the ad hoc
Tribunals for Rwanda and the Former Yugoslavia,
which reflected the Security Council’s clear
recognition of the close link between peace and justice.
Since the adoption of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, in 1998, the fight against
impunity has clearly evolved towards a permanent
system of international criminal justice centred on the
Court.
The Court established by the Rome Statute is one
of the most meaningful achievements of the
multilateral system. In 1998, it was not expected that
the Statute would enter into force so soon or, much
less, that the Court would be playing such a central
role in the fight against impunity little more than 10
years following the adoption of the Statute. To date,
there are 111 States parties to the Rome Statute, with
two trials before the Court and a third to begin soon.
Five investigations are currently under way, three of

10-42851

which were referred to the Court by States parties. One
situation was referred to the Court by the Security
Council, in 2005.
In addition, the recently concluded Rome Statute
Review Conference succeeded in fulfilling a mandate
pending since 1998, namely, adopting a definition of
the crime of aggression and the conditions under which
the Court shall exercise its jurisdiction with regard to
that crime. With regard to the exercise of jurisdiction, a
formula was developed that respects both the role of
the Security Council and the independence of the
Court, in a delicate balance that made consensus
possible. That jurisdiction will have to be activated by
States parties in 2017.
I would like to take this opportunity to call on
States that have not yet signed or ratified the Rome
Statute to ratify or to accede to it as soon as possible,
in order to ensure the complete universality of the
International Criminal Court, and therefore of the
international criminal justice system established by the
Rome Statute. We would also like to reiterate our call
to the Government of the Sudan to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court. We encourage the
Council to continue to cooperate with the Court with a
view to ending impunity.
The issue of the efficiency and credibility of
sanctions regimes has been dealt with not only by the
Security Council but also by the Special Committee on
the Charter of the United Nations and through the work
of the Organization in the framework of the General
Assembly. Continued efforts for ensuring respect for
the rule of law, in particular human rights law, are also
needed with regard to the application of sanctions in
the fight against terrorism.
To that end, it is of paramount importance that
sanctions are clear, precise and specifically directed,
and that due process is ensured for the credibility of
sanctions and for the legitimacy of their application in
domestic law. In that regard, my country has already
highlighted in the Council the positive step represented
by the adoption of resolution 1904 (2009), last
December. The establishment of an Ombudsperson for
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) is a step in the right direction in ensuring that
sanctions regimes conform to the minimum
requirements of due process.
International peace and security are essential for
the international community. Legitimacy, democracy

11

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

and justice are the values that must guide the action of
the Security Council in addressing conflict and postconflict situations, so as to build and consolidate
lasting peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Ms. Juul (Norway): An international order based
on the rule of law is a prerequisite for peaceful
coexistence and cooperation among States. Norway
therefore warmly welcomes the initiative by the
Mexican presidency to organize today’s open debate.
We also thank the presidency for preparing the
discussion paper (S/2010/322). The Security Council
indeed has a particular role to play in promoting
international law, both with regard to its own
adherence to the rule of law in its daily work and to
expanding the notion of adherence to the rule of law in
general.
The
many
violations
of
international
humanitarian law over the past few years are of grave
concern to us. The lack of protection for civilians in
conflict, the increased targeting of civilians and the use
of sexual violence as a method of warfare are just a
few examples of the serious challenges we face. In
order to provide adequate protection for civilians
affected by armed conflicts, it is necessary to have an
open and frank discussion on the practical application
of international humanitarian law. This discussion
should be based on the experience in the field in recent
conflicts. It is Norway’s firm belief that allegations of
serious violations of international humanitarian law
should always be investigated in a thorough and
independent manner to determine whether there have
been any grave breaches.
Norway welcomes the Security Council’s
achievements in developing an increasingly strong
protection framework for children in armed conflict, in
particular through its latest resolution on this issue,
namely, resolution 1882 (2009). Such a framework is
key to the protection of civilians and to the promotion
and strengthening of the rule of law in conflict
situations. Still, the lack of decisive action against
persistent perpetrators and of accountability measures
to fight impunity continue to limit the effectiveness of
the work of the United Nations in this area.
Norway is encouraged by the Security Council
statement in which it expressed its readiness to impose
targeted measures against persistent violators of

12

international law who recruit, sexually abuse, maim or
kill children in war. We support the proposals of the
Secretary-General to include child recruitment and the
use of children in war as part of the mandates of all
sanctions committees, to improve the flow of
information between the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict and the sanctions committees, and
to invite the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Children and Armed Conflict to regularly
brief sanctions committees.
Furthermore, we would like to acknowledge the
crucial contributions of international criminal tribunals
and courts in upholding justice and the rule of law.
Through these institutions, both the United Nations and
the international community have proven their ability
to rise to the occasion and prevent impunity in the face
of mass atrocities. In that regard, we would like to
draw attention to the International Criminal Court and
the outstanding arrest warrants it has issued in
connection with the Sudan. We encourage the Security
Council to follow up on the recommendations by the
Prosecutor in order to ensure compliance with
resolution 1593 (2005).
International criminal tribunals, courts and
independent investigations do not substitute, but rather
complement, the building of well-functioning domestic
justice systems. To prevent a fragile peace from
relapsing into conflict, it is important to build or
reconstruct the security sector in the aftermath of
conflict. Therefore, the Security Council rightly
emphasizes rule of law mandates in country situations
on its agenda, as do the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Peacebuilding Fund in their engagement in postconflict societies.
Impunity is particularly prevalent when women’s
rights are violated in armed conflicts. During conflicts
and in their aftermath, we must ask the crucial
questions: Security for whom? And justice for whom?
Abuses against women tend to continue unchecked
when they are not properly dealt with during peace
negotiations and in post-conflict situations. We must
continue to enhance women’s opportunities to
participate actively in peace processes and in
peacebuilding.
To enable the United Nations to support the
re-establishment of national rule of law and accountable
and effective security institutions, Norway strongly
supports the Office of Rule of Law and Security

10-42851

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

Institutions in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Global Rule of Law Programme at
the United Nations Development Programme.
We see an obvious need for effective mechanisms
for peaceful conflict resolution between States. The
International Court of Justice (ICJ) provides an
underused opportunity in that regard. Norway has
accepted the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court. We
invite all States that have not yet done so to do the
same. It is encouraging that the ICJ is now considering
a larger number of cases, on a broad range of aspects of
public international law. The Security Council should
strive to help the parties to a dispute to refer their
disputes to the ICJ so that this trend towards greater
utilization of the Court continues.
It is vital that the Security Council itself set an
example by adhering to its own legal foundations —
the Charter and international law. In particular, it
should respect and promote the rights of individuals
and basic guarantees of due process. To that end,
Norway welcomes the progress achieved in enhancing
the transparency and fairness of listing and de-listing
procedures of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999). Resolution 1822 (2008)
introduced the obligation to review all the names on
the list and to add narrative summaries of reasons for
their listing by the end of this month. In addition,
resolution 1904 (2009) established the Office of the
Ombudsperson.
While we welcome that progress, it is of
paramount importance that the procedures for listing
and de-listing be kept under constant review and that
the Council remain open to further procedural
improvements in the regime, such as the establishment
of an independent review panel. First and foremost, we
now look forward to the newly appointed
Ombudsperson taking up her functions. We will follow
her work with great interest.

the rule of law in the maintenance of international
peace and security. In spite of new mechanisms at the
United Nations and the wealth of experience and
lessons learned built up in recent years, the rule of law
continues to be at risk from impunity and evolving
threats and challenges. Our interest in participating in
today’s debate is not only rooted in our commitment to
the universal values of the United Nations Charter, but
also stems from the current state of affairs in
Guatemala.
The fight against impunity, the strengthening of
the rule of law and the protection and full respect for
human rights, both within our country and at the
international level, are central to our Government’s
policies. We acknowledge that there remain serious
weaknesses in all of those aspects within our own
society, which are in part due to the legacy of an
internal conflict that lasted four decades. The
significant progress achieved in implementing the
commitments flowing from our peace agreements has
been partially compromised by a culture of impunity
that is made worse by an expansion in the activities of
organized crime cartels.
In that connection, we have taken very concrete
steps to address shortfalls and strengthen our own
institutional democracy. The International Commission
against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG), which has
been in operation since 2007, is the most important
tool in that regard. We have benefited enormously from
that independent body, which was the outcome of an
agreement between the Government and the United
Nations and which enjoys the firm support of both the
Government and civil society. We are now beginning to
see the first fruits of its efforts to combat impunity. In
that connection, allow me to highlight some of the
important aspects of the work of the Commission.

Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, Mr. President, allow me to thank you and
your country for organizing this open thematic debate,
as well as for the concept paper circulated with your
letter dated 18 June 2010 (S/2010/322).

First, we cannot overstate the significance of new
approaches and best practices for enhanced capacity
building in the justice and rule of law sectors. This
innovative mechanism is based on a treaty and operates
on the ground with mixed functions and through a
partnership with the Office of the Public Prosecutor in
prosecuting high-impact cases. What the launching of
CICIG has revealed is that the way forward is not to
build international substitutes for national structures,
but to help build domestic capacities.

We welcome the continued willingness of the
Council to address the promotion and strengthening of

Secondly, CICIG operates within a very
precarious environment that is marked by extreme

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Guatemala.

10-42851

13

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

poverty and violence. Peace and stability will only
prevail if the population understands that highly
politically charged issues can be resolved fairly and
legitimately. That requires credible institutions and
verification processes to ensure minimum standards of
integrity in public services. Verification processes in
Guatemala now play a crucial role in transforming
institutions that during the conflict were involved in
serious abuses against public human rights agencies
but are now beginning to enjoy public confidence.
Thirdly, promoting and strengthening the rule of
law requires a measure of stability, genuine
governmental authority and political will. But that is
only possible within properly resourced and audited
public institutions. In that regard, ending impunity first
requires a duty to respect as well as to guarantee the
rule of law.
In considering the subject of this debate, we note
that the rule of law has now been mainstreamed into
the core activities of the United Nations. Furthermore,
it has become institutionalized in the latest structure,
namely, the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource
Group, which is backed by the Rule of Law Unit.
Although that allows for better coordination and
coherence within the United Nations system, we must
also respect the purview and mandate of each player in
the system responsible for rule-of-law activities.
Neither the Group nor the Unit has addressed the need
to avoid duplication and overlapping of functions.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
combating impunity is difficult and that strengthening
the rule of law requires the commitment of all
concerned. It is for that reason that we value
international cooperation and alliances with relevant
actors of the United Nations and the donor community
to promote and strengthen the rule of law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Rodríguez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to commend the timely initiative of
the Mexican presidency to convene an open debate of
the Security Council on justice and the rule of law.
Four years have passed since the last debate was
held on this important topic. In the light of
developments surrounding various interlinked issues in
that regard, it is necessary to take stock in order to
support and focus the work of various United Nations

14

bodies. Strengthening the rule of law is a priority for
the United Nations and its Member States. The 2005
World Summit Outcome (see General Assembly
resolution 60/1) recognized the need for universal
adherence to the rule of law and its enforcement at the
national and international levels as an indispensable
basis for a more peaceful, prosperous and just world.
As we can see from the topics proposed in the
concept paper (S/2010/322), the work to be done in the
area of the rule of law is cross-cutting in nature, both
when it comes to the issues involved and as it pertains
to developing that work at the institutional level in the
United Nations. With regard to the latter, there is a
need for the greatest coordination possible among the
various bodies that make up the Rule of Law
Coordination and Resource Group.
With regard to the promotion of the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict situations, it should be
emphasized that, in accordance with Article 24 of the
Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council has
the primary, but not the sole, responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. Peru
believes that efforts should be focused on prevention in
order to avoid conflict situations. To that end, we
should continue to promote the implementation of the
concept of the responsibility to protect, especially
when it comes to the first two pillars set out in the
report of the Secretary-General contained in document
A/63/677.
Peru is a member of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the body mandated to advise the Security
Council and the General Assembly on peacebuilding in
post-conflict States. Strengthening the rule of law is
crucial to the work of the Commission — especially in
the areas of security, governance, development and
justice — so as to put in place a successful process
based on national ownership. In that regard, efforts
aimed at strengthening the rule of law should be a
substantive part of peacebuilding strategies.
When it comes to international justice and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, Article 1 of the United
Nations Charter establishes that States should resolve
their disputes through peaceful means and in
conformity with the principles of justice and
international law. As the sole international universal
body with general jurisdiction, the International Court
of Justice (ICJ) plays an essential role in that regard.

10-42851

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

Thus, with very good sense, the Manila
Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of International
Disputes, which was adopted by consensus by the
General Assembly in resolution 37/10, established that
international legal disputes should, as a general rule, be
referred by the parties to the International Court of
Justice and that doing so should not be considered an
unfriendly act between States.
It should be highlighted that, in accordance with
Article 36, paragraph 2, of the Court’s Statute, Peru has
unconditionally recognized the jurisdiction of the ICJ.
We therefore call upon those States that have not yet
done so to adopt a decision to recognize the Court’s
jurisdiction.
In the context of international criminal law, the
international tribunals established by the Security
Council have made it possible for those responsible for
the most heinous crimes against humanity to be tried.
Since some of those tribunals will soon conclude their
activities, it should be recognized that their findings,
practices and archives are a valuable contribution to
the development of the rule of law and, ultimately, to
international peace and justice.
Likewise, the International Criminal Court (ICC)
plays an essential role in preventing impunity in cases
of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
As a result of the ICC Review Conference in Kampala,
we have succeeded in establishing a definition of the
crime of aggression. The relationship between the
United Nations, and especially the Security Council,
and the Court is essential to the work that the ICC must
carry out. We must therefore seek to ensure that this
relationship is geared both towards strengthening the
Court’s independence and towards promoting the
integrity of the Rome Statute.
On the national level, States have the primary
responsibility to ensure the establishment of
independent legal systems that will make genuine
access to justice possible. In that regard, there is a need
to adopt measures to implement obligations under
international law, not only with regard to substantive
aspects but also in the areas of cooperation and legal
assistance, so as to effectively try those responsible for
crimes and strengthen a culture that can prevent
impunity.
With regard to the issue of sanctions regimes and
combating terrorism, the adoption of resolution 1904
(2009) is an important step forward towards greater

10-42851

legitimacy. In addition, the appointment of Kimberly
Prost as Ombudsperson, which we welcome, will
provide us with a mechanism for greater transparency
in reviewing entries on the consolidated lists. We hope
that the consolidated list review process can be
concluded as soon as possible. However, we should
bear in mind that there are still major steps to be taken,
such as the adoption of guidelines for the effective
implementation of the resolution.
In that regard, Peru would like to reiterate that
sanctions regimes cannot be disassociated from
obligations to protect human rights, as indicated in
General Assembly resolution 64/118 and resolution
64/168, which Peru co-sponsored.
In order to disseminate the work of the Rule of
Law Unit more broadly and effectively, especially
among workers in the field, its website should also be
available in Spanish. Similarly, its publications should
be accessible in the United Nations official languages,
in accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 64/96 A-B on questions relating to
information.
Strengthening the rule of law is a task that falls to
all Members of the United Nations, and for which we
need the cooperation and financial assistance not only
of those States able to provide it, but also of
international organizations and civil society. Likewise,
efforts to strengthen the rule of law made at the
regional and subregional level should be coordinated,
since this is the only way we can ensure that such
efforts are not duplicated and that resources are used as
effectively as possible.
In conclusion, Peru reiterates its commitment to
actions aimed at strengthening the rule of law at both
the national and international levels, and expresses its
desire to contribute actively to the work in this area
conducted by the various bodies of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Tladi (South Africa): My delegation wishes
to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
participate in this debate and for your concept paper
(S/2010/322). We move from the premise, as does your
concept note, that the old debate about whether the
Security Council functions above international law is
truly passé and that, notwithstanding the primary role
of the Security Council in the maintenance of

15

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

international peace and security, the Security Council
operates within the framework of international law in
all its functions.

by the United Nations”, annexed to General Assembly
resolution 64/115, when imposing and implementing
sanctions.

An important element of preventing conflict must
be to deal with post-conflict situations in a
comprehensive manner to facilitate nation-building and
the avoidance of the recurrence of violence. For this
reason, my delegation agrees with the assertion that
peacebuilding and post-conflict capacity-building are
key components of the maintenance of international
peace and security. It is this belief that led us to
lament, in our statement of 22 April in the debate on
the implementation of the presidential note contained
in document S/2006/507, the perception that the
Security Council’s function is only to mandate
peacekeeping operations. In that statement, we
reminded the Council that

Inherent in the building blocks of the United
Nations is the inextricable link between the promotion
of justice and the attainment of a peaceful world. This
link is reflected in, among other provisions, Articles 1,
2 and 33 of the United Nations Charter. The
establishment of the International Court of Justice as a
principal organ of the United Nations also reflects
recognition of that link. The role of the Security
Council in promoting the rule of law by resorting to
peaceful judicial settlement is manifold. The Security
Council could, for example, recommend to parties that
disputes be referred to the International Court of
Justice in the spirit of Article 36 of the Charter.
Ultimately, however, whether a particular dispute is
referred to the Court will depend on the consent of the
particular States in accordance with article 36 of its
Statute.

“Peacemaking is not always merely equal to the
deployment of troops to conflict situations. It is a
continuum from mediation to conflict prevention
to peacekeeping, where required, and to
peacebuilding and peace consolidation and
sustainable development” (S/PV.6300, p. 34).
In this context, we welcome the initiatives taken
by the Rule of Law of Unit in the Executive Office of
the Secretary-General to promote a more coherent
approach to rule of law activities in societies emerging
from conflict. We await with anticipation the outcome
of these endeavours and hope that those outcomes will
contribute meaningfully to the work of the Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission.
The concept note before us observes correctly
that targeted sanctions still raise fundamental questions
in connection with the rule of law and basic principles
of due process. The note also acknowledges that major
improvements have been recorded through, for
example, the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 1822 (2008). We also welcome the adoption
of resolution 1904 (2009), which created the office of
the Ombudsperson, and annex II of that resolution,
which lays out the Ombudsperson’s functions. While
we agree that these are important steps in the
promotion of due process principles, we hope that the
Office of the Ombudsperson shall be further
strengthened to ensure a greater protective mandate.
We further encourage the Council to take account the
recommendation
of
the
document
entitled
“Introduction and implementation of sanctions imposed

16

A second possible role that the Security Council
can play in the promotion of the rule of law through the
use of the International Court of Justice is through
regular recourse to advisory opinions from the Court.
As we have noted on previous occasions, we are
pleased that the General Assembly has not been shy
about requesting advisory opinions, and we encourage
the Security Council to follow suit when faced with
questions of legal complexity. In this regard, we
remind the Council of the important consequences of
its decision to request an advisory opinion from the
International Court of Justice, which resulted in the
now famous 1971 Namibia opinion.
The role of the Security Council in the area of
peaceful settlement of dispute mechanisms is not
limited to requests for advisory opinions or to
encouraging parties to a dispute to refer it for
adjudication. The Council also has an important role in
the enforcement of decisions of the Court, in
accordance with paragraph 2 of Article 94 of the
United Nations Charter.
We believe that this responsibility applies
equally, though differently, in respect to the
implementation of advisory opinions. While advisory
opinions of the Court are not binding in and of
themselves, in the sense of Article 94 of the Charter,
they are not without legal consequence, and failure to
comply with them indicates a violation of whatever

10-42851

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

rule the Court may have been deemed to be at issue in
that opinion. In the interests of promoting the rule of
law, we therefore call upon the Security Council to
take appropriate action to ensure the implementation of
the advisory opinion on the legal consequences of the
construction of a wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory and the Western Sahara opinion.
The concept note correctly observes that an
essential element in the Security Council’s role in rule
of law issues relates to the efforts to end impunity and
the Council’s complex relationship with international
tribunals and the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Time constraints unfortunately will not permit a
comprehensive discussion, and so I limit our
observations here to the ICC, and in particular to
events surrounding the Review Conference held in
Kampala. The first important point to note was the
adoption of the Kampala Declaration, under the
facilitation of your delegation, Mr. President, which
reaffirms the nexus between peace and justice.
On the main issue under consideration in
Kampala — the adoption of the definition and trigger
mechanisms for the crime of aggression — the role of
the Council became the single greatest sticking point.
It is unnecessary to rehash the debate on whether the
Council’s mandate in the maintenance of international
peace and security is primary or exclusive, because
surely we all know that it is the former. Most of us in
Kampala expressed serious concern about leaving the
determination of the crime of aggression exclusively in
the hands of the Security Council. While very
convincing legal arguments were advanced for this
reluctance, it was also clear that the underlying
political reasons emanated from the perception, real or
imagined, that the Security Council as it is currently
constituted could not faithfully fulfil this mandate and
would, for political reasons unrelated to the
maintenance of peace and security, prevent the ICC
from exercising jurisdiction over this crime.
It seems to us that it is those same suspicions that
are behind many of the debates on the role of the
Security Council in the referral and deferral of
situations before the ICC. Whether or not these
underlying perceptions are founded on reality, they do
serve to illustrate the very urgent need to reform to the
Security Council. It is our view that, to rid itself of this
suspicion, the Council first and foremost needs to
become more representative and requires expansion in
both categories of its membership.

10-42851

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, acting head
of the delegation of the European Union.
Mr. Serrano: I would first like to thank the
Mexican presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today’s open debate and for preparing a
very stimulating discussion paper (S/2010/322). I also
offer many thanks for inviting the European Union
(EU) to participate in the debate. The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; the European Free Trade
Association country Liechtenstein, a member of the
European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine and
Georgia, align themselves with this declaration. I will
read an abridged version of the EU statement, which is
being circulated.
The European Union reaffirms its deep
commitment to an international order based on
international law, including human rights law, with the
United Nations at its core. In our view, it is imperative
that we all join our efforts to strengthen the rule of law
at the national, international and institutional levels.
The rule of law should be mainstreamed
throughout all peacebuilding and State-building
activities, in particular as regards transitional justice
and the integration of justice into the external support
to security sector reform. In this regard, the European
Union welcomes the establishment of the Rule of Law
Coordination and Resource Group and calls for greater
efforts by the Group and the Rule of Law Unit to
ensure a coordinated and coherent response by the
United Nations system in the field of the rule of law.
The European Union also supports the idea of an
update report by the Secretary-General taking stock of
the implementation of the recommendations contained
in his 2004 report (S/2004/616) and making proposals
for further actions.
Reforming the security sector in post-conflict
environments is crucial to the consolidation of peace
and to promoting poverty reduction. Only where
legitimate State authority is expanded through the rule
of law and good governance can countries be prevented
from relapsing into conflict and losing development
achievements. The rule of law should not be seen as a
principle exclusive to the justice or security sectors,

17

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

but as crucial in all areas where public authority is
being exercised, in particular in public administration.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
other international actors such as the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe or the Council of
Europe is essential for the effective promotion of the
rule of law, particularly in post-conflict situations. The
European Union has also gradually focused on the
re-establishment of the rule of law in post-conflict
situations. More than 4,000 civilian experts are
currently deployed in nine European Union missions,
of which 1,700 alone are in Kosovo, and they are
working together with their United Nations
counterparts.
Support to governance in its different aspects is
also at the core of EU development cooperation,
including with African, Caribbean and Pacific States.
Finally, the accession process, in the framework
of the European Union enlargement policy, is also a
powerful tool to drive reforms in these areas. The rule
of law is part of the so-called Copenhagen political
criteria for EU membership, and issues such as an
independent and impartial judiciary and the effective
fight against corruption and organized crime largely
condition progress towards accession.
Non-violent conflict resolution, be it through
negotiation, mediation, arbitration or judicial
settlement, is, at the same time, the result of adhering
to the principle of the rule of law and an important
contribution to further consolidating it. The European
Union supports the use of mediation as a peaceful,
efficient and cost-effective instrument of conflict
prevention and resolution in line with the SecretaryGeneral's report of April 2009 (S/2009/189). The
European Union is in the process of strengthening and
professionalizing its own mediation and mediation
support capacity so as to use these tools more
effectively. We appreciate the continuing cooperation
with the Mediation Support Unit in that endeavour.
Women's underrepresentation in peace processes
and the lack of gender expertise in negotiation and
mediation teams seriously limit the extent to which
women's experiences of conflict and consequent needs
for justice and recovery are addressed in these
processes. Resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008)
constitute an important framework for conflict
settlement activities, which need to incorporate the
principles contained therein at all stages of the process.

18

The European Union strongly supports the role of
the International Court of Justice and calls on all States
that have not yet done so to consider accepting the
jurisdiction of the Court in accordance with its Statute.
The European Union is also a staunch supporter
of the International Criminal Court. The Court has
already proven its value in preventing and deterring
those crimes that undermine the very essence of
humanity. With the winding down of the ad hoc and
special tribunals, the International Criminal Court will
be at the centre of the international criminal justice
system.
The Security Council can play an important role
in ensuring that justice for the most serious crimes is
brought to victims. Impunity should no longer be an
option.
As regards sanction regimes, the European Union
supports the principle of restrictive measures with clear
objectives that are targeted at those persons or entities
identified as responsible for the policies or actions that
have prompted the decision to impose sanctions.
The introduction and implementation of
restrictive measures must always be in accordance with
international law and respect for human rights, and the
European Union attaches great importance to the
application of fair and clear procedures when
designating persons and entities to be targeted. In this
regard, the European Union welcomes the
improvements introduced by resolution 1904 (2009).
We welcome in particular the recent appointment of the
Ombudsperson by the Secretary-General and express
our hope that she will be able to take up her functions
in the very near future.
For its part, following a number of recent
judgements by the European Union General Court and
the Court of Justice, the European Union has
conducted a thorough review and consolidation of its
implementation procedures. Those procedures will be
kept under constant review and further adapted where
necessary.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): I thank you, Mr. President,
for scheduling this very important debate today and for
inviting my country to participate.

10-42851

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

Germany fully aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of the European Union.
Respect for the rule of law is a fundamental
requirement for the maintenance of international peace,
security and justice and remains at the very core of
Germany's foreign policy. I would like to highlight
three key issues with regard to the Security Council
and the rule of law: first, the role of the International
Court of Justice and other international courts;
secondly, the rule of law and sanctions; and thirdly, the
rule of law in peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
First, on the International Court of Justice, in a
world of 192 States, differences do occur, but avoiding
threats to international peace and security will be
possible only if disputes can be addressed by peaceful
means. For this purpose, the international community
has developed a wide range of mechanisms. There are
strictly judicial mechanisms, such as the International
Court of Justice or — to name but one of the more
specialized courts — the International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea. It is of course first and foremost up to
States to make use of that system and to submit their
disputes to these procedures.
As a first step towards advancing the rule of law,
more States should accept the compulsory jurisdiction
of the International Court of Justice and of other
independent tribunals. International treaties could, as a
rule, contain dispute settlement clauses that provide for
an independent adjudication of disputes on their
interpretation or application. The Security Council
could further encourage States to make use of the
existing judicial institutions, in particular the
International Court of Justice.
Secondly, on the rule of law and sanctions, the
rule of law also entails the obligation of international
organizations to act in accordance with international
law, internally and in their relations vis-à-vis Member
States and the international community. One important
example in this regard is respect for the rule of law in
international sanctions regimes, in particular in the
fight against international terrorism. Germany, together
with a group of like-minded States, has been strongly
advocating for the improvement of United Nations
sanctions mechanisms to better respect rule of law
principles.
We are very satisfied with the progress made, in
particular through the establishment of a focal point to
receive de-listing requests and the creation of the

10-42851

Office of the Ombudsperson. We are confident that this
Office will render the de-listing procedure more
effective, thereby enhancing the credibility of the
sanctions regime as a whole.
Thirdly, on the rule of law in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, another field where the rule of law
becomes extremely important to the work of the
Security Council is in the establishment or
re-establishment of the rule of law in societies
emerging from years of armed violence.
Over the past few years, strengthening the rule of
law has become a much more common feature of
peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding efforts.
Building the rule of law is accepted as a core
peacekeeping task today, but this task poses a number
of political and operational challenges. First, the often
limited lifespan of a peacekeeping operation makes it
difficult to truly establish a functioning rule of law
system that can continue on its own once the mission
has left. Secondly, the very different circumstances on
the ground usually require a specific solution. A onesize-fits-all approach would not deliver sustainable
results or allow for the necessary principle of local
ownership.
The challenge for the United Nations, as well as
for other international organizations and multilateral
and bilateral donors, is how to extend rule of law
support beyond the immediate peacekeeping phase so
as to make reform sustainable. True rule of law support
requires the consistent and long-term engagement of
the international community as a whole. In my capacity
as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, let me also
say that adopting an earlier peacebuilding perspective
in the Security Council would enable us to enhance the
scope and to add value in peacekeeping mandates in
the areas of the rule of law, demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration, and security and justice
sector reform.
In concluding, let me reiterate that my country
will continue to be a staunch advocate of the rule of
law. Our guiding principle here, as on all other issues,
is that of a dialogue among equals. The rule of law will
be accepted by all, both nationally and internationally,
only if it is the result of a dialogue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Solomon Islands.

19

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): I thank you for
your kind invitation, Mr. President, to my delegation to
participate in this thematic debate on the promotion
and strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance
of international peace and security. My delegation
acknowledges the work of all, including the
Secretariat, on the subject under discussion, and I
would thank Mexico for the concept note (S/2010/322),
which serves as a useful guide for our debate.
As pointed out in the concept note, the General
Assembly plays an important role in advancing
international law. That includes other United Nations
treaty bodies. It is important to have closer
relationships among the General Assembly, the treaty
bodies and the Security Council, which we hope the
current Security Council reform will comprehensively
address. The Security Council has a defining role in the
promotion and maintenance of international security,
given that it is the primary United Nations organ
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security.
In discussing the questions raised in Mexico’s
concept paper, the promotion of international peace in
post-conflict situations, the peaceful settlement of
disputes, and the efficiency and credibility of sanctions
are, in my delegation’s view, secondary issues. The
primary question to ask is whether instability in certain
regions of the world is fed and fuelled by a lack of
application of international law by the Council.
Respect for international law is a must for all Members
of the United Nations. The question that should be
asked is what we do with countries that threaten
international peace and security, continue to operate
outside international law or allow that to happen in
multilateral settings.
Such questions shake the credibility of
multilateralism and have allowed the international
system to shift into a vacuum. Failure to comply with
international law has led to countries looking within
themselves for security to protect themselves and their
population, including empowering non-State actors to
carry out State responsibilities.
For that reason, selective and partial actions by
our multilateral system, including the Council, become
controversial and cost both lives and money in
addressing the symptoms rather than the causes of
conflict. Secondly, the fact that our Peacebuilding
Commission and post-conflict capacity-building

20

mechanisms are not holistic in their outreach, as in the
case of my country, which, in spite of being a country
emerging from conflict, remains outside those
mechanisms.
Solomon Islands was fortunate to have its
regional neighbours come to its assistance three years
after its ethnic conflict to re-establish the rule of law
under a regional arrangement and to allow us to
continue with our nation-building process. We are
thankful to our neighbours, led by Australia and New
Zealand. We remain eternally grateful.
We should be supporting multilateral and regional
mechanisms that strengthen and consolidate peace and
ensure that home-grown peace initiatives take root and
generate lasting and sustainable peace. On the peaceful
settlement of disputes, the advisory opinions of the
International Court of Justice need to be respected and
upheld. At the end of the day, for the collective good of
the United Nations, those with absolute power need to
take a stronger leadership role in ensuring that all
principles of international law are adhered to. Only
then will peace be possible.
Sanctions against selected countries burn bridges,
build fences around targeted countries and are more
harmful than constructive. We believe that the culture
of dialogue rather than confrontation should be the
norm, and we must have the patience for it. However,
once sanctions are applied, they must be regularly
monitored, reviewed and reported on to ensure that
they remain a tool that serves the purpose of
multilateralism.
Let me thank you, Mr. President, once again for
the opportunity to participate in this debate. I hope that
we can speak with one voice and act as a unit within
the United Nations in the promotion of international
peace and security in upholding the rule of law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on a
matter that is central to the mandate of the Security
Council. We welcome the opportunity to participate in
this debate, especially as it comes shortly after the
Review Conference on the International Criminal
Court, which was convened in Kampala some two
weeks ago. The Council may be pleased to know that
Botswana is strongly committed to ending impunity

10-42851

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

and crimes against humanity and that we are one of the
major supporters of the International Criminal Court in
the discharge of its mandate. We derived guidance and
inspiration from the concept note (S/2010/322) and we
sincerely commend Mexico’s presidency on that
initiative.
Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations
recognizes that the collective measures employed by
the United Nations in the prevention and removal of
threats to peace should be underpinned by the
principles of justice and international law. In their
notable work United Nations Ideas That Changed the
World, Thomas Weiss and others list four critical areas
that have traditionally driven United Nations responses
to the challenges of war and armed conflict. Foremost
in that sequence is the notion of replacing war and
conflict with the rule of law and negotiations. The
other options include the use of preventive diplomacy
to forestall conflicts, striking a balance between
disarmament and development in order to effectively
dismantle the structural causes of conflict, and, lastly,
interposing international buffers with observers to keep
peace or in peacebuilding and peacekeeping
operations.
The creation of the United Nations and, with it,
the adoption of the Charter and the creation of the
principal organs, such as the Security Council, ushered
in a new and genuine dispensation in which States
could no longer resort to unilateral armed force in
pursuit of their national interests without providing
justification and legality for their actions. That is the
legal framework that exists and deserves to be
respected by all Member States, big and small, weak
and powerful.
However, there is a minority of those whose
attitude of taking advantage of the inadequacies of the
international judicial system and circumventing the
provisions of the Charter only succeeds in undermining
the very legal frameworks that they helped to create.
In order to strengthen the rule of law, we should
strive for the attainment of the highest ideals of the
Charter by doing more to cultivate the norms and
standards of international law. My delegation would be
more worried if many of us did not endeavour to resist
the temptation to undermine international law, which is
contributing so immensely to the promotion of the rule
of law and the development of international
jurisprudence. We need not be fearful of the law to the

10-42851

extent that constructive enhancement of the various
provisions of international legal instruments is replaced
by a preoccupation with how best to unshackle the law.
It is clearly demonstrated that the sacrosanct
respect and adherence to the rule of law at both the
national and the international levels, as well as the
maintenance of peace and security, are mutually
reinforcing. Conversely, the collapse of national
institutions charged with the mandate of enacting
legislation and lack of respect for the rule of law and
enforcement are often a catalyst for the escalation and
sustenance of conflict, as well as the destruction of
socio-economic infrastructure.
The United Nations is the only multilateral
platform for the progressive development and
codification of international law. It should therefore
never tire in its noble efforts to strengthen the rule of
law. It should rather continue to consistently apply the
provisions of various conventions in order to safeguard
the clarion call of the Charter “to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war” by mobilizing the
collective will of the entire membership to maintain
international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this very
important open debate on the promotion and
strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security and your submission
of a concept note on the topic (S/2010/322).
Azerbaijan reaffirms its commitment to an
international order based on international law and the
rule of law, and considers it essential to peaceful
coexistence and cooperation among States.
Since the adoption of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome (resolution 60/1) and the last open debate in
the Security Council on the rule of law held in 2006
(see S/PV.5474), there have been important
developments. A significant contribution has been
made to the strengthening and promotion of an
international order based on generally accepted legal
norms and principles. In a number of situations,
successful efforts have reduced tensions and ensured
that peace processes moved forward.
At the same time, more should be done to address
the major threats and challenges that continue to affect

21

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

the basic elements of the international legal order,
undermine the national unity, territorial integrity and
stability of States, and regenerate disregard and
contempt for human rights. The heightened
vulnerability of civilian populations during wartime —
in particular forcibly displaced persons, refugees,
women and children — brings an element of urgency
to the imperative of restoration of the rule of law.
The peaceful settlement of disputes is one of the
basic principles of international law enshrined in
paragraph 3 of Article 2 of the Charter of the United
Nations. Indeed, the commitment to resolving disputes
through peaceful means and in accordance with
international law is one of the cornerstones of the
notion of the rule of law at the international level. The
true value of this principle is to commit States to
respecting each other’s territorial integrity and political
independence, refraining in their international relations
from the threat or use of force, and resolving their
disputes in conformity with international law.
It should be made clear at the same time that the
reference to the principle of peaceful settlement of
disputes must in no way impair the inherent right of
individual or collective self-defense if an armed attack
occurs against a Member of the United Nations until
the Security Council has taken measures necessary to
maintain international peace and security.
In circumstances where the aggressor State has
neglected its obligation to settle the international
dispute by peaceful means and thereafter has illegally
used force to acquire control over the territory of
another State, insistence on the application of the
principle of peaceful settlement of disputes will
inevitably play into the hands of an aggressor, tend to
entrench positions of control, reinforce perceptions of
the centrality of military strength in international
relations, and encourage impunity rather than
contribute to the triumph of justice.
Undeniably, invasion or attack by the armed
forces of a foreign State, military occupation and
bombardment constitute armed attacks, triggering the
right of self-defence in accordance with Article 51 of
the Charter of the United Nations and customary
international law. It is obvious that, in situations of
protracted inter-State conflicts and long-continued
unsuccessful negotiations, the victim of an armed
attack, especially when it suffers from illegal
occupation of its territory and consistent measures by

22

the aggressor State to sustain the situation, is entitled
to the right to self-defence and can resort to it as soon
as it arrives at the firm conclusion that prolonging the
negotiations is an exercise in futility and that political
settlement is unattainable.
There should be better understanding that States
acting in contravention of the Charter of the United
Nation and international law, undermining the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, violating
international humanitarian law and human rights law
and ignoring Security Council resolutions that
explicitly condemn such behaviour, may forestall
enforcement countermeasures only by putting a prompt
end to their illegal acts and negotiating in good faith
the prospects for peace, stability and cooperation. The
fact that illegal situations continue because of political
circumstances does not mean that they are thereby
rendered legal or can go on forever. Law and justice
are more important than force.
As the concept note rightly points out, respect for
international humanitarian law is an essential
component of the rule of law in conflict situations and
plays a crucial role in the maintenance of international
peace and security. However, a defining feature of
most, if not all, conflicts is the failure of the parties to
respect and ensure respect for their legal obligations to
protect civilians and spare them from the effects of
hostilities. As a consequence, civilians continue to
suffer from inadequate protection in situations of
armed conflict. Therefore, further efforts in this regard,
in particular through insistent measures aimed at
ensuring strict compliance by parties to armed conflict
with their obligations under international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee law, remain crucial and must
constitute an absolute priority.
Particular consideration must be given to
implications for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict aggravated by population displacements and
foreign occupations. The impact of conflict on housing,
land and property in such situations requires a more
consistent approach in order to ensure the safe and
dignified return of those forced to leave their homes.
It is important that the recognition of the right to
return, along with increased attention to its practical
implementation and concrete measures aimed at
overcoming obstacles preventing return, be applied by
the international community with more systematic
regularity. Ensuring the right to return constitutes a

10-42851

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

categorical rejection of the gains of ethnic cleansing
and offers important measures of justice to those
displaced from their homes and land, thereby removing
a source of possible future tension and conflict.
Integral to the existing challenges is the need to
ensure accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, both for
individual perpetrators and for parties to conflict. In
recent years, important steps have been taken for the
protection and vindication of rights and the prevention
and punishment of wrongs. The punishment of crimes
with an international dimension and scope has
demonstrated how effective international justice can be
when there is political will to support it.
It is important to emphasize in this regard that
ending impunity is essential not only for the purposes
of identifying individual criminal responsibility for
serious crimes, but also for ensuring sustainable peace,
truth, reconciliation, the rights and interests of victims
and the well-being of society at large.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate, that in
order to achieve the goals of the rule of law, we should
uphold fundamental principles, adhere to the uniform
application of international law, and promote the
democratization of international relations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada): I would like to
congratulate and thank the delegation of Mexico for
convening this important debate. I would like to focus
on international humanitarian law and international
criminal justice.
Canada has actively engaged with the
international community to prevent crises, promote
human rights and the rule of law, and respond to
humanitarian emergencies. This reflects our values and
responds directly to Canada’s desire to promote peace,
security, prosperity and well-being around the world.
In this regard, we remain committed to encouraging
respect for and implementation of international
humanitarian law as agreed to in the Geneva
Conventions.
And yet, despite the existence of multiple
international legal instruments pertaining to the
protection of civilians and the conduct of armed
conflict, including customary law and Security Council
resolutions, the past two decades have seen State and

10-42851

non-State actors alike shockingly and deliberately
violate these core humanitarian principles. New
challenges — whether attacks on aid workers or
restrictions on access by civilians to aid — present an
important challenge to our collective commitment to
ensuring the effective implementation of international
humanitarian law.
Indeed, I would argue that the Security Council
has a critical role to play in calling for adherence to
international humanitarian law. It can do this in several
ways, including by better using its own field missions to
monitor respect for international humanitarian law, by
calling for better analysis in country reports provided to
the Council, by encouraging fact-finding missions and by
drawing on the range of tools at its disposal — such as
prosecutions and targeted sanctions — when
international humanitarian law is flouted. The Council
also has a role to play in encouraging States to take
steps to hold accountable those who would violate
international human rights and humanitarian law and in
ensuring that they are brought to justice. It is the duty
of every State to exercise its criminal jurisdiction over
those responsible for serious crimes.
The International Criminal Court is a crucial part
of the international criminal justice system, but it is
also a court of last resort. Where such crimes have
occurred, States must ensure accountability through
effective and genuine investigations and prosecutions
at the national level. In this respect, Canada recognizes
that strengthening domestic capacity to investigate and
prosecute these crimes is essential to closing the
impunity gap. The Council can play an important
supporting role in this respect through, among other
measures, its resolutions that call for United Nations
peace operations to help build the rule of law.
(spoke in French)
Canada’s continuing support for international
criminal justice is based on our commitment to the rule
of law and the principle that those who commit crimes
must be held accountable. Within this paradigm,
Canada has supported the work of the International
Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia, the Special Court for Sierra Leone, the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon, the Extraordinary
Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia and, of course,
the International Criminal Court. We also continue to
invest in national justice and rule of law capacitybuilding in countries emerging from crisis. While great

23

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

strides have been made toward the rule of law at the
international level, there remain areas in need of
further progress.
In conclusion, Member States must be
encouraged to comply with their international
obligations, adhere to international treaties and
incorporate international norms and standards into their
domestic systems.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): It appears that I am the
last speaker on the list, so allow me to join all previous
speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this debate, which serves as an engine to generate
complex and open dialogue for examining the
conceptual issue of the rule of law.
In recent years, the international community has
increased its efforts to address the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict situations. Following the
commitment to the rule of law in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1), the rule of law was
placed high on the United Nations and national
agendas. A consensus emerged that the rule of law
should be promoted at both the national and
international levels and be based on the United Nations
Charter, the norms of international law and the
principles of good governance.
Armenia attaches utmost importance to the
promotion of justice and the rule of law, as these
values are indispensable for the maintenance of
international and regional security and the protection
of human rights. Moreover, the systematic breaches of
the rule of law contribute to violations of these basic
human rights and fundamental freedoms of peoples,
which are among the major and immediate causes of
regional conflicts.
The full and fair implementation of the norms and
principles of human rights, such as the free exercise of
democratic values, should be welcomed and
encouraged by the United Nations Member States and
should not be conditioned on the current status of the
territory within which people choose to live
democratically. Core United Nations values and
principles cannot be compromised or ignored when it
comes to people who live in conflict and post-conflict
situations.

24

As we discuss the concept of the rule of law, we
should emphasize the need for and importance of
interaction with the representative authorities
legitimately elected by the people of conflict regions
during settlement negotiations. Armenia pursues an
approach of dialogue, negotiations and mutual
compromise, and strongly rejects the language of force,
threats and militaristic rhetoric.
The notion of the rule of law represents a concept
that is diametrically opposed to the rule by force or use
of force. This principle stipulates a framework for
peaceful
conflict
resolution
and
democratic
governance. Strengthening the rule of law based on
justice and security therefore requires a deeper
commitment and a broader vision of the future.
Adherence to the principle of non-use of force or
threat clearly and unequivocally declared by the parties
concerned in conflict and post-conflict settings is
another crucial factor for creating a environment
conducive to building mutual trust and in achieving
justice and security.
Armenia believes that the conflict resolution
process must inevitably be based on the resolve and
will of all concerned parties — first and foremost, of
those who will be directly influenced and affected by
the settlement. Our approach must also be built on the
understanding that any conflict resolution should
impartially and fully address the root causes of the
conflict under discussion in order to prevent their
renewal in the future, and should provide reliable and
adequate security guaranties to the populations
concerned, thus ensuring sustainable peace and
development for the whole region.
The rule of law is a concept at the very heart of
the stated mission of the United Nations and other
international organizations. It is a well-known fact that,
in an increasing number of its operations on the
ground, the United Nations is calling on the services of
relevant regional and subregional organizations, since
in certain areas and in some cases these international
actors are able to provide expertise and a better
understanding of local peculiarities to complement that
of the United Nations.
Since 1992, for example, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has been
providing a forum for the settlement of a conflict in our
subregion, and we believe that that organization has
adequate capacity to maintain its lead in the

10-42851

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

negotiation process. We are confident that continuous
negotiations within the framework of the OSCE, which
have been uninterrupted since their inception, serve as
one of the major prerequisites for a just and lasting
resolution of the issue.
While the Security Council has primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, other main bodies of the United
Nations and relevant international organizations,
including the Bretton Woods institutions, can play a
significant role in contributing to the development and
strengthening of international law, the rule of law and
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more speakers inscribed on my list.
After consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the Charter of the United Nations
and international law, and to an international
order based on the rule of law and international
law, which is essential for peaceful coexistence
and cooperation among States in addressing
common challenges, thus contributing to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
“The Security Council is committed to and
actively supports the peaceful settlement of
disputes and reiterates its call upon Member
States to settle their disputes by peaceful means
as set forth in Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations. The Council emphasizes the key
role of the International Court of Justice, the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations, in
adjudicating disputes among States and the value
of its work and calls upon States that have not yet
done so to consider accepting the jurisdiction of
the Court in accordance with its Statute.
“The Security Council calls upon States to
resort also to other dispute settlement
mechanisms, including international and regional
courts and tribunals which offer States the
possibility of settling their disputes peacefully,
contributing thus to the prevention or settlement
of conflict.
“The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of the activities of the United Nations

10-42851

Secretary-General in promoting mediation and in
the pacific settlement of disputes between States,
recalls in this regard the Secretary-General's
report on enhancing mediation and its support
activities of 8 April 2009 (S/2009/189), and
encourages the Secretary-General to increasingly
and effectively use all the modalities and
diplomatic tools at his disposal under the Charter
for this purpose.
“The Security Council recognizes that
respect for international humanitarian law is an
essential component of the rule of law in conflict
situations, reaffirms its conviction that the
protection of the civilian population in armed
conflict should be an important aspect of any
comprehensive strategy to resolve conflict, and
recalls in this regard resolution 1894 (2009).
“The Security Council further reiterates its
call on all parties to armed conflict to respect
international law applicable to the rights and
protection of women and children, as well as
displaced persons and humanitarian workers and
other civilians who may have specific
vulnerabilities, such as persons with disabilities
and older persons.
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong
opposition to impunity for serious violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights
law. The Security Council further emphasizes the
responsibility of States to comply with their
relevant obligations to end impunity and to
thoroughly investigate and prosecute persons
responsible for war crimes, genocide, crimes
against humanity or other serious violations of
international humanitarian law in order to prevent
violations, avoid their recurrence and seek
sustainable
peace,
justice,
truth
and
reconciliation.
“The Security Council notes that the fight
against impunity for the most serious crimes of
international concern has been strengthened
through the work of the International Criminal
Court, ad hoc and mixed tribunals, as well as
specialized chambers in national tribunals, and
takes note of the stocktaking of international
criminal justice undertaken by the first Review
Conference of the Rome Statute held in Kampala,
Uganda, from 31 May to 11 June 2010. The

25

S/PV.6347 (Resumption 1)

Council intends to continue forcefully to fight
impunity and uphold accountability with
appropriate means and draws attention to the full
range of justice and reconciliation mechanisms to
be considered, including national, international
and mixed criminal courts and tribunals, truth and
reconciliation commissions, as well as national
reparation programmes for victims, institutional
reforms and traditional dispute resolution
mechanisms.
“The Security Council expresses its
commitment to ensure that all United Nations
efforts to restore peace and security themselves
respect and promote the rule of law. The Council
recognizes
that
sustainable
peacebuilding
requires
an
integrated
approach,
which
strengthens coherence between political, security,
development, human rights and rule of law
activities. In this regard, the Council reiterates
the urgency of improving United Nations
peacebuilding efforts and achieving a coordinated
United Nations approach in the field among all
parts of the United Nations system, including in
ensuring capacity-building support to assist
national authorities to uphold the rule of law
especially after the end of United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions.
“The Security Council considers sanctions
an important tool in the maintenance and
restoration of international peace and security.
The Council reiterates the need to ensure that
sanctions are carefully targeted in support of
clear objectives and designed carefully so as to
minimize possible adverse consequences and are
implemented by Member States. The Council

26

remains committed to ensure that fair and clear
procedures exist for placing individuals and
entities on sanctions lists and for removing them,
as well as for granting humanitarian exemptions.
In this context, the Council recalls the adoption
of resolutions 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009),
including the appointment of an Ombudsperson
and other procedural improvements in the
Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime.
“The Security Council welcomes the
establishment of the Rule of Law Coordination
and Resource Group, chaired by the Deputy
Secretary-General and supported by the Rule of
Law Unit, and urges greater efforts by the Group
to ensure a coordinated and coherent response by
the United Nations system to issues on the
Council’s agenda related to the rule of law.
“The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to provide a follow-up report
within 12 months to take stock of the progress
made in respect of the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the 2004 report of
the Secretary-General (S/2004/616), and to
consider in this context further steps with regard
to the promotion of the rule of law in conflict and
post-conflict situations.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the
Security
Council
under
the
symbol
S/PRST/2010/11.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

10-42851
