S/PV.8173

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8173rd meeting

Wednesday, 31 January 2018, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Umarov. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kazakhstan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Melki
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-02656 (E)
*1802656*

S/PV.8173

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2017/507)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Kazakhstan.
During our presidency, Kazakhstan arranged its
programme of work to address the ongoing and new
emerging threats of the twenty-first century. We built
upon Secretary-General Guterres’ new agenda for
peace, in synergy with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and today’s realities.
As this has been the first time that Central Asia was
represented on the Security Council in the history of
the United Nations, we strove to balance the Council’s
global agenda with priorities in the region. Through
multilateralism and a comprehensive approach for
conflict prevention, we have alerted the Council to some
impending challenges. Based on openness, neutrality
and inclusivity, we have aspired to give the Council
new dynamism with visions and forward momentum
that eventually could become lasting legacies.
In addition to political diplomacy and mediation,
a three-fold multidimensional strategy was put
forward by Kazakhstan to promote and strengthen a
security and development link, a regional approach
to tackling transnational threats faced by countries
in conflict, and streamlining the effectiveness of the
Organization’s system in delivering as one United
Nations. Implemented in Central Asia, it can serve as a
model for other regions, as well.
Kazakhstan has always endeavoured to enhance
the unity and collective ownership of the Council. Our
term began with a solemn flag raising ceremony that
we introduced for the first time to pay tribute to newlyelected members and symbolize the trust placed in them
by Member States. It is important that we agreed to make
that innovation an annual practice at the beginning of
every new term of the Council. We have also worked
on behalf of all Member States, with a majority of 20
public meetings and only 10 consultations. In addition to
three signature events, we have adopted two resolutions
2/17

31/01/2018

and four presidential statements, and issued 12 press
statements. In many cases, their adoption and issuance,
together with authorized media events, were critical
to project the Council’s support and unity, which was
much needed, for those struggling in conflict zones
to implement peace agreements. They also helped to
enhance transparency, agree upon outcomes and define
a road map for the future. I shall now briefly describe
our signature events.
At the high-level thematic briefing on 18 January
(see S/PV.8160), the most pressing global problem
concerning the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction was afforded a new perspective, as was the
use of confidence-building measures. Presided over by
President Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan, the discussions,
which were attended by an unprecedented audience, gave
momentum to a new paradigm for averting deliberate or
accidental outbreaks of war, and conveyed my country’s
honour and respect for the United Nations. As has been
stated by my Head of State, it is crucial to enjoy political
will and build confidence among leaders to achieve a
stable and secure world. Kazakhstan will continue its
efforts to build trust among nations during its term
on the Council. The same day, the Council adopted a
milestone presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/1) as
a blueprint for regional preventive diplomacy, which
aims at achieving a world free of violent conflicts by
the United Nations centenary in 2045.
The ministerial debate of 19 January, on building
regional partnership in Afghanistan and Central Asia
as a model to link security and development (see
S/PV.8162), was presided over by His Excellency Mr. Mr.
Kairat Abdrakhmanov, and included the participation of
several visiting Ministers. Council members and 16 other
delegations focused on investments in connectivity,
trade and infrastructure so as to strengthen the
security of the region. Kazakhstan’s vision for the link
connecting security and development could be realized
through the integration of Afghanistan into the region
with all its human capital and promise. Presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/2, which was adopted before
the debate, calls for enhanced regional, interregional
and international cooperation to promote long-term
peace, stability and sustainable development, as well
as to combat terrorism, violence and drug trafficking.
One of the highlights of our presidency was
the Security Council mission to Afghanistan from
12 to 15 January, which aimed at gaining first-hand
information concerning threats facing the country and
18-02656

31/01/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

its potential. That visit was the first made since 2010,
and provided a unique opportunity to meet President
Ghani, Chief Executive Abdullah and a total of 120
representatives of the Afghan Government, the business
sector, civil society, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and the NATO Resolute
Support Mission. The Council was able to demonstrate
its support for the country and its commitment to peace
and reconciliation. It also reinforced the importance
of holding parliamentary and presidential elections
in 2018 and 2019, respectively. The premise of our
approach concerning the linkage connecting security,
development, a regional approach and an effective
United Nations has been fully recognized by the
Afghan leadership.
On 29 January, at the initiative of Nikki Haley,
Council members visited Washington, D.C., to meet
with the United States leadership and exchange
views with President Trump on the Council’s agenda,
including counter-terrorism.
The significance of regional preventive diplomacy
was prominently brought to the fore at the briefing
provided by Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Natalia Gherman, Head of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia (UNRCCA), and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Mohammed ibn Chambas, Head of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS). It was the first time in three years that a
Security Council press statement (SC/13179) was issued
concerning UNRCCA in support for the Centre, which
celebrated its tenth anniversary in December 2017.
Meetings on various United Nations peacekeeping
operations reviewed the work of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Mission
in Colombia, the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, UNOWAS, the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia and the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, and analysed the readiness of their operations,
while considering needed restructuring to address the
political, security, humanitarian, human rights and
development dimensions.

S/PV. 8173

We take note that regional organizations
and forums — such as the African Union, the
European Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Group of
Five for the Sahel — are crucial to reaching early and
long-lasting solutions to conflicts in Africa. Intense
deliberations concerning the Middle East made it clear
that political will, confidence-building and trust are
indispensable to bring all parties to the conflict to the
negotiating table to bring about peace.
Dialogues with New York-based civil society
representatives as our partners proved helpful. Inviting
women activists gave on-the-ground insights and
strengthened the women/youth and peace and security
agenda as a prerequisite for stability and progress.
Although it does not fall under the programme of
work of the Council, the landmark high-level special
event surrounding the presentation by our Foreign
Minister of a draft code of conduct towards achieving a
world free of terrorism, which was held on 18 January
and included more than 100 participants, was
nevertheless very relevant to its work. The document
will be further elaborated to serve as a platform to bring
Member States together to honour their commitments to
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and other instruments.
We now close with this formal wrap-up session as
a tool to assess the Council’s response and relevance to
address issues and improve its working methods. No
endeavour is accomplished alone.
Unity is important. Our presidency was marked
by a convergence of ideas, a spirit of compromise and
readiness to seek common ground. As today’s meeting
is the last official one of our presidency, on behalf
of my Government and my delegation, I express our
warmest appreciation to all Council members and States
Members of the United Nations for their whole-hearted
solidarity with us. I also thank the Council’s secretariat,
the Executive Office of the Secretary-General, the
Department of Political Affairs, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Safety
and Security for their ongoing expert guidance at
every stage.
In addition, we thank all branches of the
Secretariat, and in particular the team of excellent
interpreters for standing shoulder to shoulder with us.
Alhough our presidency is ending, it only heightens our

18-026563/17

S/PV.8173

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

resolve to move forward with greater commitment and
determination. It is with great pleasure that I now hand
over the stewardship of the Council to Kuwait. I wish
the Kuwait delegation every success next month, and I
assure it of our full support.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those other members of
the Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): First of all, I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, and your team on the
successful completion of your presidency. This month
we welcomed the six newly elected members of the
Security Council, and the important initiative that you
took to organize a flag installation ceremony for the
first time is very much welcomed and appreciated. We
hope the ceremony will be maintained as a tradition in
the years to come.
Substantively speaking, January has indeed been a
very busy month and a great deal has been accomplished.
The effort you, Sir, made in bringing the issue of
Afghanistan and the Central Asia region to the fore is
commendable. We also welcome the adoption of the
press statement on the United Nations Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia (SC/13179)
for the first time in some time. The visit to Kabul
afforded Council members an opportunity to have a
better appreciation of the situation in Afghanistan. The
high-level briefing on non-proliferation (see S/PV.8160)
also allowed us to have an exchange of views on
practical confidence-building measures to de-escalate
growing tensions and preserve the international
non-proliferation regime.
Today I speak on behalf of three African members
of the Council, and I would like to highlight the
discussion we had over the past month, in particular
with regard to issues of peace and security in Africa.
On 9 January the Security Council discussed the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(see S/PV.8153). One year after the signing of the
Comprehensive and Inclusive Political Agreement of
31 December 2016, the deep divisions that remain on
its implementation and the tense political atmosphere
that prevails in the country are a source of concern.
The deteriorating security and humanitarian situation
is also worrisome. There was broad consensus among
Council members on the importance of accelerating
4/17

31/01/2018

the full implementation of the 31 December agreement,
which remains the only viable framework for resolving
the current political impasse and for doing everything
possible to ensure that the elections scheduled for
23 December take place in a free, fair, peaceful and
credible manner.
The critical importance of enhanced coordination
among the United Nations, the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the Southern African Development Community and
other partners in supporting the implementation of
the 31 December agreement and the electoral process
was underscored. That and other relevant points are
covered in the press statement issued by the Council on
16 in January (SC/13163), which sent a clear message
to the Congolese parties to reject violence and address
their differences peacefully. Resolving problems of
violence in eastern and central Democratic Republic of
the Congo, ensuring the rule of law and accountability
were identified as priorities to facilitate the necessary
conditions for the conduct of the elections.
On 10 January, the Council received a briefing on
the situation in Darfur and the activities of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) (see S/PV.8155). It was noted that the
security situation in Darfur continues to show marked
progress and that the Government is consolidating
State authority across Darfur. The weapons-collection
programme launched by the Government is also said
to have consolidated the prevailing relative peace and
stability in Darfur. However, concern was expressed
about the lack of progress in the peace process.
With regard to UNAMID, the assessment report
presented by the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Secretary-General on phase one
of the reconfiguration of the mission (S/2018/12) was
discussed. We welcome the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2018/4) adopted this morning, which reflects
the consensus of the Council on the situation in Darfur
and the reconfiguration of UNAMID.
On 11 January, the Security Council received a
briefing on the six-month report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel (UNOWAS) (see S/PV.8156). The briefing
allowed the Council to reflect on the political, peace
and security situation and the humanitarian situation in
West Africa and the Sahel. The presidential statement
adopted yesterday (S/PRST/2018/3) reflects the salient
points raised during the Council’s discussions and
18-02656

31/01/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

its recognition of the role of UNOWAS in supporting
efforts by national and local actors to sustain peace.
The Security Council discussed the situation in
Libya on 17 January (see S/PV.8159). Council members
reiterated their support for the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya and his work to facilitate the
implementation of the United Nations action plan. It
was acknowledged that the road ahead would not be
easy. The importance of further galvanizing the support
of the Libyans themselves and of the international
community to bring about a Libyan-led political
solution, under the auspices of the United Nations, was
very much underscored.
On 23 January the Council received a briefing on the
situation in Mali and the activities of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (see S/PV.8163). It was an opportunity for the
Council to welcome the renewed commitment of the
Malian parties to the expeditious implementation of all
of their remaining obligations under the Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali by the end of March,
through the adoption of a revised timetable. However,
serious concern was expressed about persistent delays
in the full implementation of key provisions of the
Agreement. Council members underscored the urgent
need to deliver tangible and visible peace dividends to
the population in the north and other parts of Mali in
order to preserve the relevance of the agreement and
prevent the reversal of the gains achieved thus far.
They expressed their intention to follow the situation
closely and to respond with appropriate steps within the
framework of resolution 2374 (2017), should the parties
not implement the commitments made in accordance
with the new timetable. We hope the press statement
issued by the Council on 24 January (SC/13177) will
send the right message to the parties in that regard.
On 24 January the members of the Security
Council deliberated on the situation in Somalia (see
S/PV.8165). While progress on the political, security
and economic reforms was welcomed, the importance
of making progress on key issues in 2018, including on
the constitutional review, elections, fiscal federalism
and power- and resource-sharing, was underscored.
However, concern was raised about the ongoing
instability in Somalia, and Council members urged
all parties to resolve political differences through
peaceful dialogue.

S/PV. 8173

With regard to the conditions-based transition plan,
the Council reaffirmed the importance of accelerating
the implementation of the national security architecture
while focusing on the gradual transfer of lead security
responsibility from the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) to the Somali Government. In
that regard, members underlined the importance of
close consultation among the Federal Government,
the federal member states, the African Union and
the troop-contributing countries, the United Nations
and international partners to ensure a coordinated
approach to implementing conditions-based planning
and financing. The joint efforts by the United Nations
and the African Union to explore options for financing
AMISOM was also noted.
Last but not least, the Council received a briefing
on the situation in South Sudan (see S/PV.8166). The
security situation in South Sudan remains fragile,
and the dire humanitarian situation continues to be of
serious concern. The signing of the Agreement on the
Cessation of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and
Humanitarian Access was welcomed, but its violation
by the parties is dimming prospects for progress in
ending the conflict. The members of the Council
stressed that all violations must be investigated and
that those responsible held accountable. In that regard,
the role of the Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism in verifying
those violations was appreciated. Maintaining the unity
of the Council, as expressed in its latest presidential
statement (S/PRST/2018/4) in urging the parties to
participate in the High-level Revitalization Forum
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and live up to the commitments they made,
was underscored.
On the margins of the thirtieth African Union
(AU) Summit, a series of meetings were held in Addis
Ababa, including the meeting of the leaders of the
United Nations, AU and IGAD as part of maintaining
unity of purpose among the three organizations in
the search for lasting peace, security and stability in
South Sudan. The hope and expectation is that it would
provide renewed impetus to the second phase of the
High-level Revitalization Forum, which is scheduled to
start early next month. We look forward to receiving a
briefing from the Secretary-General on that and other
related issues under the incoming presidency of the
Kingdom of Kuwait, to which we wish the best of luck
and success.

18-026565/17

S/PV.8173

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I offer many
congratulations to Kazakhstan on its able leadership of
the Council for the month of January. It has been a busy
and productive month for the Security Council. Thanks
to Kazakhstan’s sustained efforts, the Security Council
travelled on its first mission to Afghanistan in seven
years, where it met with leaders of the Government
of National Unity, officials of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, opposition parties
and civil society representatives. Council members
thanked the Afghan people for their continued resolve
in the fight against terrorism, and noted international
consensus on the need to strengthen security. They
urged President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah to
hold free, fair and transparent elections, as scheduled,
and stressed the importance of maintaining unity for
the sake of an inclusive and stable Afghanistan.
We welcome Kazakhstan’s emphasis on promoting
peace in Afghanistan, and we welcome the emphasis
on the potential benefits of security and development
partnerships between Afghanistan and Central Asia. We
thank Kazakhstan for convening a ministerial debate
on the partnership between Afghanistan and Central
Asia. Afghanistan, as those present all know, is a top
United States priority as well. That is why our National
Security Advisor, H. R. McMaster, came to New York
especially to brief the Council on Afghanistan and our
South Asia strategy, which goes hand in hand with
the United Nations efforts to end the conflict and help
Afghans build a better future.
We were also very pleased to receive our biannual
briefing on the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventative Diplomacy for Central Asia — the first
by the mission’s new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Natalia Gherman. Of particular
note is the fact that the Council adopted a press
statement (SC/13179) supporting her work, which is
the first time we have come to a consensus on such a
document in several years. We hope that it will open the
door for future documents in support of the mission’s
important work.
However, obviously South and Central Asia were
not the only focus to the Council’s work. This month,
Ambassador Haley urged Council members to support
the South Sudan arms embargo and said that we as
a Council must act on the position we took in our
14 December presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/25)
to impose costs and consequences on those who
undermine the peace process in South Sudan.
6/17

31/01/2018

We also held important discussions on the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus Mission
and its support for a comprehensive settlement to
reunify Cyprus as a bizonal, bicommunal federation.
We renewed the Mission’s mandate this month and
now we urge Cypriot leaders to take steps to rebuild
trust, improve the public atmosphere and resume
talks immediately.
Council members remain unified in support of the
peace process in Colombia and the work of the United
Nations Verification Mission, noting that the challenges
posed by the reintegration of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia and the implementation
of the historic Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace are
significant, and success is not certain. The Council
is also committed to the resumption of talks with the
Ejército de Liberación Nacional and emphasizes the
importance of a new ceasefire.
The Council also reaffirmed that the Libyan Political
Agreement must remain the framework for the political
process throughout the country’s transition period and
that there is no room for spoilers. It is long past time for
all parties to put the interests of the Libyan people first
and engage fully with the United Nations sponsored
political process. In the meantime, we must also deepen
our work with the Libyan authorities to ensure that
all those responsible for human rights abuses against
migrants, including the shocking practice of slavery,
are held accountable.
As you, Mr. President, mentioned earlier this week,
Ambassador Haley hosted the members of the Security
Council in Washington, D.C., to view evidence of
Iran’s violations of its international obligations and its
interference in conflicts around the region. She also
hosted Security Council members at the United States
Holocaust Museum for a discussion about atrocities in
Syria. The trip underscored the need for the Council to
take action on both fronts and pursue accountability.
I thank you again, Mr. President, for your able
management of the Council this month. We are very
much looking forward to the Kuwaiti presidency of the
Council in February. We are confident that Kuwait will
lead us effectively in our continuing efforts.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation joins in congratulating Kazakhstan on having
fulfilled in earnest the responsibility of presiding over
the Security Council during the month of January,
18-02656

31/01/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

and for having done so at the highest level in its first
time as a non-permanent member. We commend the
Permanent Mission of Kazakhstan and its team, as well
as Ambassador Umarov.
We highlight President Nursultan Nazarbayev’s
participation in the very timely debate (see S/PV.8160)
on the need to build confidence and prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and the
participation of Minister Kairat Abdrakhmanov and his
colleagues from Central Asia in the enriching debate on
Afghanistan and the importance of regional cooperation
for security and development (see S/PV.8162). In both
cases, Kazakhstan made substantive contributions to
international peace and security.
My delegation fully recognizes the need to take
more constructive action in the prevention of conflicts
at the national, regional and global levels in order to
achieve sustainable peace. In that regard, we would like
to share some reflections on the issues addressed by
the Council in January, which has also been Peru’s first
month as a non-permanent member.
First, we have reaffirmed our conviction that the
solution to the challenges facing the international
community
necessarily
involves
strengthening
multilateralism, respecting and promoting international
law, and observing the Charter of the United Nations,
in particular Chapter VI on the peaceful settlement
of disputes. We believe that today’s world requires
a multidimensional and comprehensive approach,
which is the basis of sustainable peace. Sustaining
peace also requires building inclusive and accountable
national institutions aimed at achieving sustainable
development and cooperation, as well as the active
participation of women and young people. In that
regard, we welcome the adoption of the presidential
statement on prevention (S/PRST/2018/1), presented by
the Kazakhstan delegation.
At the same time, we are of the view that it is
appropriate to continue strengthening the ways in which
the Council identifies, evaluates and responds to the
emergence of new risks and threats. The Council must
bear in mind the serious impacts of such phenomena
as poverty, inequality or climate change on security,
especially given that the United Nations system has
the capacity to take action to such ends through a more
coordinated and coherent approach of its three pillars.
Secondly, we welcome the broad consensus in
the Council on many principles, perspectives and

S/PV. 8173

objectives, and we emphasize the need to maintain its
unity. Without prejudice to the interests and differences
that normally exist among its members, we believe that
the unity of the Council leads to the firm commitments
and concrete actions required to promote international
peace and security. One example of that is the Council’s
unity in its support for the peace process in Colombia.
We highlight, among the agenda items that we have
considered this month, the efforts of that country
to achieve sustainable peace with the support of the
international community. We also note the unity of the
Council in support of the peace process in Afghanistan.
We thank the presidency and the Secretariat for the
successful organization of the mission to that country,
and thank the Afghan authorities for their favourable
response. My country has strongly condemned the
recent terrorist attacks and expressed its solidarity with
the Afghan people and Government. We hope that those
responsible will be punished.
This month, we have also recognized the important
work of the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel and the United Nations Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia in the
fight against complex threats, such as terrorism and
organized crime.
We also agree on the fundamental objective of
achieving the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
We are cooperating in the follow-up of various processes
included in the January agenda, inter alia, those of
Liberia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Libya,
Mali, Somalia, South Sudan and Darfur. We must
nevertheless say that, in many cases, there is much
more that can and should be done. We are particularly
concerned, among the issues considered this month, by
the difficulties in reaching a commitment regarding the
non-impunity of the use of chemical weapons in Syria
and the lack of dialogue on the question of Palestine.
Thirdly, I would like to briefly refer to the work of
the two subsidiary bodies over which Peru was in charge
in January. The Counter-Terrorism Committee began
the discussion on the annual programme and drew up
the itinerary of visits and meetings throughout 2018.
We are seeking long-term collaboration with the
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, including in the
framework of the June meeting of relevant national
authorities. The Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014) also initiated the process of
considering the recommendations made by the Panel of

18-026567/17

S/PV.8173

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Experts following the issuing of a substantive report
that will be discussed during the Kuwaiti presidency
in February.
In conclusion, I reiterate our congratulations to you,
Mr. President, and your team for your exemplary work
this month and we welcome the Kuwaiti delegation,
which will assume the presidency tomorrow.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Let me start by joining
other Security Council members in paying tribute to
you and your team, Mr. President, for your excellent
stewardship of the Council during the month of January.
As the first country from Central Asia to preside
over the Council, we commend the focus on regional
approaches to conflict prevention that you have brought
to our work. Stronger regional cooperation can not only
help overcome common challenges, but also creates the
conditions for mutually beneficial opportunities. Each
country is better off if their neighbours also prosper.
That point was clearly demonstrated during the open
debate on 19 January, when we discussed regional
partnership in Afghanistan and Central Asia as a model
for linking security and development. The presidential
statement (S/PRST/2018/2) adopted following that
debate is an important legacy of your presidency. I
would also add my deep appreciation for our joint trip
to Kabul and for the way you and your team managed
that visit.
Regarding regional approaches, for our part, we
were pleased to collaborate with Côte d’Ivoire, with
constructive engagement from all Council members, on
the presidential statement on the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), which
was adopted yesterday (S/PRST/2018/3). A regional
approach to conflict prevention, early warning and
response mechanisms have proven increasingly relevant
as challenges related to climate change, trafficking and
terrorism do not respect borders. UNOWAS is a model
for other regions.
Sweden has long been a champion of disarmament
and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. The briefing on non-proliferation and, in
particular, the important role of confidence building
measures, was very welcome and timely. The Council
has an important role to play in advancing these issues,
as well as standing united to ensure that those who
violate international norms are held to account. The
Council needs to move forward in this effort.
8/17

31/01/2018

In the area of non-proliferation, Sweden, together
with Poland, requested an update from the Secretariat
under other business following the 9 January
intra-Korean talks, the first in two years. The Council
members welcomed the developments, reiterated its
call for full implementation of sanctions against North
Korea and echoed the Secretary-General’s call for
denuclearization. The meeting was important, as it
also showed the Council’s commitment to and support
for a peaceful solution to the tense situation on the
Korean peninsula.
Turning to the situation in Syria, we are alarmed
by what we heard only yesterday (see S/PV.8171) — the
continued severity of the devastating humanitarian
situation in Syria, the unacceptable levels of violence,
and that urgent humanitarian assistance, including
medical assistance, is required by more than 13 million
people. As penholders, together with Kuwait, we are
resolved to do what we can to support the United
Nations and the humanitarian actors on the ground
to help the millions in desperate need. During his
briefing to the Council on 22 January, Emergency
Relief Coordinator Mark Lowcock outlined five actions
needed for sustained and improved humanitarian
assistance, particularly to besieged and hard-to-reach
areas. These are concrete, tangible and realistic, and we
strongly support them. It is imperative that the Council
stand united behind the efforts of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in that regard.
Let me say a few words regarding working methods.
We applaud your efforts, Sir, to ensure that the Council
was able communicate clear messages after most closed
consultations during the month. That not only increases
transparency, but also helps the Council to summarize
the most salient points of discussions and to think
about how to best address the issues further. We look
forward to working with Kuwait on continuing efforts
to make the work of the Council more results-oriented,
transparent and inclusive. The open debate next week
on working methods is welcome in that connection.
Many of the tools needed to make the Council more
effective are already there; however, they must be used
appropriately. That includes ensuring that meetings
are tailored in terms of format and focus to ensure
the best chance of a meaningful outcome from the
Council’s deliberations.
Finally, Mr. President, experience over the past year
shows that non-traditional briefers from civil society,
notably women, have often animated our discussions
18-02656

31/01/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

by adding perspectives that we would otherwise not
necessarily think about. We appreciate the fact that a
woman civil society organization briefer was added to
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya meeting
on 17 January (see S/PV.8159). Ensuring women’s full
participation in sustaining peace is a Swedish priority.
In Libya, it is essential that women be able to participate
at every step in the implementation of the action plan.
We strongly believe that the Council will find that our
efforts are generally more effective if we allow that to
happen across the board.
Mr. Melki (France) (spoke in French): As a very
dense month comes to a close, I wish to commend
the dedication, determination and effectiveness that
you have shown, Mr. President. The work that has
been accomplished over the course of the month is a
testament to the commitment of Kazakhstan to the role
of the Security Council and, more broadly, to the United
Nations system and multilateralism. The track record
is particularly positive in the domains of disarmament
and non-proliferation, the maintenance of peace and
regional cooperation in Central Asia, naturally, but
also in West Africa, as evidenced by the meeting on
11 January (see S/PV.8156) and the adoption of the
presidential statement on 30 January (S/PRST/2018/3).

S/PV. 8173

the Democratic Republic of the Congo to increase their
financial aid to the country and to help it overcome the
current humanitarian crisis, which is dire.
On a separate African topic, the meeting on
the situation in Mali of 23 January (see S/PV.8163),
allowed us to send a strong and unanimous message
to the parties in Mali on the impatience of the Council
with regard to the full implementation of the peace
agreement. In that regard, the press statement that was
issued on 24 January (see SC/13177), welcomes the
renewed commitment of Malian parties to implement
their respective obligations by the end of March, while
indicating that if they do not, the new stages will be
reviewed in the framework of the sanctions regime.
On the Malian peace process, without which there
can be no peace in the Sahel, we must urgently make
progress. France thanks Kazakhstan for having given
the Council the opportunity to reaffirm that message.

Instead of delving into a programme too vast to be
described in detail in this statement, I will limit myself
to speaking about four priority elements for France.

Finally, we welcome the unanimous adoption
yesterday of resolution 2399 (2018), renewing the
sanctions regime on the Central African Republic until
31 January 2019. After the adoption of resolution 2387
(2017) on 5 November, which renewed the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
resolution 2399 (2018) is a new indication of the
Council’s attention to the situation in the Central
African Republic.

First of all, January was an important month for
addressing the African dossier in the Security Council.
We held an important meeting on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on 9 January (see S/PV.8153).
As the country enters an electoral year that will be
vital to its future and the stability of the entire region,
it will occupy the attention of the Council until
23 December. It has been important for the Council
to express its expectations since the beginning of the
year. The adoption of the press statement of 18 January
(S/PRST/2018/1), for which I thank the Kazakh
presidency, was an opportunity to show that attention
and to recall the principles championed by the Security
Council — the full implementation of the SaintSylvestre agreement of measures to ease tensions, the
respect for the electoral timetable and the participation
of all in the electoral process in an environment of
peace and of respect for fundamental rights.

The sanctions that we have just extended are not
useful in and of themselves, but rather as a means to
contribute to the stabilization of and the return of lasting
peace to the Central African Republic. Armed groups
indeed continue to have a presence on a great majority
of the territory and continue to receive supplies,
thanks to the illicit flow of arms and munitions from
neighbouring countries. Maintaining the sanctions is
therefore vital, but the mechanism will continue to be
accompanied by necessary exemption procedures in
order to allow the defence and security forces in the
Central African Republic to be trained, equipped and
armed. Resolution 2399 (2018) introduces two new
elements that seem particularly important. It will allow
us to sanction individuals who incite violence when
their actions are likely to jeopardize the peace, stability
and security of the Central African Republic, and to
punish individuals who attack humanitarian workers.

On the humanitarian front, the statement was an
opportunity for the Council to appeal to the partners of

The second priority as set out by the Kazakh
presidency was Afghanistan and Central Asia, which

18-026569/17

S/PV.8173

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

were the focus of the Council during January, as was
stated earlier. The Council’s visit to Kabul made it
possible to reaffirm the international community’s
support for Afghanistan in a very fragile security
context and take steps with respect to the elections
and the peace process. The ministerial-level debate
of 19 January (see S/PV.8162) on the links between
development and security in Afghanistan and Central
Asia was an opportunity to adopt the first Security
Council presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/2) on
the relationship between Afghanistan and Central
Asia. Finally, the consultations held by the Council
on 22 January on the activities of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia led to the adoption, for the first time since January
2015, of a press statement reiterating the Council’s
support for the Centre (SC/13179).
The series of appalling attacks that recently struck
Afghanistan make it clear that, regrettably, the country
and the region as a whole require more than ever the
attention of the Security Council.
Thirdly, another priority of the Kazakh presidency
was reflected in the meeting held on 18 January at the
initiative of and with the presence of the President of
Kazakhstan (see S/PV.8160), which made it possible to
address the issue of the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. This is an absolute priority for France
as well. We are aware of the fact that the threats facing
the non-proliferation regime are more significant than
ever and that the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and the threat of their use by States or
terrorist groups are proven dangers.
In North Korea and Syria, non-proliferation norms,
which lie at the very heart of our collective security, are
being regularly and often blatantly flouted. The rapid
development of North Korea’s nuclear and ballistic
programmes remains for us a grave source of concern.
The same is true of the ongoing use of chemical
weapons in Syria.
This leads me to my last point: the crises in
North Africa and the Middle East. We participated in
an important meeting on Libya (see S/PV.8159) and
in the quarterly open debate on the Middle East (see
S/PV.8167). We had a number of opportunities to address
the situation in Syria, especially the humanitarian
aspect thereof. We also met to discuss various aspects
of the humanitarian situation on 9 January, allowing us
to touch on the situation in Raqqa, where mines and
10/17

31/01/2018

unexploded ordnance have killed more than 200 people
since last October. It was also an opportunity for most
of us to more strongly underscore the gravity of the
humanitarian situation in Syria, in particular in eastern
Ghouta and Idlib.
A second meeting on various items was held
on 22 January to enable Mark Lowcock to brief the
Security Council on his first visit to Syria and to make
priority recommendations. Jeffrey Feltman briefed us
on the most recent developments in northern Syria, and
we took that opportunity to reiterate our grave concerns
about the deterioration of the humanitarian situation in
Syria. Two of those concerns were pre-eminent in our
discussions: the situation of the population in eastern
Ghouta, besieged by the Syrian regime, which is
deliberately and systematically blocking humanitarian
convoys and continues to refuse to authorize hundreds
of urgent medical evacuations; and the resumption
of attacks on civilians and medical infrastructure.
Bombings have killed dozens of civilians in the
“de-escalation zones”, including in Idlib, where they
also led to mass displacements.
Finally, we met yesterday for the monthly briefing
(see S/PV.8171) and humanitarian consultations on Syria.
The near-consensual views on the urgent humanitarian
situation expressed on those occasions makes it vital
that the Council issue a strong pronouncement. This
would help to underscore the Council’s concern with
regard to the exacerbation of the situation of besieged
civilians in eastern Ghouta and the failure to carry out
urgently needed medical evacuations, the intensified
bombings in the Idlib region, and the repeated attacks
on hospitals and health-care workers.
The issues I have just touched on reflect the
diversity and importance of our exchanges of views
in the past month. Mr. President, I wish to thank you
once again.
Ms. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): Let me
first thank Kazakhstan for a very successful presidency.
January 2018 has been our first month on the
Security Council, as part of our split term with Italy.
I welcome this opportunity to reflect on what we, as
a Council, have accomplished and also where we have
made too little progress, or none at all.
Let me consider three issues in this regard:
concerning Afghanistan, the prevention of conflict by
18-02656

31/01/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

addressing root causes; peacekeeping operations that
are fit for purpose; and accountability and justice.
On the issue of Afghanistan and prevention,
Afghanistan and the Central Asian region have been at
the heart of your programme, Mr. President, and the
need for the Council’s continued support of Afghanistan
is evident. Just this past week, the Council issued three
statements on the terrorist attacks there (SC/13172,
SC/13180 and SC/13185). More than 100 people, mostly
civilians, lost their lives. Those heinous attacks only
strengthen our resolve to stand with the Afghan people.
Only an inclusive peace and reconciliation
process — one that is Afghan-led and Afghanowned — can guarantee true stability in Afghanistan,
and it is paramount that all countries in the region
take up their responsibility by actively contributing to
that goal.
In this context, the high-level debate held on January
19 (see S/PV.8162) provided a valuable opportunity
for discussion, as did the valuable visit of the Council
to Afghanistan. Members of the Council emphasized
the need for inclusive regional development as an
important factor in preventing conflict and sustaining
peace in Afghanistan.
Conflict prevention and attention to root causes
were also addressed in the work of the Council. The
presidential statement on the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel that the Council adopted just
yesterday (S/PRST/2018/3) refers to the role of women
in prevention and recognizes the adverse effects of
climate change and drought on the stability of West
Africa and the Sahel.
On peacekeeping, last December 15 United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) peacekeepers
were killed in North Kivu. Last Saturday, another
peacekeeper was killed in South Kivu province.
Violence against United Nations peacekeepers is
unacceptable and needs to stop. The people who
are supposed to protect others are being themselves
mercilessly targeted and killed. On 22 January,
Lieutenant-General Cruz published a report that had
been requested by the Secretary-General. In the report,
Mr. Cruz presents clear recommendations on how to
change the way in which the United Nations operates
in high-risk peacekeeping operations. Previous reports
have included similar recommendations. Missions must
be better prepared and more proactive in implementing

S/PV. 8173

their mandate and protecting civilians. MONUSCO is
one of the missions that operates in an environment
where there is barely any peace to keep and where the
notion of the primacy of a viable political process is
almost absent.
In our discussions this month on the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, we
addressed similar serious challenges. The credibility of
the Council depends partly on our ability to design and
guide effective peacekeeping operations. That is why
the Kingdom of the Netherlands is planning to organize
an open debate on peacekeeping in March.
On accountability and justice, this month we heard
reports of the renewed use of chemical weapons in
Syria resulting in the killing of more than 20 civilians
in eastern Ghouta. In addition, the indiscriminate
bombardment of civilian-populated areas in Syria
continues, as does the starvation of civilians as a method
of warfare, through the blocking of desperately needed
humanitarian aid, including food aid. What has become
of the hard-won gains in international humanitarian
law in the last century? The lack of compliance with the
Geneva Conventions by parties to the Syrian conflict
erode not only the very norms enshrined in these
Conventions, but also the rules-based international
order. We cannot let that happen.
In 2015, the Council took decisive and credible
action to uphold accountability when it established
the United Nations Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (see S/PV.7501). It had a strong mandate
to investigate and identify perpetrators independently
from the politics in the Council. It established the
use of chemical weapons in Syria by both the Syrian
authorities and Da’esh. We have now considered a draft
resolution to establish a new mechanism, as presented
by the Russian Federation last week. The fundamental
characteristics of any accountability mechanism are the
principles of impartiality and independence. They were
still missing in the proposal that was presented. A new
mechanism should at least have the mandate to conduct
research and identify perpetrators independently of
the Council. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is ready
to continue to work for justice and accountability for
Syria and elsewhere in the world. In that regard, we
welcomed the General Assembly’s establishment of an
accountability mechanism for the most serious crimes
committed in Syria, the International, Impartial and

18-0265611/17

S/PV.8173

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Independent Mechanism to assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of those Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 (General
Assembly resolution 71/248). Ultimately, the most
appropriate path to accountability and justice would be
a referral of the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court.
In conclusion, we thank the Kazakh presidency
for its conduct of the Council’s business during the
month of January and appreciate its efforts to agree
on press elements after most consultations as well
as to encourage Council members to speak in the
Chamber where possible. I would also like to take this
opportunity to wish the delegation of Kuwait all the
best for its presidency in February. We look forward to
working with them.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Security Council’s agenda for the past
month has been especially full. We would like to thank
you personally, Mr. President, and your entire team
for your very professional and effective execution of
your functions in the presidency. We appreciate the
relevance of Kazakhstan’s initiatives, which reflect
the Council’s central role in seeking and developing
effective solutions to very difficult problems related to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
That applies particularly to the Security Council’s
meeting on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (see S/PV.8160). We believe firmly that
the way to put an end to the risks and threats in this
area is by observing the fundamental principles of
international law and ensuring equal and indivisible
security conditions for every country. The current
state of affairs in the area of non-proliferation and
disarmament urgently needs us to collaborate in the
quest for ways to deal with its growing problems while
at the same time maintaining cooperation mechanisms
that have been proven to be effective and respecting the
interests of all States.
We greatly appreciated the holding of a
ministerial-level debate on Afghanistan and Central
Asia (see S/PV.8162). Kazakhstan’s particular focus
on the issue of Afghanistan has been backed up by
Astana’s responsible attitude to the quest for answers
to the threats to the Central Asian region emanating
from Afghanistan. The dangerous situation there,
including the increasing risk of Afghanistan’s northern
12/17

31/01/2018

provinces becoming a bridgehead for the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, requires an integrated approach
both from the regional Powers and the international
community as a whole. We assume that within the
framework of initiatives designed to promote Central
Asian-Afghanistan cooperation, primary consideration
will be given to the positive experience of the Moscow
format and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
Afghanistan Contact Group. Mutually beneficial
cooperation is what is needed in Eurasia today,
and external actors should promote that rather than
attempting to drag the countries of the region into a
zero-sum game or present them with a false choice
between North and South.
We welcomed the presidential statement on
Afghanistan and Central Asia (S/PRST/2018/2), aimed
at strengthening peace and stability in the region. It
is important that we succeeded in reaching a mutual
understanding on conflict prevention in the presidential
statement. However, it was also clear that discussion of
this pressing issue should continue in the wider format
of the General Assembly and its specialized committees.
We commend the Council’s very well prepared mission
to Kabul during Kazakhstan’s presidency. After a gap of
many years since the previous such visit, it once again
demonstrated the Security Council’s unity on the issue
of the Afghan dossier and represented an important
milestone in the context of resolving the country’s
situation. We were pleased with the consultations on
the activities of the United Nations Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, which we
see as a comprehensive political tool for establishing
dialogue, cooperation and a peaceful resolution of the
issues among Central Asian states. It was gratifying
that for the first time in three years the Council was
able to agree on a press statement regarding the Centre’s
activities (SC/13179).
The quarterly debates on the Middle East have
unfortunately confirmed the fact that the crisis trends
in the region are still dominant. An episode of serious
arrhythmia in the efforts to settle the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict complicated the task of restarting a political
dialogue. The situation in Yemen is rapidly deteriorating,
while the state of affairs in Syria, Libya and Iraq
remains difficult. We firmly believe that breakthroughs
will be possible only through coordinated international
cooperation and the establishment of a unified agenda.
We must strive to unite our efforts to combat terrorism
and consolidate our approaches to settling serious
18-02656

31/01/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

regional crises. Russia is ready to participate in that
work with all interested partners. Attempts to promote
national agendas while ignoring the views of other
Member States, which we unfortunately witnessed
at the beginning of the month, are counterproductive
and only make the quest for lasting solutions to the
issues harder.
In the past month, with regard to a settlement of
the conflict in Syria, a ninth round of negotiations
was held under the auspices of the United Nations. We
are pleased that there has been no pause in the recent
inter-Syrian talks. In Sochi, in the past few days, with
the support of the United Nations, the partners in the
Astana process and the leading regional states held the
Syrian National Dialogue Congress, an unprecedentedly
major event hosted by Russia. The Security Council has
consistently emphasized that it is the Syrians themselves
who must determine their country’s future, and a wide
representation of every stratum of Syrian society such
as this is therefore simply crucial to enabling work to
begin on such urgent issues as constitution-building. In
that regard, our efforts dovetail fully with the logic of
resolution 2254 (2015), and we hope that they will have
an appropriate follow-up.
At Russia’s initiative, the Council began discussing
the creation of a new international investigative
mechanism to replace the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism, whose reputation is
tainted. It will be important to ensure that any new
entity works professionally and reliably to establish
all the circumstances related to the use of poisonous
substances, in strict conformity with Chemical Weapons
Convention rules, in order to eventually ascertain the
identity of the perpetrators of such acts.
During the discussion in January of issues in West
Africa and the Sahel-Saharan region (see S/PV.8156),
we concluded that the countries of the region are all
dealing with similar challenges and threats that should
be combated through a multifaceted approach. The
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel region
is a mechanism whose potential for making progress on
these issues has not been fully exploited.
The extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus for another six
months was an important step, since the mission will
be particularly needed during the six-month pause in
the direct talks on a settlement between the island’s

S/PV. 8173

two communities. The slight reduction in the size of
its military component should in no way affect its
overall effectiveness.
In conclusion, we would like to once again thank
our friends from Kazakhstan and wish every success
to the delegation of Kuwait, to which the baton of the
presidency passes in February.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China appreciates the fact that under the presidency
of Kazakhstan, the Council has accomplished its work
for the month of January. We congratulate Ambassador
Umarov and his team on their outstanding performance.
With regard to the Council’s work this month, I
would like to reaffirm our positions on the following
three issues.
The first issue concerns the situation in Afghanistan.
Peace and stability in Afghanistan are in the interest
of the long-term well-being of the Afghan people
and impact their regional stability and security. The
situation in Central Asia has been stable on the whole
and the region has great potential for development.
On 13 and 14 January, a Council delegation travelled
to Afghanistan and visited Kabul. On 19 January, the
Council held an open meeting at the ministerial-level
on peace and security in Afghanistan and Central Asia
(see S/PV.8162) and adopted presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/2. All that has helped Council members
understand the Afghan issue through first-hand
experience, facilitated efforts by the international
community to explore ways to solve the Afghan issues
from a regional perspective, and promoted lasting peace
and development in Afghanistan and Central Asia.
The second issue is the situation in Middle East.
In January, the Council held an open meeting on Libya
(see S/PV.8159) and an open debate on the question
of Palestine (see S/PV.8167). More than 50 countries
and organizations stated their views on the situation
between Palestine and Israel and the status of Jerusalem.
That has enhanced the understanding of the parties
concerned about the urgency of resolving the relevant
issues and sent a strong message from the international
community urging the early resumption of peace talks
between Palestine and Israel.
The third issue is the situation in Africa. In
January, the Council discussed the situations in West
Africa, the Sahel region, the Central African Republic,
South Sudan, Somalia, Mali and the Democratic

18-0265613/17

S/PV.8173

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Republic of the Congo and adopted relevant outcome
documents. The Council has continued to focus its
attention on agenda items on Africa and expresses its
support to regional and subregional organizations, such
as the African Union’s good offices, and has supported
regional countries with a view to making progress in
addressing challenges. That is conducive to achieving
lasting peace and stability on the African continent at
an early date.
In conclusion, I wish Kuwait all the best in
assuming the presidency in the month of February.
China will actively support its work.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): First of all, allow me to
congratulate you personally, Mr. President, as well as
your team, our colleagues from Kazakhstan, on your
very successful presidency during the month of January.
We express our gratitude and commend your efficient
and professional conduct of the work of the Security
Council. We particularly appreciate your transparency
in dealing with the media, as demonstrated by your
presentation, on many occasions, of communiqués to
the press.
This month was busy, but it was also very
productive, as the Council dealt with important issues
for international peace and security. We held two
high-level events dedicated to important topics, and
the Council undertook a visit to Afghanistan, which
was a way to gain a first-hand understanding of the
country’s needs and priorities and an opportunity to
show solidarity with the people of Afghanistan.
Let me now concentrate on three topics that Poland
considers important for our activities in the Council.
My first point relates to the role of preventive
diplomacy, which was rightfully underlined during
several meetings this month. On 18 January, the
Council adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2018/1,
on conflict prevention. For the first time since 2015, the
Council also adopted a press statement (SC/13179) in
which it commended the activities of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia, which can be seen as a positive development. I
also believe that presidential statement S/PRST/2018/3,
on the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel, which was adopted yesterday, will be a useful
tool for maintaining stability in the region.
Secondly, let me mention briefly the issue
that is at the forefront of Poland’s activities in the
14/17

31/01/2018

Security Council, namely, the role of international
law in maintaining peace and security. We see the
need for further development of legal instruments in
international relations and for the ability to enforce
them. In that regard, the high-level briefing on
non-proliferation and confidence-building measures,
which was held two weeks ago (see S/PV.8160), was
most timely and important.
Thirdly, let me also highlight the need for
maintaining the Council’s unity and ownership, which
was demonstrated in yesterday’s adoption of resolutions
and presidential statements. We will need this level of
unity during the upcoming months when discussing the
most serious challenges to peace and security, but also
humanitarian situations.
January was also a month of deadly terrorist attacks
in Afghanistan and Mali. Such tragic events show us
how much the Council’s activities and unity are needed,
and we have to deliver.
In conclusion, I would like once again to thank our
colleagues from Kazakhstan and express our gratitude
to them.
(spoke in Arabic)
I wish Kuwait every success during its presidency
of the Council next month.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinatinal State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): On behalf of my delegation, I
would like to warmly congratulate and thank you,
Mr. President, for your professional, effective and
proactive work in guiding the Security Council’s work
this month. We commend your leadership, and that of
your entire delegation, during your presidency.
The vision and perspectives brought by
Kazakhstan have been instrumental in the preparation
of the programme of work for this month, in which
the Security Council placed primary and needed
emphasis on the challenges facing Afghanistan and its
relationship with the Central Asian region. Presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/2, adopted on 19 January, and
the debate held on the same day (see S/PV.8162), at
which the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan
was present, served to lay the groundwork for the
Security Council’s debate on the existing ties between
Afghanistan and Central Asia as a model to link
security and development.
18-02656

31/01/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

In that regard, I would like to emphasize that
cooperation between the Central Asian States and
Afghanistan is fundamental for the stabilization of that
country, particularly with regard to the fight against
transnational crime and terrorism. Proof that this
issue is essential to the country and the region is the
perpetration of four terrorist attacks in the past week,
which resulted in the deaths of almost 200 people. We
reiterate our gratitude for the bravery and sacrifice
that Afghanistan’s people, Government and security
forces continue to make in the fight against terrorism
on behalf of all of us.
In addition, the need for cooperation in the
fight against transnational crime and terrorism
was demonstrated during the consultations held on
22 January on the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia. During those
consultations, we were once again able to stress the
importance of intraregional cooperation and Central
Asia’s cooperation with Afghanistan. We also highlight
the Council’s adoption of a press release (SC/13179) in
support of the work of the Regional Centre, which had
not happened since 2015.
Another event that we would like to underscore is
the Security Council’s visit to Kabul, which allowed
us to have a closer look on the ground of the political
reality and security in Afghanistan. We highlight
the work done by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan in support of the political
process in the country. In that regard, for us Security
Council members who had the opportunity to travel
to Afghanistan with you, Mr. President, the incidents
that I described earlier — I am referring to the
terrorist attacks perpetrated and suffered in Kabul in
recent days — not only are news that one reads with
sadness and pain but also become very close personal
experiences. That is why we applaud your personal
insistence, Mr. President, and that of your delegation
that the trip should take place.
We would also like to highlight the emphasis that
the presidency placed on the issue of non-proliferation
with the holding of the high-level briefing on
confidence-building measures (see S/PV.8160), at
which the President of Kazakhstan was present. In that
context, we highlight the decision of countries such
as Kazakhstan to eliminate the possession of nuclear
weapons from their defence doctrines and their national
security policies. That is a clear example of how, with

S/PV. 8173

political will, leadership and resolve, it is possible to
achieve that goal.
As a member of the first densely populated area
declared free of nuclear weapons and of the first region
to declare itself a zone of peace, Bolivia reiterates that it
is ready to launch a call for that example to be replicated
in other regions. We believe that the best prevention
measure is the elimination of all nuclear weapons and
other weapons of massive destruction.
In that regard, we highlight the presidential
statement on preventive diplomacy (S/PRST/2018/1),
adopted on 18 January, which reiterates the need for
the Security Council to focus on the prevention of
armed conflicts by making effective use of tools such
as negotiation, mediation, conciliation, and recourse to
regional organizations or arrangements, among others,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
It also highlights the importance of taking into account
the participation of regional and subregional actors in
mutual confidence-building measures.
We would also like to highlight the briefing on
the peace process in Colombia (see S/PV.8154), which
took place on 10 January. It is important to highlight
the commitment of the Government of Colombia and
of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(FARC) to implementing the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace. Although there are significant challenges in the
reintegration of former combatants into civilian life, in
the strengthening of security in the areas abandoned by
the FARC and in specific measures to move forward with
comprehensive rural reform, the willingness shown by
the parties and by the people of Colombia demonstrate
that the peace process is irreversible. With regard to
the negotiation process with the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional, we regret that it has been suspended. We
hope that the talks can be resumed as soon as possible.
To conclude, we highlight the holding of the open
debate on the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question (see S/PV.8167). We believe that the monthly
holding of such a meeting and the focus of our efforts
on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict are fundamental to
bringing us closer to resolving it. We reiterate that the
only way to guarantee a just and lasting peace is through
the two-State solution, whereby a free, sovereign and
independent Palestinian State can finally be established
within the pre-1967 international borders, with East

18-0265615/17

S/PV.8173

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

31/01/2018

Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.

the most crucial areas to support the Government of
Afghanistan’s efforts to achieve a long-time peace.

In addition to once again congratulating you,
Mr. President, on the way in which Kazakhstan carried
out the work of the presidency, we pledge all our efforts
so that, likewise, the presidency of Kuwait has the
same success.

This month we have also discussed the situation
in South Sudan. We all were clear and united in
our concern about the continued violence and the
actions of all parties to the conflict. After making
our expectations clear in last month’s presidential
statement (S/PRST/2017/25), we now need to make
the consequences clear to violators of the cessation of
hostilities and to those who undermine the High-Level
Revitalization Forum. To prevent further violence, the
effective monitoring and attribution of violations will
be essential. Obstruction and criticism of the ceasefire
and transitional security arrangements for monitoring
must end immediately.

Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, and all of
your team on a successful presidency. From the first
day, when you started what I hope will be a new Security
Council tradition by organizing a flag ceremony to
welcome the new members, you have managed the
Security Council business in an inclusive, transparent
and very effective manner.
I will focus my intervention on three of the most
pressing threats to international peace and security that
the Council has tackled in January — Afghanistan,
South Sudan and Syria.
I would first like to welcome the leadership
that Kazakhstan has demonstrated on Afghanistan.
The Security Council visit that you, Mr. President,
organized strengthened our collective understanding of
the conflict and established many areas of consensus
among Council members. However, as my Dutch
colleague has already highlighted today, the terrible
events of the past week, with multiple terrorist attacks
claiming many innocent lives, remind us of the scale
of the threat faced by the people of Afghanistan and
the need for the Council to work together to promote
security and stability.
As we all agreed, there can be no purely military
solution to the conflict. Long-term peace and stability
will be achieved only through a peace process
that is Afghan-led and Afghan-owned. Regional
cooperation is essential for that, and I would like
to commend Kazakhstan again for convening the
important ministerial discussion on building regional
partnership in Afghanistan and Central Asia (see
S/PV.8162). Progress towards the holding of credible
and inclusive parliamentary elections this year and
presidential elections next year is another important
step towards stability.
Looking ahead, the mandate renewal of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in
March presents a valuable opportunity to streamline
the Mission. That will allow us to concentrate on
16/17

We reiterate our call today for an arms embargo. It
would apply equally to all parties and would not single
anyone out for blame. It would send a strong message
to spoilers and strengthen those attempting to bring
the South Sudanese parties to peace. It is in line with
what the region has called for — clear consequences
for violators.
Finally, let me turn to Syria. The sharp deterioration
in the already dire humanitarian situation occurs as
the Al-Assad regime continues to use aid as a weapon
of war and denies humanitarian access to those most
desperately in need. No progress has been made on
accessing the 2.5 million people in besieged and hardto-reach areas. The request of the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs for agreement to
allow three or four United Nations and Syrian Arab Red
Crescent convoys each week across front lines to those
areas has been ignored. Children in eastern Ghouta
are dying as they wait for the regime’s approval to be
medically evacuated.
This month, the continued indiscriminate aerial
bombardment of Idlib has caused countless civilian
casualties, targeted hospitals and displaced 270,000
people within Idlib itself, stretching the already
scarce resources beyond their limits. UNICEF has
reported that, in the first 14 days of 2018, more than 30
children were killed by escalating violence in besieged
eastern Ghouta.
The Council has agreed that we should put aside
our differences over the political situation in order to
tackle humanitarian issues. However, despite all the
rhetoric, we have not seen any progress and, more
important, nor have the people of eastern Ghouta. They
18-02656

31/01/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

are still besieged, starving and cut off by the Syrian
regime from any help. As the Security Council, we
cannot allow that to continue for yet another month.
The Syrian regime must allow the delivery of essential
aid and medical evacuation for those who need it most.
The Council must be able to express itself clearly on the
matter and uphold its responsibilities.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to express my deep appreciation to you,
Mr. President, and to your team for your hard work this
month and for the professional way in which you led the
Security Council deliberations.
Together, we were able to adopt a number
of resolutions, presidential statements and press
statements, which reflected the unity of the
Security Council towards the various issues under
its consideration. You, Sir, were also keen to provide
the press with information after informal consultations
held in January.
In our view, the holding of today’s meeting
represents an occasion to review the Council’s work
during an unusually eventful month. In that regard,
I would like to highlight some of the important
achievements of your presidency and address additional
points, as follows.
First, the important field visit of Council members
to Afghanistan was the first since 2010. It demonstrated
the Council’s commitment to closely monitoring
the latest developments in one of the most important
conflicts on its agenda. We reaffirm the importance
of such field visits, which provide an opportunity to
follow developments on the ground in conflict zones,
understand the real challenges faced by countries in
question and realize the responsibilities of the Council
to meet all needs and requirements so as to achieve
international peace and security.
Secondly, the open debate on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
(S/PV.8167), proved that it is now high time to end the
Israeli occupation of Arab and Palestinian territories
so that the Palestinian people can exercise all their
rights, including their right to establish a Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital and along the
4 June 1967 borders, as provided for in the resolutions
of international legitimacy and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Thirdly, Kuwait is co-penholder with Sweden
on the humanitarian situation in Syria. As such, we
are prepared to take the lead in reaching a unified

S/PV. 8173

position in the Council to improve the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Syria; to expand the range of
humanitarian assistance so that it can reach different
parts of Syria, such as Eastern Ghouta, Idlib, and north
of Aleppo; and to provide protection to civilians in the
light of the increasing violence there.
Fourthly, with regard to presidential note S/2017/507,
we have come together today to implement its most
salient elements. As Chair of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, I take this opportunity to announce, in
my capacity as President of the Council next month,
that we will hold an open debate in the first week of
February to hear statements and recommendations by
United Nations States Members — not only Security
Council members — on how to increase transparency
and improve the performance of the Security Council.
That will allow us to identify ways to improve our
working methods during our presidency.
In conclusion, I thank all Council members that
have offered their good wishes and support to Kuwait’s
presidency of the Council as of tomorrow. We look
forward to cooperating with all Council members
so that the Council can carry out its tasks, shoulder
its responsibilities and implement its mandate for
maintaining international peace and security. We will
ensure that the presidency is transparent and cooperative
in a constructive manner with all Member States.
The President: As this is the last scheduled meeting
of the Security Council for the month of January, I would
like to reiterate the sincere appreciation of the delegation
of Kazakhstan to the members of the Council, especially
my colleagues the Permanent Representatives, their
respective staffs and the secretariat of the Council, for
all the support they have given to us. Indeed, it has been
a busy month, and one in which we rallied to consensus
on several important issues within our purview. We
could not have done it alone, or without the hard work,
support and positive contributions of every delegation
and the representatives of the Secretariat, as well as
all the conference service officers, interpreters and
security staff.
As we end our presidency, I know that I speak
on behalf of the Council in wishing the delegation
of Kuwait good luck in the month of February. As a
token of our appreciation, we have distributed to each
delegation photographs to commemorate our work
together and limited-edition commemorative stamps.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

18-0265617/17
