A/RES/75/189

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 December 2020

Seventy-fifth session
Agenda item 72 (b)
Promotion and protection of human rights: human
rights questions, including alternative approaches for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 16 December 2020
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/75/478/Add.2, para. 89)]

75/189.

Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 which guarantees the
right to life, liberty and security of person, the relevant provisions of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 2 and other relevant human rights conventions,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council
on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, as set out in Council resolution
44/5 of 16 July 2020, 3
Welcoming the universal ratification of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August
1949, 4 which, alongside international human rights law, provide important legal
frameworks of accountability in relation to extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions during armed conflict,
Recalling all its resolutions on the subject of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions as well as the resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights and the
Human Rights Council on the subject, and emphasizing the importance of their full
and effective implementation,
Recognizing the positive role that regional human rights systems can play in the
global protection against arbitrary deprivation of life,

__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53
(A/75/53), chap. V, sect. A.
4
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
1
2

20-17342 (E)

050121

*2017342*

A/RES/75/189

Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions

Acknowledging the importance of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development 5 and its implementation for the promotion and protection of the
enjoyment by all persons of human rights, gender equality, access to justice for all
and democracy, including effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all
levels,
Noting with deep concern that impunity continues to be a major cause of the
perpetuation of violations of human rights, including extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions, especially with regard to the gender-related killing of women
and girls, also known as femicide,
Noting that enforced disappearances can end in extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions, recalling the importance in this regard of the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, 6 and
calling upon all States which have not yet done so to consider signing and ratifying
or acceding to the Convention,
Acknowledging that international human rights law and international
humanitarian law are complementary and mutually reinforcing,
Noting with deep concern the growing number of civilians and persons hors de
combat killed in situations of armed conflict and internal strife, and that women and
girls are disproportionately affected by conflict, as recognized in Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000 on women and peace and security and
subsequent resolutions on the matter,
Noting with deep concern also the continuing instances of the arbitrary
deprivation of life, resulting from, inter alia, the imposition and implementation of
capital punishment when carried out in a manner that violates international law,
Recalling the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and
Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules) 7 and the adoption
of the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the
Nelson Mandela Rules), 8
Deeply concerned about acts that can amount to extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions committed against persons exercising t heir rights to peaceful
assembly and freedom of expression and against human rights defenders in all regions
of the world,
Deeply concerned also about killings committed by non-State actors, including
terrorist groups and criminal organizations, which may amount to abuses of
international human rights law and violations of international humanitarian law,
Acknowledging that extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions may under
certain circumstances amount to genocide, crimes against humanity or war crim es, as
defined in international law, including in the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, 9 and recalling in this regard that each individual State has the
responsibility to protect its populations from such crimes, as set out by the General
Assembly in its resolutions 60/1 of 16 September 2005 and 63/308 of 14 September
2009,
Convinced of the need for effective action to prevent, combat and el iminate the
abhorrent practice of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, which represent
__________________

Resolution 70/1.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2716, No. 48088.
7
Resolution 65/229, annex.
8
Resolution 70/175, annex.
9
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.
5
6

2/6

20-17342

Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions

A/RES/75/189

flagrant violations of international human rights law, particularly the right to life, as
well as of international humanitarian law,
1.
Reiterates its strong condemnation of all the extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions that continue to occur throughout the world;
2.
Demands that all States ensure that the practice of extrajudicial, summary
or arbitrary executions is brought to an end and that they t ake effective action to
prevent, combat and eliminate the phenomenon in all its forms and manifestations;
3.
Reiterates that all States must conduct prompt, exhaustive and impartial
investigations, exercising due diligence, into all suspected cases of ext rajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions, identify and bring to justice those responsible, while
ensuring the right of every person to a fair hearing by a competent, independent and
impartial tribunal established by law, grant adequate compensation with in a
reasonable time to the victims or their families and adopt all measures, including legal
and judicial measures, also bearing in mind gender equality in access to justice,
necessary to put an end to impunity, particularly with regard to the gender-related
killing of women and girls, also known as femicide, and extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions of refugees and migrants and humanitarian workers, and prevent
the further occurrence of such executions, as recommended in the Principles on the
Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extralegal, Arbitrary and Summary
Executions, 10 fully consistent with their obligations under international law;
4.
Calls upon Governments, and invites intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, to pay greater attention to the work of national-level
commissions of inquiry into extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, with a
view to ensuring the effective contribution of these commissions to accountability
and to combating impunity;
5.
Calls upon all States, in order to prevent extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions, to comply with their obligations under the relevant provisions
of international human rights instruments, and also calls upon States which retain the
death penalty to pay particular regard to the provisions contained in articles 6, 14 and
15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and articles 37 and 40
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 11 bearing in mind the safeguards and
guarantees set out in Economic and Social Council resolutions 1984/50 of 25 May
1984 and 1989/64 of 24 May 1989 and taking into account the recommendations of
the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions in reports to the Council and the General Assembly, including
the report submitted to the Assembly at its sixty-seventh session, 12 regarding the need
to respect all safeguards and restrictions, including limitation to the most serious
crimes, stringent respect of due process and fair trial safeguards and the right to seek
pardon or commutation of sentence;
6.
Emphasizes that to prevent extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
States should take necessary steps to adopt such laws or other measures as may be
necessary to give effect to the right to life in accordance with international law and
that everyone has the right to recognition everywhere as a person before the law;
7.

Urges all States:

(a) To take all measures required by international human rights law and
international humanitarian law to prevent loss of life, in particular that of children,
during detention, arrest, public demonstrations, internal and communal violence, civil
__________________

Economic and Social Council resolution 1989/65, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
12
A/67/275.
10
11

20-17342

3/6

A/RES/75/189

Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions

unrest, public emergencies or armed conflicts and to ensure that the police, law
enforcement agents, armed forces and other agents acting on behalf of or with the
consent or acquiescence of the State, including private security providers, act with
restraint and in conformity with international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, including the principles of proportionality and necessity, and in this
regard to ensure that police and law enforcement officials are guided by the Code of
Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials 13 and the Basic Principles on the Use of Force
and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials; 14
(b) To ensure the effective protection of the right to life of all persons, to
conduct, when required by obligations under international law, prom pt, exhaustive
and impartial investigations into all killings, including those targeted at specific
groups of persons, such as racially motivated violence leading to the death of the
victim, killings of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious an d linguistic
minorities or because of their sexual orientation or gender identity, killings of persons
affected by terrorism or hostage-taking or living under foreign occupation, killings of
refugees, internally displaced persons, migrants, street children or members of
indigenous communities, killings of persons for reasons related to their activities as
human rights defenders, lawyers, journalists or demonstrators, killings committed in
the name of passion or in the name of honour and killings committed f or
discriminatory reasons on any basis, to bring those responsible to justice before a
competent, independent and impartial judiciary at the national or, where appropriate,
international level and to ensure that such killings, including those committed by
security forces, police and law enforcement agents, paramilitary groups or private
forces, are neither condoned nor sanctioned by State officials or personnel;
8.
Affirms the obligation of States, in order to prevent extrajudicial, summary
or arbitrary executions, to protect the lives of all persons deprived of their liberty in
all circumstances and to investigate and respond to deaths in custody;
9.
Encourages States, taking into account the relevant recommendations of
the United Nations and of regional human rights systems, to review, where necessary,
their domestic laws and practices with regard to the use of force in law enforcement
in order to ensure that these laws and practices are in conformity with their
international obligations and commitments;
10. Emphasizes that, to prevent extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions, States should take effective measures to ensure that the use of force by
law enforcement officials is in conformity with international obligations and the
principles of legality, precaution, necessity, proportionality and accountability, as
well as their national legislation;
11. Encourages States to make appropriate protective equipment and lesslethal weapons available to their officials exercising law enforcement duties, wh ile
pursuing efforts to regulate and establish protocols for the training and use of less lethal weapons and in this regard strengthening international cooperation, bearing in
mind that even less-lethal weapons can result in risk to life or serious injury;
12. Also encourages States to accelerate the work on fulfilling the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, bearing in mind the importance of the full
enjoyment of human rights and access to justice for all and effective, accountable and
inclusive institutions at all levels, as well as the systematic mainstreaming of a gender
perspective;
__________________
13
14

4/6

Resolution 34/169, annex.
See Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
Havana, 27 August–7 September 1990: report prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.91.IV.2), chap. I, sect. B.
20-17342

Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions

A/RES/75/189

13. Urges all States to ensure that all persons deprived of their liberty are
treated humanely and with full respect for international law and that their treatment,
including judicial guarantees and conditions, conforms to, as appropriate, the United
Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela
Rules), as well as the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners
and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules) and, where
applicable, the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and the Additional Protocols
thereto of 8 June 1977, 15 as well as other pertinent international instruments;
14. Welcomes the International Criminal Court as an important contribution to
ending impunity concerning extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, and,
noting the growing awareness of the Court worldwide, as highlighted during the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Rome Statute of the Court, calls upon
those States that are under an obligation to cooperate with the Court to provide such
cooperation and assistance in the future, in particular with regard to arrest and
surrender, the provision of evidence, the protection and relocation of victims and
witnesses and the enforcement of sentences, also welcomes the fact that 123 States
have ratified or acceded to and 137 States have signed the Rome Statute, and calls
upon all those States that have not ratified or acceded to the Rome Statute and the
Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the International Criminal Court 16 to
give serious consideration to doing so;
15. Acknowledges the importance of ensuring the protection of witnesses for
the prosecution of those suspected of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions,
urges States to intensify efforts to establish and implement effective witness
protection programmes or other measures, and in this regard encourages the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to develop practical tools,
including gender-sensitive tools, designed to encourage and facilitate greater
attention to the protection of witnesses;
16. Encourages Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to organize training programmes and to support projects with a view to
training or educating military forces, law enforcement officers and government
officials, as well as private personnel acting on behalf of the State, in international
humanitarian and human rights law connected with their work, to include a gender
and child rights perspective, as well as information on the role of journalists and
media workers, in such training and to require, where appropriate, that all private
security providers have vetting and training procedures in place, including mandatory
appropriate weapons training, that include human rights norms and principles, and
appeals to the international community and requests the Office of the High
Commissioner to support endeavours to that end;
17. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the Special Rapporteur to
the General Assembly 17 and the Human Rights Council, and invites States to take due
consideration of the recommendations contained therein;
18. Commends the important role that the Special Rapporteur plays in the
elimination and prevention of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, and
encourages the Special Rapporteur to continue, within the mandate, to collect
information, including data disaggregated by sex, from all concerned, to respond
effectively to reliable information that comes before him or her, to follow up on
communications and country visits and to seek the views and comments of
Governments and to reflect them, as appropriate, in reports;
__________________

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
Ibid., vol. 2271, No. 40446.
17
See A/74/318 and A/75/384.
15
16

20-17342

5/6

A/RES/75/189

Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions

19. Acknowledges the important role of the Special Rapporteur in identifying
cases where extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions could amount to genocide
and crimes against humanity or war crimes, and urges the Special Rapporteur to
collaborate with the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and, as
appropriate, the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide in addressing situations of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
that are of particularly serious concern or in which early action might prevent further
deterioration;
20. Welcomes the cooperation established between the Special Rapporteur and
other United Nations mechanisms and procedures in the field of human rights, and
encourages the Special Rapporteur to continue efforts in that regard;
21. Urges all States, in particular those that have not done so, to cooperate
with the Special Rapporteur so that the mandate can be carried out effectively,
including by favourably and rapidly responding to requests fo r visits, mindful that
country visits are one of the essential tools for the fulfilment of the mandate, and by
responding in a timely manner to communications and other requests transmitted to
them by the Special Rapporteur;
22. Strongly urges all States to take the necessary measures to ensure the
safety and security of national and international humanitarian personnel;
23. Expresses its appreciation to those States that have received the Special
Rapporteur, asks them to examine the Special Rapporteur’s recommendations
carefully, invites them to inform the Special Rapporteur of the actions taken on those
recommendations, and requests other States to cooperate in a similar way;
24. Once again requests the Secretary-General to continue to use his best
endeavours in cases where the minimum standards of legal safeguards provided for
in articles 6, 9, 14 and 15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
appear not to have been respected;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Rapporteur with
adequate human, financial and material resources to enable her to carry out the
mandate effectively, including through country visits;
26. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue, in close collaboration
with the High Commissioner and in conformity with the mandate of the High
Commissioner, established by the General Assembly in its resolution 48/141 of
20 December 1993, to ensure that personnel specialized in international humanitarian
and human rights law, including in provisions related to gender equality, form part of
United Nations missions, where appropriate, in order to deal with serious violat ions
of human rights, such as extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions;
27. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the General Assembly, at its
seventy-sixth and seventy-seventh sessions, a report on the situation worldwide with
regard to extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions and recommendations for
more effective action to combat this phenomenon;
28.
session.

Decides to continue its consideration of the question at its seventy-seventh

46th plenary meeting
16 December 2020

6/6

20-17342
