UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL
FORTIETH

RECORDS
YEAR

2634”
NEW

MEETING:

11 DECEMBER

1985

YORK

;

CONTENTS
Page
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2634)

.....................................

1

................................................

1

Letter dated 6 December 1985 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Nicara a to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council PS/17671) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

S/PV2634

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol W...) are normally published in
quarterly Supphnents of the officiar Recorris of the Security @urcir. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Reso&uions and Lh%ons of the
Securify Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2634th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 11 December 1985, at 3.30 p.m.
Print:

Mr. IRandre

BASSOLE

(Burkina Faso).

provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption

At the invitation of the President, Mr Bermcal Soto (Costa
Rica), Mr Oramas Oliva (Cuba), MI: Herrera Cdceres
(Honduras) and Mr Azzamuk (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
took the pIaces reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

agenda. (S/Agenda/2634)

3. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India): My delegation has already
had the opportunity of congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of December and of expressing our confidence
in your well-known ability to give guidance and leadership
to the Council. Last week, we arrived at a satisfactory
conclusion to our dehtirations
in regard to the situation
in Angola. We hope that our current deliberations on the
situation in Central America will lead similarly to a successful outcome.

of the agenda.

2. Letter dated 6 December 1985 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Nicaragua
to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/17671).
The meeting was called to order at 4.10p.m.

4. The item relating to the situation in Central America
has been on the agenda of the General Assembly for the
last three years. This is the tenth time over this period that
Nicaragua has felt compelled to have recourse to the
Security Council. This is indicative of the gravity of the
deteriorating situation that obtains in Central America
and the sense of insecurity that the Nicaraguan Govemment and people continue to experience.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 6 December 1985 from the Charge d’affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Nicaragua to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17671)

5. In spite of the valiant efforts of the Contadora Group
to find a political solution to the problems of Central
America, the situation in the region continues to be
marked by instability and strife. Acts of interference and
intervention-direct
and indirect-have
continued and
even intensified. Statements have been made which fly
directly in the face of the concepts of sovereignty and
independence of States. The process of dialogue between
the two States directly concerned has been interrupted.
New forms of pressure and coercion have been brought
into play.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
conformity with decisions taken at the 2633rd meeting, I
invite the representative of Nicaragua to take a place at
the Council table. I invite the representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Mexico, the Syrian Arab Republic
and Viet Nam to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr Chamotro Mora
(Nicaragua) took a place at the Gxutcil table; ME BajaieKhorassani (Islamic &pt.&he of Iran), MIT Maya-PaIencia
(Mexico), MI: El-Fattal (Syrian Amb Republic) and ME Bui
Xuan Nhat (Viit Nam) took the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber.

6. Yesterday, we had the opportunity of listening with
attention and-1 must confess--grawing concern to the
statement of the Acting Minister for External Affairs of
Nicaragua, who explained with clarity the developments
that have compelled Nicaragua once again to seek redress
by the Council. It is clear that the people of Nicaragua
have been subjected to great hardship and distress, and
the economy of the country has suffered considerable
disruption and damage.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Costa Rica,
Cuba, Honduras and the Libyan Arab Jamahiiya in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the debate,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant

7. In my current capacity as representative of the Chairman of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, I should
1

like to take this opportunity to reaffirm our solidaritywith
the Government and people of Nicaragua, a friendly and
fellow non-aligned country. We respect the right of Nicaragua, as indeed of all States, to be masters of their own
destiny. We note the will of the Nicaraguan people to
mould a new future for their nation, and we support their
efforts to build a new society, free from all foreign interference or pressure. We affirm the sovereign right of every
country to pursue its own political and social and economic system.

other intimidating acts; threats of seizure and occupation and selective bombing of Nicaraguan territory; the
use of neighbouring countries as bases for aggression
and the training of mercenary groups; acts of sabotage;
air and naval attacks; the mining of the country’s main
ports; and the imposition of coercive economic measures, including the trade embargo” [ibid, para. 2051.
Additionally,

the Ministers

“expressed the opinion that these new acts of political
and economic pressure, coupled with military actions,
should be considered within the framework of a
broader Ian to destabilize and overthrow the Govemment of R icaragua; and that they augment the risk of a
regional war and hinder the necessary dialogue that the
Contadora Group is promoting to achieve a negotiated
and political solution to the region’s problems” [ibid,
para. 2071.

8. Security Council resolution 530 (1983), adopted in
May 1983, reaffirmed the right of Nicaragua and of all the
other States of the area to live in peace and security, free
from outside interference. That resolution also recalled
the relevant principles of the Charter of the United Nations, particularly the obligations of States to settle their
disputes exclusively by peaceful means, not to resort to the
threat or use of force and to respect the self-determination
of peoples and the sovereign independence of States.
More recently, Council resolution 562 (1985), adopted in
May this year, infer alia, affirmed the inalienable right of
Nicaragua and the rest of the States to decide on their own
political and economic systems free from outside interference, subversion, direct or indirect coercion, or threats of
any kind, reaffirmed its fii support to the Contadora
Group; called on States to refrain from carrying out political, economic or military actions of any kind against any
State in the region which might impede the peace objectives of the Contadora Group; and called on the Govemments of the United States and Nicaragua to resume the
dialogue in Manzanillo, Mexico. Regrettably, these resolutions continue to remain on paper.

11. When we consider the situation in Central America,
our thoughts turn inevitably to the Contadora Group,
which for nearly three years now has been engaged in an
admirable effort to bring peace to that troubled region,
marshalling the genius, and calling upon the political will,
of Latin America itself to solve the problems afflicting the
area. However, as the Secretary-General noted in his
latest report on the subject, “despite the efforts of the
Contadora Group, the situation in Central America has
been steadily deteriorating this year” [see S/l 7549, para.
81. He also stated that “It is imperative for the countries
with interests in the region to support with deeds the
Contadora Group’s efforts and refrain from any action
that might adversely affect them” [ibid, para 111.

9. The situation in Central America has figured prominently among the important issues engaging the attention
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. The Seventh
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held at New Delhi in March 1983, took
note with great concern of the continuing tension in Central America. ‘Ib quote from the Political Declaration
adopted at that meeting, the heads of State or Govemment “denounced the new and increasing threats and acts
of intimidation and the growing seriousness and increased
number of acts of aggression against Nicaragua”, which
“were considered part of a deliberate plan to harass and
destabilize that country” [see S/15675 and C&xl and 2,
anntq sect. I, para. 136)

12. My country, along with other non-aligned countries,
has been following the developments in Central America
with serious concern. The Movement has deplored the use
of coercive measures against Nicaragua, as well as the
overt and covert attempts to interfere in its internal affairs. It is our conviction that the tensions and disputes in
the Central American region can only be resolved peacefully and through negotiations among all concerned. We
welcome and support the efforts of the Contadora Group
and the recently constituted Lima Support Group. We
hope that the Contadora Group, with the support of the
entire international community and with the goodwill and
co-operation of all the States concerned, will be able to
invigorate its efforts. At this critical juncture, its effective
functioning has assumed an even greater dimension and
significance. The continuation of its efforts is crucial to
the resolution of the problems of the region. It is essential
that they be intensified. It is equally important that these
address the basic issues at stake. This is indispensable for
the eventual success of its efforts.

10. More recently, at its Conference of Foreign Ministers at Luanda in September, the Movement gave expression to-and
here I quote from the Final Pohticai
Declaration adopted by the Ministers-“deep
concern
that the present situation in Central America constitutes
one of the main focal points of tension at the international
kv~l”te~l17610
and Cord, annex I, para. 2041.

13. It is our profound conviction that peace in Central
America cannot rest on the foundations of policies of
intervention, interference and intimidation, on the threat
or use of force, or on coercive measures of any kind
whatsoever. For any peace to be enduring it must be based
on acceptance of the principles of the liticai and socioeconomic pluralism of States, scrup up”ous observance of
the principles of non-interference and non-intervention,

“condemned the escalation of aggression, military attacks and other actions against Nicaragua’s sovereignty,
political independence, territorial integrity, stability
and selfdetermination.
In this regard, they especially
condemned the violation of its air space and territorial
waters, the launching of international manoeuvres and
2

20, We are living today in a particularly serious time in
Latin America, when the most profound economic crisis
of our history is jeopardizing the political and social fabric
of many countries and unleashing with unprecedented
intensity forces and energies that will inevitably bring
about deep changes in our national structures, the direction of which will certainly mould our future.

a positive appreciation of the endemic problems of that
troubled part of the world and a constructive and cooperative approach to their resolution. It is incumbent upon
the Security Council and all its members to grasp this
reality and give the urgent task of bringing peace to that
region a real chance.
14. Over 30 years ago the first Prime Minister of newly
independent India, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, stated:

21. In this context, the problem of the unjust intemational trade demonstrated by the debt is an explosive and
volatile factor that will be decisive in the inevitable process
of future change. It is within that delicate framework of
contemporary reality that we must consider the attempt
to turn back the clock of history by force and the obsessive
attempt to impose on 3 million Latin Americans a destiny
different from that which they have chosen, without realizing that this could cause a change very different from the
one sought in the direction of the 400 million Latin Americans who see in this new combat between David and
Goliath a threat to their dignity, unity and sovereignty and
a return to a period of our history that we believed and
trusted was a thing of the past.

“Every country has a right to choose its own path and
go along with it. We have chosen our path and we
propose to go along with it, and to vary it as and when
we choose, not at somebody’s dictate or pressure; and
we are not afraid of any other country imposing its will
upon us by military methods or any other methods.”
Those words were not uttered in any specific context. They
were universal and abiding truths, not limited by time or
space, and they represented the very basics both of nonalignment and indeed of the Charter of the United Nations. As we proceed with our debate, let us reflect on
those seemingly simple words and see if they have any
relevance to the agenda item before us today.

22. As is always the case, an attempt to stifle by force the
people’s claims and feeling of national independence is
unwittingly awakening the dormant energies of a great
volcano. That is a tragedy for a region which today is
attempting to work out, in the absence of co-operation
and in the face of international indifference, a proper
space for its democracy and which has succeeded in finding its own ways of arriving at peaceful, negotiated solutions to the most delicate situations in cases when its
autonomy and freedom to do so have been respected.

15. Mr. ALZAh4ORA (Peru) (interpretationfrom Spanish): First, I extend brotherly greetings to you, Sir, and tell
you how pleased we are to see you presiding over the
Council, which so much appreciates your personal and
I also wish to express my
professional qualities.
delegation’s appreciation of the outstanding way in which
our friend Mr. Woolcott of Australia presided over the
Council during the month of November.
16. Because we are Latin Americans we have a duty of
solidarity with the brother people of Nicaragua; because
we are non-aligned we have a shared responsibility to
defend the principles of self-determination and non-intervention; and because we are members of the Support
Group linked to the Contadora effort we are committed
to the collective task of achieving a peaceful, negotiated,
stable and democratic solution to the question of Central
America.

23. That ability to reach agreement and understanding
without the interference of external factors could have,
and still may be able to, offset any real risk to the peace
and security of the region, affirmed political and social
stability, ensured respect for the sovereignty and integrity
of all and promoted a political evolution that could reconcile freedom with justice and open the door to genuine
participative democracy based on ideological and economic pluralism within the framework of genuine nonalignment. We would thus have given an example of
democratic maturity, of harmonious and fraternal coexistence in the hemisphere, with respect for the principle of
the sovereign equality of States, in tune with inter-American principles and pacts, which could with moral authority have preached abroad what is practised within the
continent and could have projected our intracontinental
relations towards a future of effective trust and securitysomething which so far has been unattainable.

17. Our membership in the Council, though, obliges us
to reflect even more profoundly in scope and perspective
in order to assess objectively the consequences for the
international
commumty of the dangerous course of
events in Central America.
18. It is not necessarv to have more information or
imagination to realize that the situation in Central America is entering an extremely serious stage at which the
decision has been reached to use all the military, economic
and political resources necessary to pursue a pre-established geopolitical purpose to its final consequences.

24. Nothing is perfect, much less an attempt to institutionalize, under siege, a revolutionary process which put
an end to the long night of a fierce dictatorship, supported
and sustained precisely by many political sectors and economic groups that today claim to intervene on behalf of
freedom and democracy.

19. In the face of the use of force, anywhere and in any
circumstances, as a legitimized form of diplomatic action,
it is pointless to invoke enshrined principles and commitments undertaken at the international level. All that can
be done now is to appeal to reason and common sense,
and perhaps also to recall the precariousness, demonstrated by recent history, of relying on military superiority
as a supreme and permanent argument.

25. Differences may exist as to methods, procedures and
orientation; mistakes can be acknowledged and should be
corrected. But what is untenable is to try forcefully to bend
the will of a people that recently emerged from a genuine
3

struggle for freedom and autonomy to impose upon it
once again from outside the yoke of domination and
dependence. And this course of action holds within it an
imminent danger for all the peoples of the third world,
because the attempt by the super-Powers to make the
settlement of regional conflicts in the third world their
own exclusive preserve would amount to repudiating the
systemof multilateral relations, to liquidating forever the
right of self-determination and to disregarding all that this
Organization stands for. The Central American crisis is
therefore universal in scope and significance, becausein
that crisis,asin other regional crises,principles and values
fundamental to all developing peoples are at stake.

solution of force, imposed from the outside, to the question of Central America.
30. In view of the growing escalation of the conflict in
Nicaragua and the consequentworsening of the situation
in the region, Peru considers that the conditions exist for
the Security Council, in the context of its reiterated support for Contadora, to establishmeasuresof investigation
and control commensurate with the seriousnessof the
situation for peace and security.
31. As a member of the Support Group, Peru will none
the lessact only in complete agreement and co-ordination
with the Contadora Group, whoseLatin American efforts
it completely supports, and in accordancewith the will of
the countries most affected by the conflict. We trust that
the preventive action that the Council should take and
which is also an essentialprerequisite fur the peace-making action of the Contadora Group may be employed in
time to ensure the discharge of the responsibility that we
all share to preserve the fundamental principles of the
United Nations and the international legal order that it
enshrinesand to maintain peace and securityin the region
and in the world, which is our specific function and duty.

26. Given this situation, ‘Contadora emergesas the sole
viable alternative to the option of war in Central America
and asthe Political processthat Canresolve, if its action is
not undermined, the contradictions deeply rooted in the
Central American region, whose origins are not limited to
the difficulty of having systemsof different ideologies
coexist,but rather derive from a long history of material,
.institutional and democratic privation.
27. This has been recognixed and proclaimed in diierent resolutions in this Council which, faced with the worsening of the situation in the region and notorious attempts
to frustrate the peace-making attempts of Contadora, has
reaffirmed its support for this processby encouraging it to
intensify its action for the attainment of a stable,peaceful
and negotiated solution. ‘That aspiration is strengthened
today by the inclusion of Argentina, Brazil, Peru and
Uruguay as members of the Lima Support Group, which
was established precisely to avoid a waning of the Contadora effort and to create external conditions conducive
to maintaining its vitality and its dynamics.

32. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (intepretationjfoqz Russian): I wish to congratulate you;Mr. President, on your assumption of the post
of President of the Security Council. We have no doubt
that you will successfullydischargeyour duties, especially
asyou have acquired considerable experience in this field.
I wish to assure you that you can count fully on the
co-operation of the Soviet delegation. We alsowish to pay
a tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Woolcott, who performed most successfullyasPresident last month.

28. Thus, entire peoples of Latin America arejoining in
this attempt to achieve a realistic negotiation which can
guarantee peace and security to all the peoples of Central
America and which, respecting their sovereign right to
‘self-determination, can promote national unity and re.’ gional fraternity for allCentral Americans, The Contadora action, which is eminently constructive, should not
compromise any interest. The presence within it and in
the Support Group of countries of the stature of its members is a guarantee that the objectives of security,stability,
peace and democracy, with which they have identified
themselves and to which they are committed, tin be
achieved without violence through intelligent and careful
negotiations to preserve values and principles fundamental to all those of us who share that continent. This is the
responsibility that has been assumedand that they remain
committed to fulfd if the course towards understanding
and prudence is not blocked. There are no obstacleswhich
cannot be overcome, unless there is a decision to create
them. And the interests of all can be reconciled if there is
a real will to do so.

33. The Soviet delegation considersNicaragua’s current
complaint to the Security Council asa fully warranted and
timely step. In his statement yesterdayin the Council, the
Acting Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua,
Mr. Tmow, set before the Council facts which testify
eloquently to the’escalation of the provocative actions
taken against his country and the expansion of military
interference in its affairs from outside.
34. Almost four years have passedsince the time when,
at the request of Nicaragua, the question of aggressive
actions by the United States against that State was first
taken up in the Council. In that period, which is short even
for the lifetime of the United Nations, the question of the
flashpoint of tension in Central America has become
firmly established on its agenda.-The constant buildup of
hostile actions against Nicaragua has led to a state of
affairs in which the situation in Central America has
become one of the most potentially explosive in the world
‘and now ranks on a par with the conflicts in the Middle
East and southern Africa.

29. Given the military escalation we are witnessing, the
Contadora countries and those of the Support Group
reiterate their desire for concord, agreement, good will
and openness to all the parties involved in the problem
and their intent to spare the Latin American region the
upheaval and violence that would inevitably accompanya

35. The flames of that flashpoint of tension continue to
cost,the lives of thousands of human beings. But that is
not all. .In effect, it is putting the torch to the fate of many
‘Statesof the region and of the internationalsituation asa
whole. The logic .of events shows quite clearly that if
developments in that region cannot be returned to their
4

againstthe Nicaraguan people, which has embarked upon
the course of autonomous development and progressive
transformation. Assorted typesof pressure are being used
against that country in the form of constant military
manoeuvres,which were recently extended for another six
months, reconnaissanceflights and the threatening presence of naval forces off the coasts of Nicaragua. Also,
military operations are being carried out by the counterrevolution from the territory of neighbouring States.
There is no doubt as to the addressof those who continue
to co-ordinate and prepare such operations.

normal course, the existing military danger there could
lead to a repetition of the tragic events with which the
Cotmcil is very familiar from the example of other regional conflicts.
36. Therefore. one fully understands the perfectly natural concern felt by the &erwhehning majo&y of Statesof
the circumstancessurrounding Nicaragua at the present
time. This mounting alarm hasbeen well illustrated by the
fact that in the general debate in the plenary meeting of
the Assembly representatives of almost 140 StatesMembers’of the United Nations in one way or another advocated the prompt settlement of the Central American
crisis.

41. The very dangerous manifestation of the escalation
of tension imposed from outside was the a pearance in
the hands of the counter-revolutionaries oPanti-aircraft
missiles of the surface-to-air type, which led to tragic
events in the territory of Nicaragua. There can hardly be
any doubt asto who placed those weaponsin the hands of
the’mercenaries,particularly asin Washington quite some
time ago it was possible to hear arguments about the
%xpediency” of their introduction into the camp of the
Contras.The question therefore ariseswhether thosewho
practically acclaimed the attack on the Nicaraguan helicopter realize the direction in which they are push$g
events. The transfer of that type of weapon to terrorrst
bands could lead to an unpredictable escalation of criminal actsof violence. The targets of the terrorist acts,aswas
the casewith the mining of Nitiraguan ports, could prove
to be the meansof transport of various Statesand peaceful
civilians, and not only in that region. This is something
that thosewho advocate the strengthening of the struggle
,against international terrorism would do well to think
about, so that their words can be brought into line with
their deeds.

37. None the less,one has to note that the situation in
that region of the world conthmes to become more acute,
acquiring an ever more dangerous character. That is the
conclusion reached by the Secretary-General, who finds
in his latest report that “despite the efforts of the Contadora Group, the situation in Central America has been
steadily deteriorating this year” [see$117549, para 8j, and
he also refers to “the urgent need for an equitable, comprehensive and negotiated solution in the region” [ibid,

para. II].

38. The members of the Council are familiar with the
basicpolitical prerequisites for such a solution. A number
of thesehave been reflected in SecurityCouncil resolution
562 (1985), adopted in May when the Council met to
consider the situation resulting from the introduction by
the United Statesof a trade embargo against Nicaragua.
That resolution with full clarity confirmed the inalienable
right of Nicaragua and other Statesto decide on their own
political and economic systems,free from outside interference, subversion, direct or indirect coercion or threats
of any kind. It also called on all States to refrain from
carqhg out, supporting or fornoting political, economic
or military actions of any L d against any State in the
region which might impede the peace objectives of the
Contadora Group. At the same time, the Council called
on the Governments of the United Statesand Nicaragua
to resume the bilateral dialogue with a view to reaching
accords favourable for normalising their relations &nd
regional detente.

42. I believe that if our aim is to list the illegal acts
against Nicaragua, such as the mining of ports, “educational supplies” for terrorist groups, participation of
American mercenaries in raids on Nicaraguan territory,
the ,trade embargo and much else,this in itself would take
up many pages of an indictment. It is to be emphasized
that this course is being conducted openly and is a clear
challenge to civilised norms of morality and the principles
of international law. The International Court of Justice at
The Hague demanded the cessationof such actions, and
for good reason. At the same time, the United Nations is
a witness of the stubborn unilateral refusal to pursue a
dialogue between the two parties, notwithstanding the
fact that this hasbeen provided for in the Security Council
resolution.

39. The seven months which have elapsed since the
Council adopted that resolution ,have shown, however,
that the situation surrounding Nicaragua is far from normal and the basic provisions of the Couucil’s resolution
remain unfullllled. As far as concerns the United States
trade embargo against Nicaragua, the SecondCommittee
of the General Assemblywas recently obliged to adopt a
special resolution on that question, a resolution which
condemned that embargo and other measures aimed
againstNicaragua and demanded their immediate repeal.

43. The slanderous campaign is being stepped up
against the uolitical and economic systemwhich the.Nica;aguan pebple have chosen for themselves.Virtual ultimatums are being delivered to force them to change their
internal system and foreign policy, and, in fact, to renounce their sovereignty. It is clear to all that here we have
a general policy of destabilization for the overthrow of the
Government of that country. The threats against Nicaragua become-ever more brazen. In this connection it is
sufficient to recall the recent statementsof a highly placed
United Statesofficial concerning the need to “remove the
tumour” by means of surgical intervention.

40. It is clear that the main reason for the aggravation of
the situation in Central America still remains, that is, the
further escalation of the aggressivepolicy of the United
Statesagainst Nicaragua, aimed at gross interference in
the affairs of that sovereign State. Irrefutable facts
demonstrate that there has been an expansion of the
arsenal of the means of military and political pressure
5

44. Naturally, this dangerous course has given rise to
resolute and almost general condemnation throughout
the world. The Soviet Union, like many other States of
greatly differing political persuasions, cannot be indifferent to the aggressive policy being pursued against Nicaragua. We have a feeling of solidarity with that people of that
country, which has valiantly defended its inalienable right
to independence and its own path of development.

Union, because they not only run counter to the task of
improving the international atmosphere, which was referred to in the joint Soviet-American statement, but also
create a direct threat to international peace and security.
49. As was emphasized by the General Secretary of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union, Mr. Gorbachev, at the session of the Supreme
Soviet, on 27 November, ‘We have always been and will
continue to be on the side of peoples defending their
independence.”

45. It is obvious that the United States not only is failing
to fulfil its obligations as a permanent member of the
Security Council but indeed IS deliberately undermining
the Contadora process for a peaceful settlement of the
Central American situation. The United States is trying to
cover up its policy of hostility towards Nicaragua by generalities concerning its support for the efforts of the Contadora Group. But what is primarily needed is concrete
action to that end; what is needed is the manifestation of
political responsibility, the renunciation of strong-arm
tactics. This would make it possible to reduce tension in
the region and around it and help to establish a climate
favourable to a political settlement of the crisis in Central
America by the Latin American countries themselves.

50. In the opinion of the Soviet delegation, the Security
Council must play an important role in the urotection of
the sovereignty of Nicaragua and other co&tries of the
region. It is the task of the Council to bring a restraining
influence to bear on the dangerous developments in Central America.
51. Mr.MOHAMME
D (‘Rinidad and Tobago): My delegation would like to extend to you, Sir, our sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of December. I know
that under your able and experienced stewardship the
work of the Couricil will be guided with competence and
impartiality. I wish also to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Woolcott, the representative of Australia, for the
energetic and responsible manner in which he led the
Council’s work during the month of November.

46. It is precisely that approach to the problem of normalizing the situation in Central America that is advocated by Nicaragua in making constructive proposals to
that end, inter alia, concerning the establishment in the
region of a zone of peace, free of any foreign presence.
That policy was clearly demonstrated in the note addressed by the Acting Foreign Minister of Nicaragua to
the Secretary of State of the United States on 6 December
[s/17675, annex]. In particular, the note contained an
urgent appeal to the Government of the United States not
to impede negotiations within the framework of the Contadora Group and to promote the establishment of minimum security conditions which would make it possible to
continue negotiations on the Contadora Act. Unfortunately, however, we have not a positive reaction to that
proposal from the United States.

52. In May of this year my delegation participated in a
debate on the situation in Central America at a meeting
of the Council [2579th meeting] convened at the instance
of the Government of Nicaragua. Today the Council is
once more considering the question, against a backdrop
of an escalation in the conflict in Central America and,
more specifically, the introduction and use of sophisticated weaponry. This escalation can lead only to a further
deterioration of the social, economic and political conditions in Central America, as well as hinder attempts to
negotiate peace and stability in the region.

47. As a consistent supporter of having the countries of
the region themselves solve the problems of Central
America by political means without foreign interference,
the Soviet Union takes a very positive view of the efforts
of the Contadora Group and the States which support it
to eliminate the external factors which are impeding the
normalization of the situation in the region and the resumption of negotiations between the United States and
Nicaragua. The Soviet Union calls for recognition of the
inalienable right of each people to freedom and independence and to the autonomous choice of the path of its own
development so that that right will not be violated by
anyone and there will be no outside interference. This
Soviet position of principle was outlined fully with complete clarity to the President of the United States during
the Geneva summit in November.

53. My delegation deplores the use of force or the threat
of the use of force in the resolution of disputes, and if
historical precedents provide any indication of future perspectives, llinidad and Tobago is concerned that we are
facing the gloomy prospect of not only an arms race in
Central America but the competitive use of increasingly
sophisticated weapons.
54. Trinidad and Tobago is convinced that Deace. stability and security in Central America must be predicated on
the principles of selfdetermination,
respect for sovereignty, non-interference in the internal affairs of States,
the inviolability
of national frontiers and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. The mechanism for achieving
those objectives must be constructive dialogue both at the
bilateral level and within a multilateral
framework, of
which the Contadora peace process is an appropriate
forum. We feel that bilateral and multilateral discussions
or negotiations are not mutually exclusive and could be
pursued simultaneously in a spirit of mutual respect and
tolerance.

48. The actions of the United States which have led to
the heightening of tension in the Central American region
and the statements of certain American leaders conceming the intention to continue to support the anti-Government bands and overthrow the Government of Nicaragua
cannot fail to give rise to serious concern in the Soviet
6

countries in seeking a peaceful settlement of the question
of Central America in accordance with the principles of
self-determination
and non-interference.

55. It is our view that the current problems in Nicaragua
have effects on and implications for the entire Central
American region. A negotiated settlement is particularly
important since what is envisaged is a comprehensive
settlement embracing diverse internal and external factors which include social, economic, political and security
considerations.

62. The Chinese Government and people have all along
sympathized with and supported the just struggle of the
Nicaraguan people to safeguard their national independence and State sovereignty and develop their national
economy. We hold that the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of all countries in Central America
should be respected. The disputes among the countries in
the region and those between the United States and Nicaragua should all be settled through negotiations conducted on an equal basis and in accordance with the basic
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, but not
through resort to force or threat of force.

56. My delegation continues to believe that the Contadora process created by the diplomatic and political
initiatives of Colombia, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela
and more recently assisted by a support group of additional Latin American countries-Argentina,
Brazil, Peru
and Uruguay-provides
the framework for a peaceful and
negotiated settlement of the entire Central American
problem. We recall that Security Council resolution 530
(1983) and General Assembly resolutions 38/10 and 3914
fully support the Contadora process. My delegation considers that the deteriorating situation in Central America
warrants increased attention and consideration by the
Contadora Group with the assistance of the Support
Group and the full support of the parties concerned for
the Contadora peace process.

63. The Chinese delegation hopes that all the concerned
parties to the conflicts in Central America will respect the
aspirations of the people in Central America and adopt
practical and effective measures to terminate the prolonged turbulence in the region so as to enable the Contadora Group and the Lima Support Group to become
fruitful at an early date in their efforts in search of peace
and stability in Central America.

57. Trinidad and Tobago is deeply concerned over the
recent deterioration of the situation in Central America.
My delegation is convinced that existing mechanisms for
the negotiating process to bring about international reconciliation are not lacking; what may be lacking is the
political will to negotiate in a spirit of good faith and
compromise.

64. The PRESIDENT
(interpreWorzfrom French): The
next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite hi to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
65. Mr. ORAMAS OLIVA (Cuba) (infeqxefatbn from
Spantrh): First of all, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption once more of the presidency of the Security Council. Your well-proved diplomatic talents and
your firm commitment to the defence of peace and just
causes are a guarantee of a successful outcome of thework
of this important body. I wish also to thank most cordially
the representative of Australia for the very effective way
in which he conducted the Council’s work last month.

58. Mr. LI Luye (China) (inrerpre~~fionfrom Chinese): It
is my pleasure, Sir, to see you assuming the presidency of
the Security Council, and please allow me to extend to you
my warmest congratulations. I am convinced that, being
an outstanding diplomat of Burkina Faso, you will certainly be able to guide the proceedings of the Council to
a smooth accomplishment of the important tasks of the
Council for this month. I wish also to take this opportunity
to express our appreciation and gratitude to your predecessor, Mr. Richard Woolcott of Australia, for his excellent performance in discharging the functions of the
presidency for November.

66. Yet again Nicaragua finds itself obliged to request
the convening of the Council in order to set before it the
exceedingly grave situation prevailing in the Central
American region as a consequence of persistent interference in the affairs of the countries of the region by an
imperialist Power. The Acting Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua, Victor Hugo Tmoco, has reiterated
that the latest decisions of the United States Government
authorizing the supply of aircraft, helicopters, launchers
and other kinds of war materiel to the mercenary forces
committing
aggression against Nicaragua constitute a
dangerous escalation threatening peace and a serious
blow to negotiating efforts.

59. We have listened with attention to the statements by
Mr. Tmoco, Acting Minister for External Relations of
Nicaragua, and representatives from other countries. The
Chinese delegation wishes to offer its observations on this
question.
60. Despite the continued efforts of the Contadora
Group, the situation in the Central American region remains tense and turbulent and no relaxation has been
achieved so far. This cannot but cause serious concern for
the international community.

67. To this we must add the fact that there has been a
dangerous escalation of conflict in the region with the
introduction of new, sophisticated hardware given by the
United States to the Somoza criminals, now called amtras, as shown by the shooting down of a Nicaraguan
helicopter by a surface-to-air missile. Not only has Nicaraguan air space been mined, but also the cycle of violence
has thereby been intensified and tensions raised to levels
at which the point of no return might well be reached.

61. The fundamental way to alleviate and eliminate tensions in Central America is to remove all outside interference. We therefore oppose the intimidation, interference,
infiltration and sabotage carried out by any outside force,
in whatever form and under whatever pretext, against the
Central American countries. We support the unremitting
efforts of the Contadora Group and other Latin American
7

68. The supply of surface-to-air missilesby the United
Statesto the Somorist counter-revolutionaries is a clear
violation of the Charter of the United Nations and the
norms of international law. But that is not all. That action
is a dangerous precedent becausetheseweaponshave not
been used reviously by mercenaries and now there is a
danger of J: eir proliferation.

74. The contras today, like self-seekinghacksof the past,
are-as Sandino would have said of the latter-‘&a collection of rabble, cowards and traitors, incapable of leading
a patriotic and valiant people suchasours, which isworthy
of a better fate, a people whosepatriotic attitude is setting
an example of dignity and moral rectitude to the other
peoples of the continent”. This people once again is infhctmg a severe defeat on its imperialist enemies and the
lackeysin the pay of the Yankee Government. Whatever
69. Today a Nicaraguan helicopter has been shot down, ‘conspiracy
be hatched, it will be smashed by the
but tomorrow it could well be an airliner. The statements determined may
resistance
of Secretaryof StateShultz,applauding the useof surface- Sandinist revolution. of the undefeated and victorious
to-air missilesby the so-called Contrasand warmlyendorsing their recent criminal acts,are not only irresponsible,
encouraging asthey do the useof suchweaponsby Somoz- 75. How can Nicaragua be asked to make more and
ist mercenaries, but they also reveal the Yankee hypocrisy more concessionsif, with each passing day, it is being
when speaking out againstterrorism. To givesophisticated asked to pay a very high price for the decision to be the
weapons to the counter-revolutionary agentsin their pay, master of its own destiny? Nicaragua is the victim of an
undeclared dirty war by the United States; that is well
the contras, is to sanction new acts of terrorism, with
known, because the leaders of that country openly state
unforeseeable consequences.
that the Yankee Government’s commitment to the contras is unrestricted. In other words, even if agreement is
70. The international community cannot ignore the reached
on the Contadora Act, they will continue to back
gravity of these events nor the dangers which may stem these contra assassins.It is also well known becausethey
from irresponsible and criminal actions and statementsby unabashedlyrequest more millions of dollars to help these
the United States Government and its highest officials, wretched criminals who like vile vermin scurry awayfrom
such as those to whom I have referred, includiig the Nicaraguan territory whenever the Sandinist army strikes.
remarks of the Secretary of State.
76. It isnot Nicaragua that should make concessions,but
71. These facts and actions seriously exacerbate the those committing the aggressionagainst that country who
state of tension and the dirty war waged by the United
should put an end to their criminal and ignominious war
States imperialism on Nicaragua. That aggression has for there to be peace for the peoples of Central America.
been repudiated repeatedly by the international commu- It is essential that aid to the contras cease and that the
nity, as can be seen from various General Assemblyand interests and aspirations of the Nicaraguan peoples be
Security Council resolutions, decisions of the Intemarespected, as President Daniel Ortega Saavedra stated
tional Court of Justice and the recent decision of the
recently in the 42nd meeting of the General Assembly’s
SecondCommittee at this fortieth sessionof the Assembly fortieth session.
which condemned the economic embargo and the coercive measurestaken by the United Statesagainst Nicara77. The time hascome to take afirm and resolute stand,
gua, as well as from the Final Declarations of the because
the situation in Central America is deteriorating.
Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned CounWhat
is
happening now is a grave threat to peace and
tries, held in September last at Luanda, which expressthe
security.
We
must not be fooled by lying presscampaigns,
views of the overwhelming majority of Members of the
the
sole
aim
of
which is to create the necessarypsychologUnited Nations.
ical conditions for the United StatesCongressto approve
new aid for the contras. Let us think back on all these
72. As set out in the Charter, it is the responsibility of
precedents,becausetomorrow, when there is some counthe Security Council to assure the maintenance of intertry that wants to do something not to the liking of Washnational peace and securityand to put an end to actswhich
ington, some cock-and-bull story will be manufactured so
disturb them such asthose I have mentioned, which are a that on the basisof this harmful practice which is contrary
danger to peace and security in our Central American
to international law, monies may then be voted to arm
region and may have incalculable international conse- killers who will try to overthrow that Government-as if
quences.In this casethese actionsare all the more serious the invasion of Castillo Armas in Guatemala, or the assassince the country violating the Charter and openly refussination of Salvador Allende in Chile or the invasion of
ing to endorse any norm of international law is a permaGrenada were not enough to demonstrate who is practisnent member of the Council. The attitude of the United
ing the policy of State terrorism and to know exactlywhat
States Government is not only unacceptable and to be that policy means.
condemned @sofacro; but from any point of view it goes
a&%&its status as a permanent member of the Security 78. Recently, the United States Under-Secretary of
.
State, Mr. Abrams, gave some false figures as to Cuban
advisers in Nicaragua. We reject the statement on the
73. A few daysago in the General Assemblywe saidthat
resenceof Cuban troops in Nicaragua. President Ortega
FG
aavedra, in his statementbefore the Assembly,provided
ti people suchas the Nicaraguan people, which is imbued
with self-respect,will be able to defend tooth and nail its information on Cuban advisersin his country. The United
Statesknows perfectly well that the Cubans in Nicaragua
freedom and the right to make its own revolution.

85. While condemning this a& of aggression, we classify
it and analyse its objectives in the context of the policy of
aggression against Nicaragua, which has been escalating.
continuously over the last four years. This most recent act
of aggression-mining
Nicaraguan air space, as it weregoes hand in hand with other such forms of aggression and
sabotage as earmarking American funds to provide the
mercenary forces with all the means necessary to enable
them to expand hostilities laterally and vertically. Such
acts of aggression also go hand in hand with continuous
military manoeuvres designed to increase tension in this
sensitive region df the American continent and to achieve
well-known pre-arranged objectives for the purpose of
undermining the territorial integrity and independence of
Nicaragua.

are advisers; it is quite clear that that smokescreen is
designed to justify new assistance for the contra assassins.
79. Let there be no more endless military and naval
manoeuvres in the Central American region, no further
aid to the contras, no more aggression against Nicaragua;
then we shall be marching towards the bright course of
peace. But the Sandinist revolution cannot be asked not
to defend itself and to agree to commit suicide. We should
help the victim, which is Nicaragua, and impose pace on
the aggressor, which is the Umted States. I beheve that
now more than ever, the Security Council has a major
responsibility, and an opportunity to fulfil the mandate it
was given by calmly and firmly helping to restore peace
and stability in the Central American region. Our peoples
come before the Council seeking help to achieve the peace
for which they yearn. It is our responsibility to do our
utmost to secure that peace, because while we are sitting
here debating the matter, hundreds of brave Nicaraguans
are being killed by the criminal bands formed and sustained by the United States.

86. Mr. Shultz, the United States Secretary of State,
affrmed on 3 December-that
is, a day after the act of
aggression against the helicopter-that
the United States
would persist in its unlimited support of the mercenaries
even if the countries of Central America signed the Contadora Act. Mr. Shultz described Nicaragua as a “cancer”.

80. At this time we call for the solidarity of Latin America, the non-aligned countries and peace-loving forces
with the heroic Nicaraguan people, which is nti defending for all time the sovereignty, independence and dignity
of all the small peoples, especially in our America, against
their principal and historical enemy.

87. These acts of aggression combihed with provocative
statements run counter to the efforts of the Contadora
Group and the Latin American Suprfl Grou&---;
2
the Luna Group-and
those of the ecretaryrescue the region of Central America from the grip of
armed conflict which threatens the entire region with a
great explosion with incalculable consequences, in addition to being a flagrant violation of the rules of intemational law and the purposes and principles of the Charter,
especially the principle of the peaceful settlement of diiputes. They reveal an integrated and systematic plan for
open intervention in the internal affairs of Nicaragua
directed against the Sandinist revolution and proceeding
from a foolhardy imperialist theory that rules out the
coexistence of non-aligned progressive government and
other systems of government in the region.

81. I wish to conclude my statement by quoting from
August0 C&ar Sandino, the General of free men, who
said, “there will be justice, and the war of the oppressors
of the free
oples will be won by the war of the liberators”. As a 8z ban with profound faith in the destiny of our
America, I express to the Council today my unshakeable
belief in the glorious victory of Nicaragua.
82. The PRESIDENT
(in?erpre&ztion
m French): The
next speaker is the representative o f” the Syrian Arab
Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

88. Everything indicates that the United States does not
allow changes that run counter to its own selfish interests,
which are always based on the consolidation of relations
of inequality with the countries of Central America.

83. Mr. EL-FA’ITAL
(Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretution j?om Arabic): At the outset of my statement, Sir, I
should like to express our great pleasure at your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month. We
assure you that we are participating in the deliberations
of the Council because of our keen interest in the establishment of peace, security and harmonious coexistence
among the peoples and nations of Central America. I take
this opportumty
also to convey to your predecessor,
Mr. Woolcott, the representative of Australia, our appreciation of his achievements during his objective and judicious guidance of the work of the Council last month.

89. We call upon the Security Council to take all the
necessary measures to put an end to the aggression against
Nicaragua and to strengthen the role of the countries of
the Contadora Group and those of the Latin American
Support Group. We are convinced that despite the imbalance of power as between the United States, a giant, and
Nicaragua, a small’ developing country, the peoples of
Central America and the countries of Latin America in
general will never submit to the attempt to turn back the
clock by the revival of abominable Somozism in Nicaragua-

84. The downing of a helicopter of the Nicaraguan Air
Force on 2 December 1985 inside Nicaraguan territory by
a sophisticated surface-to-air missile indicates a qualitative escalation and development in the weapons used by
the mercenary forces, thanks to the support of the United
States, which includes training, funding and armaments,
in addition to wide media and political coverage. All of
these developments are directed against the independence and sovereignty of Nicaragua.

90. TLbday Nicaragua faces a threat to its independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity. The Security Council
should take all possible measures to promote a peaceful
settlement of the dispute and persuade the United States
to resume the dialogue with Nicaragua, to cease its acts of
aggression against that country-which,
although small in
size, is great in its values-and to support the Contadora
9

efforts msiea,d of undermining them. The future of peace
and security in Central America depends on the renunciation by the United States of its policy of using force
against Nicaragua, directly or indirectly. Instead it should
devote its efforts to seeking objectives based on peaceful
coexistence and pluralism in the region.
91. The aggressive measures against Nicaragua, if they
continue to escalate as they are doing at present, will not
only threaten the peace and security of Central America
but have grave adverse effects throughout the Caribbean
and Latin America,,as well as on international peace and
security. We call upon the United States to show reason,
prudence and understanding in order to contribute to the
resolution by peaceful means of the problems and crises
in Central America, instead of intervening in the internal
affairs of States and resorting to terrorism, aggression and
oppression-especially
since such crises and problems are
the legacy-of the regimes of darkness and backwardness
imposed by’world imperialism and its political and economic interests on that part of the world.
:
.92 i Nicaragua has p&ved by deeds and by words its
attachmentto the principle of the peaceful settlement of
disputes. Regrettably, however, Nicaragua’s attachment
to the pu,rposes anti principles of the United Nations and
the prmcipIesof
hitemattonal
law is met by defiance,
rejection and disregard on the part of the United States
Administration.:
For that reason, all of us cannot but
believe that Washin on is seeking openly to overthrow
the Government of 8: icaragua and, at the same time, is
persisting in its attempts to control the destiny of all the
peoples of Central~America.
Such activities cannot be
accepted by the international community.
._ .’
93. In any em+, we believe that no giant, however great
he may be, can control the destiny of peoples. We call
upon the Security Council, in dealing with the question
before it, to be guided by the decisions taken by the
Seventh Cunfeience of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi in 1983, as well
as the’decisioxis taken by the Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aliied
Countries held at Luanda last September.’ ‘I$@@ ;those decisions, the majority of the
peoples and nations of the world expressed their solidarity
with Nicaragua and called for an immediate end to all
United St%tes threats and acts of aggression, the operations of mercenaries, and the United States economic
boycott against the people and Government of Nicaragua.
We are certap that there can be no peace or security so
long as there 1sa direct or indirect United States military
presence in Central America.
..
94. 24.b the +opies of the world are at the side of the
militant people %ofNicaragua. They wish that people success hi its revolution. -They wish success also for the peaceful effortsta’etiinguish
the flames of total war that world
imperiaiism is seeking to fan in the region for the purpose
of tightening its grip there. History teaches us that peoples
that believe in the justice of their cause always are victorious.
_:

95. Thq PRESIDENT

(interpretationj?om French): The

next speaker is the. representative
.
:. i

of Mexico. I invite hi

to take a place at the Council
statement.

table and to make his

96.

(Mexico)

Mr. MOYA-PALENCIA

(intqmetation

porn French): I wish to tell you, Mr. President, how very
pleased my delegation is to see you presiding over the
delicate work of the Security Council during this month
of December. Your experience, your skill and your personal qualifications will be of particular benefit to the
Council during its deliberations in these rather difficult
times.

[ZXe speakercontinued in English.]
97. I wish also to express my country’s deep recognition
of the outstanding performance of the representative of
Australia during his presidency of the Council last month.

[The speakercontinued in Spanish.]
98. I wish to thank the Security Council for giving me
this opportunity to express the Mexican Government’s
views on the Central American situation, on the basis of
the complaint that has been lodged by the Government of
Nicaragua.
99. We are faced with a dangerous worsening of the
crisis in Central America caused by what appears to be a
buildup in the arms race in the region. Once again, the
choice of solutions of force is being promoted to the
detriment of the quest for formulas that can guarantee
understanding through diplomatic negotiations.
100. On many occasions we have indicated the consequences that a widespread confrontation would have for
the region. But we cannot deny that violence is today a
daily fact of life in the areas of greatest conflict. The
international
community cannot be indifferent to the
armed confrontations that occur daily and to the repeated
violations and breaches of the international legal order.
101. My delegation does not intend to refer to recent
events in isolation. Rather, we wish to draw the Council’s
attention to those aspects which, in the Mexican
Government’s view, are at the heart of the Central American conflict.
102 We must repeat once again that in the Central
American region the very exercise of the principle of
non-intervention
is in jeopardy, as is, therefore, respect
for the self-determination of peoples. The Government of
Mexico has invariably and unequivocally spoken out
against any violation of the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of States, wherever it may occur.
Defence of the principle of non-intervention-a
basic
norm of international
law- has, none the less, special
significance for Latin America. It cannot be forgotten that
the history of our continent is characterized also, to a very
great extent, by foreign intervention and the policy of
force. This explains the long struggle of Mexico and the
Latin American peoples to establish the principles of
non-intervention
and selfdetermination
as fundamental
norms of inter-American coexistence.

,‘.’

I

,:‘:

.:.

110. Every State in the region has a right toseeuritjt, and
it is clear that any transgression of the norms of intemational coexistence makes it impossible-for mutual concessions to be made to strengthen genuine regional security.
Without respect for the aforementioned principles the
very possibility of political negotiation in the area is se+
ously endangered.

103. Nevertheless, unilateral and totally unacceptable
litical developinterpretations
of Latin America’s
. y unrelated to the
ment -interpretations
that are cert allr
interests of the countries of the region themselves-have
frequently denied the right of peoples to self-determination, which has meant disregard for the legitimacy of
national development plans and for the freedom of each
country to build its future without any pre-conditions.

111. Peace brooks no preconditions. Confrontation and
blockade must give way to negotiation which ‘can no
longer be evaded. Central America requires a real commitment which, in addition to putting an end to the intolerable waste that drains human and material resources in
its societies, makes it possible to establish harmonious
bases for coexistence. Thus the importance of dialogue
among those who have bilateral differences that affect the
region at large. Therein also resides the importance of a
multilateral agreement, respectful of the individuality of
each nation, which can take due account of,the legitimate
.
concerns of all parties.

104. The Central American crisis, and in particular the
situation of Nicaragua, has elements in common with
other national processes of past decades. In the past-and
this is true today as well-in Latin America what was at
stake was the right of peoples to choose their own destiny
without any interference and to coexist within a regional
order respectful of the democratic plurality of nations and
respectful of international law.
105. That is the historical crux of the Latin American
problem. It is at the root of the tragedy which threatens
Central America.

112. This is the challenge confronting Central America.
It is the aspiration of Mexico and Latin America -and this
has been the clear and reiterated u&h of the vast majority
of our countries- to begin a new era of inter-American
relations respectful of our destiny and plurality. That is
why the Government of Mexico speaks out once again for
the establishment of dialogue and the adoption of constructive agreements.
i
113. In his statement before the fo,urteenth~extraordinary session of the General Assembly of the Organization
of American States, Mexico’s Minister for .Foreign Affairs, Bernard0 Sepblveda Amor said, among other things,
the following:

106. A few weeks ago we had the opportunity to consider
the situation in Central America. We pointed out at that
time that the action of irregular forces whose purpose is
to overthrow legitimately established Governments constitutes, infer aliu, a clear obstacle to regional detente.
Therefore, the peace-making process of the Contadora
Group, by pointing very clearly to actions of political or
military destabilization
as one of the main sources of
regional tension, has established in its peace proposals a
set of perfectly well-defined commitments to the prohibition of any type of support for such actions.
107. Hence in the final draft of the Contadora Act on
Peace and Co-operation in Central America [S/17549,
annex v], of September 1985, obligations are laid down
that would be assumed by States to prohibit any type of
political, military, financial or other support to irregular
forces that promote the overthrow or destabilization of
other Governments, as well as to prevent by all means
within their power the use of their territory for the purpose of committing wrongful acts against the territory of
other States. Bringing peace to Central America requires
strict respect for that international obligation by States,
including those from outside the region.

“All the nations of the continent havea grave responsibility in the crisis of Central America. The conflict in
the region threatens the peace, development and political and social stability of the hemisphere; The spread
of militarism is a factor which jeopardizes thefuture of
inter-American relations and gravely affects regional
security.
“The Governments cannot remain indifferent in the
shadow of a tragedy of death and destruction, militarization of societies and exportation of war machinery.
We cannot sanction as legitimate what is illegal; we
cannot justify actions of destabiiatian
or subversion
on the excuse that they rotect one’s security. That is
why we speak of politica Pand moral responsibility.
.
“It is time for reason to prevail, and for t&purpose
we understand the need to reconcile legitimate interests and to ensure respect for internationallaw
for the
benefit of all. The countries in conflict and those which
have influence in the area must give, up something in
:
order to achieve what is essential.”
,’
,_,
I’
We have the right to aspire to that, forthe’c&seofCentral
America is the cause of Latin America. ‘In the regional
crisisour owndestinyis alsoat stake.
: .r’

108. At the same time, we cannot disregard the fact that
quantitative and qualitative changes are rapidly occurring
in weapons stockpiles in the region. Hence the risks of
military confrontation increase and the spiralling arms
buildup in Central America is encouraged. Moreover,
that runs counter to some of the main declared objectives
of the negotiations, which consist precisely of obtaining
agreements among the Central American Governments
not to introduce new weapon systems in Central America.
109. In our view, supporting Contadora by more than
words means immediate respect for the spirit and letter of
the principles that guide the search for negotiation aimed
at prohibiting acts of political and military destabiliration,
as well as those principles that refer to controlling and
reducing the arms buildup, eliminating the foreign military presence, or eradicating the arms traffic.

114. The PRESIDENT
(inteqvetation porn French):
The next speaker is the representative of Viet Nam. I
11

invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

biity to the Central American region, the aforementioned
acts on the part of the United States have not only aggravated the tension but have also undermined the Contadora process, running counter to the common
aspirations of the peoples in the region and in the world.

115. Mr. BUI XUAN NI+%T(Viet Nam): Allow me first
of all to say how pleased I am during my fmt appearance
in the Security Council at seeing you, Sir, presiding over
its work. I am convinced that your ability and diplomatic
skill are certainly a guarantee for the successful outcome
of our debate. I should like also to extend my congratulations to Mr. Woolcott of Australia for his conduct of the
Council’s work during the month of November, and our
thanks to all the members for giving me an opportunity to
take part in this discussion.

121. Viet Nam is firmly convinced of the righteousness
of Nicaragua’s cause. My delegation demands that the
United States put an immediate end to all kinds of assistance, overt or covert, to the mercenary forces which are
operating either in Nicaragua or from the neighbouring
countries and stop all acts of infringement of the sovereignty of Nicaragua, so that favourable conditions will be
created for negotiations directed to a comprehensive settlement of the regional issues, thereby translating the
peoples’ wishes into reality.

116. ThewarofaggressionimposedbytheUnitedStates
on the Nicaraguan people has further escalated to a dangerous extent. The United States Govermnent has decided to authorize the supply of aircraft, helicopters,
speedboats and other types of war materials to the mercenary forces operating inside and outside Nicaragua.
Recently, for the first time in the history of this continent,
it supplied the Contras with SAM-7 surface-to-air missiles,
which resulted in the death of 14 Nicaraguan soldiers
fighting to defend the independence and sovereignty of
their country. That is completely contrary to the peace
rhetoric of the President of the United States in the
General Assembly on the occasion of the meetings commemorating the Organization’s fortieth anniversary.

122. My delegation reiterates its whole-hearted and unswerving support for the right of the Nicaraguan people
to self-defence and for their heroic struggle to defend
their sovereignty and territorial integrity and their sacred
right to life and self-determination.
The principles of the
Charter must be strictly respected. It is the earnest hope
of our delegation that this august body of the United
Nations will react properly to the request by the representative of Nicaragua.
123. The PRESIDENT
(interprefufion porn French): I
invite the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

117. What has Nicaragua done to deserve such treatment? Everybody knows that non-aligned Nicaragua is a
small and poor country. It is therefore altogether illogical
to think, even for a single minute, that it may constitute a
threat to the security of the United States, the superPower of this hemis here. The illegal and immoral war
being waged by the e nited States against Nicaragua has
taken a toll of nearly 10,000 Nicaraguans dead. or
wounded, 7,600 war orphans, and 240,000 homeless. How
much more loss and suffering will the people of that
country have to endure?

124. Mr. RAJAIB KHORASSANI
(Islamic Republic of
Iran): I extend my sincere congratulations to you, Mr.
President. It is a great pleasure to see you presiding over
the Security Council. The Council must be proud of its
new President, because under your presidency all the
oppressed nations have full confidence that the Council
will not be and cannot be exploited in the interest of the
arrogant Powers. The Council may not be able to take a
positive step, for well-known reasons, but it will definitely
not be misused, and for this we feel indebted to you for
your skill and your personal qualities. Incidentally, your
predecessor, Mr. Woolcott of Australia, too, had the vote
of confidence of the entire international body. He, too,
administered the affairs of the Council most sincerely and
very constructively indeed. I extend my special appreciation to him for his good performance in the Council in the
month of November.

118. Two weeks ago Viet Nam joined other delegations
in the plenary meetings of this fortieth session of the
General Assembly to express deep concern at the deteriorating situation in Central America and to condemn the
escalation of aggression by the United States and its hirelings against Nicaragua’s sovereignty and independence,
its acts of sabotage, its air and naval attacks, its mining of
the country’s main ports and its imposition of coercive
economic measures, including the trade embargo.

125. The year 1985 is coming to its final days. I wish also
to avail myself of this opportunity to wish you, Mr. President, and the members of the Council a happy New Year.

119. In this very year of the fortieth anniversary of the
United Nations, when the words “peace”, “independence”, “sovereignty”
and “selfdetermination”
are
lauded and extolled in the various forums of the Organization, such acts by the super-Power of North America are
a challenge and an affront to all nations, big or small; they
constitute an open violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, and of international law, and in particular they
show contempt for the 10 May 1985 Order of the Intemational Court of Justice.

126. This is the sixth meeting that the Security Council
has convened to discuss the problem of Nicaragua in the
year 1985, and at the past five meetings nothing significant
has been achieved to relieve Nicaragua of its roblems
R ore imcaused by the United States Administration.
portant is the sad fact of the new escalations which have
been reported. The situation around the borders of Nicaragua is deteriorating. The $27 million that has been given
to the contras under the label of humanitarian assistance
have been converted into SAM missiles, which downed

120. While sustained efforts are being made to find a
comprehensive political solution to bring peace and sta12

one of the helicopters that Nicaragua had obtained with
great difliculty and for urely defensive purposes.American newspapershave afsoreported the presence of trucks
and lorries which are used by the contras for military
transportation. These and other items, of which we do not
know very much, have been acquired through the same
humanitarian generosity that the United StatesAdministration has extended to the Somozaelements and other
mercenaries.
127. It is sad that such generosity by the United States
in almost all cases,and certainly in the caseof Nicaragua
and South Africa, reaches the wrong side. The United
StatesGovernment could have contributed the same$27
million to the people of Nicaragua. We know that the
entire nation of Nicaragua must suffer from economic
blockade, the mining of harbours and other political,
economic and military activities of the United States,and
only the enemies of the nation of Nicaragua benefit from
them. This American comprehensive war against Nicaragua deserves the strong condemnation of the intemational body. As the result of these inhumane policies not
only hasthe entire nation of Nicaragua been taken captive
but also the peaceand securityof the region is in jeopardy.
128. The Contadora Group, which was-and I hope still
is-the hope of the entire region, seemsto be losmg its
charisma, and I am afraid that if its members do not take
timely and determined action they may be gradually rendered ineffective. The danger in this context is that the
United StatesAdministration may be tempted to manipulate or to “influence” the Contadora Group and the
Support Group in order to preserve its allegedly justified
interests.Tb the extent that the United StatesAdministration advances in that direction, doubts and sceptical
feelings are aroused on the Nicaraguan side, and consequently the credibility and effectiveness of the Contadora
Group is damaged.
129. Thus, when the United States Administration
might just be feeling happy with its political achievements
in terms of having smoothly made the Contadora Group
tilt towards a “‘balance” in favour of the United States,it
might, from the viewpoint of the Nicaraguans, have been
influencing the Contadora Group and thus diverting it
from the balanced position which was the only anchorage
for Nicaragua’s confidence and trust. In other words, the
more the United Statespersuades the Contadora Group
to adopt its own terms of impartiality and evenhandedness,the more the Contadora Group becomesirrelevant
to the solution of the conflict. Nicaragua cannot be
blamed for this undesirable possible development becauseit is a small country, not comparable to the United
States;only the United Statescan be blamed.
130. The United Statesis a country of “star wars” ambitions; it claims to be the richest, the strongest, the most
technologically advanced,scientifically matchless,militarily invincible. To conquer the heavensand install an interplanetary service station for the United Statesmay be no
longer a mere dream but rather a fairly practical project,
if an expensiveone.

that might in the slightest degree shake Nicaragua’s confidence in the Contadora Group. If they are honestly
interested in a solution to the present conflict, the Americans must ensure that the Nicaraguan people can maintain their full trust and confidence in the Contadora
Group and the Support Group and be able to continue to
believe that the Contadora Group will bridle United
States imperialism in Central America. Please do not
anybody tamper with the regionally and globally recognized prestige and charisma of the Contadora Group.
132. Considering that there is no comparison between
the size,power, population, technology, science,standard
of education, health services, educational and research
institutions, natural resources, automation devices and
services, games,pleasures, sports-sins even, and whatever else representatives choose-of the United States
and those of Nicaragua, it is hard to explain this unequal
and therefore unjust comprehensive battle. The only explanation is that a country, or rather an empire, of the
magnitude of the United States has fallen victim to an
unwise, uncultured, bellicose Administration that has no
solution to its political problems other than resort to force
and that is prepared to be aparty to any and every conflict.
The fact is that the United StatesAdministration is actually ready to denigrate and waste all the grandeur and
glamour of this exceptionally hard-working and productive nation of the United Statesjust in order to destroy
such a small, oppressed, Somoza-stricken,good-hearted
and really harmless and friendly neighbour as Nicaragua.
133. We deeply regret that it may take many years for
the United StatesAdministration to understand that its
victory over Nicaragua is a real defeat for the United
States.If there were any wisdom or understanding at all
among those in the higher levels of that Administration,
they would perceive that it is most imperative for them to
give up this silly ambition of bringing the Sandiit revolution to its knees.This rancorous obsessionis only selfdefeating and self-humiliating becauseit only showshow
far from right is the present American concept of the
situation in Central America. If this Administration had
any respect for the interests of the hard-working and
good-hearted American people, it would immediately end
this unequal, immoral battle.
134. In the light of the fact that there is no comparison
between the resources of the two adversaries and of the
seriousnessof the threats to peace and security in the
region, it would be appropriate to expect Nicaragua to be
insecure, angry, defensive, recalcitrant, uncompromising,
difficult, and impossible to talk to. But the contrary has
always been the case.It is Nicaragua that demonstrates
serenity, wisdom, patience, tolerance, security, lack of
irritability, opennessand readiness for peaceful and constructive talks at any time, in any place and at any level
proposed. And we observe that it is the United Statesthat,
on the contrary, is very stubborn, difficult and uncompromising and rejects all proposals for negotiations made by
Nicaragua.
135. This exchange of positions is due to the fact that,
first of all, the United Statesis not interested in resolving .._
its differences with Nicaragua, and, secondly,it knowsthat!“-

131. My best and most sincere advice, therefore, to the
United StatesAdministration isstrictly to avoid any action
13

if it enters into peaceful negotiations, its arguments will
not sell in any market for any price. For the same reason
it refrained from accepting the jurisdiction of the Intemational Court of Justice. The United States Administration
therefore thinks that the best solution from the point of
view of its iilegitimate
concern is a military one. This
explains how and why some humanitarian donations can
be converted to surface-to-air missiles.

139. We think the people of Nicaragua must have the
right to choose for themselves, without any interference
or intervention on the part of the American Administration. Why do some people think that those who overthrew
the Somoza r6gime without United States help cannot
establish a system of their own choice without the assistance of some of the American-backed Somoza mercenaries who live on the charity of United States humanitarian
donations? What the whole world expects of the United
States Administration
is only a minimum of understanding and wisdom. Alas, even that minimum just cannot be
afforded.

136. In groping for a solution in the dark, a lesson from
Viet Nam might help. In the viet Nam war the United
States lost billions of dollars and thousands and thousands
of American servicemen-volunteers,
soldiers and officers. Yet it sustained a defeat which marked an epoch in
American history. Do you not think, Mr. President, that if
the United States had offered just one fifth of the material
loss alone to the North Vietnamese at that time in the
form of a donation, without any expectation of return and
without any positive or negative intervention in their internal affairs and problems, the ultimate results would
probably have been better than those it finally obtained in
Viet Nam? The diificuhy is that the learned ignoramuses
and the unperceptive sophisticated intellectuals who constitute the policy-making machinery of the United States
are so obsessed with repeated defeats that they simply
cannot listen; instead they stubbordy continue to solve all
their problems by pointing their guns at everybody. They
are too preoccupied with their gunboat dipIomacy to look
back and see what they have done. They just do not
understand that what they feel they have to do to Nicaragua is simply not a solution but the undesirable inevitable
corollary of the wrong pohcies which they have adopted
towards Central America and Latin America. Wisdom
dictates that they should stop doing all those “good”
things that they feel like domg in order to meet the
challenge of Nicaragua. Instead, they should pay more
attention to all the good things that Nicaragua has done
in order to show its good will.

140. May I request you, Mr. President, in the course of
your private consultations, to advise the concerned arty
that his Government is simply wrong, that what it is Boing
is counter-productive
and is threatening the peace and
security of Central America, which is not as far away as
Viet Nam was. The United States must know that the
inevitable American defeat in this regionwould beslightly
different from the one in far away Viet Nam.
141. If the United States Administration
is reahy worried about the so-called spread of communism, it must
refrain from making propaganda for it by calling all the
heroes- and freedom fighters of the region C%nmmmists.
142. What the United States is doing in Central America
is totally contrary to its purpose. My advice to the American Administration
is as follows: please do not do just
anything; if you feel you do not want to be absolutely
irrelevant and neglected, suftice it to offer considerable
assistance only to the same revolutionary Government of
Nicaragua; give the Nicaraguans the chance to develop
confidence in you and you will see how peacefully and
easily they will resolve all your differences with them.
They need your friendship, not enmity, your assistance,
not conspiracies, and your dignified consideration, not
blind intolerance.

137. First of ah, the President of Nicaragua has always
addressed the United States President with respect and
honour; secondly, Nicaragua has always extended its
hands in friendship, has always reiterated its readiness for
friendly, peaceful talks to resolve differences. It has been
careful not to condemn or to use any language that might
further antagonize the United States. The Foreign Minister of Nicaragua, the Reverend Father D’Escoto
Brockmann, has visited Washington as often as he thought
useful to persuade the United States towards friendship.
138. Nicaragua has held a popular election. Such an
election was absolutely unnecessary so far as the people
of Nicaragua were concerned, because they were fully
behind the Sandiist rt@me, but the elections were still
held, to accommodate some of theconcerns of the United
States. The election might not have been as valid as the so
meticulously clean elections of the United States, in which
the Watergate scandalwas only a peanut, but by our third
world standards it was really acceptable. Yet the United
States did not stop nagging. Nicaragua is drafting a new
constitution in which the right to private ownership-1 am
told-is also specified.
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00300

143. We believe that Nicaragua is suffering from the lack
of proportion that exists between the degree of wisdom
and thoughtfulness of the United States Administration
and the military force which it can exercise. May the good
members of the Council, as well as the Contadora Group,
mobilize their collective wisdom in order to make up for
that lack of proportion by persuading the United States
simply to stop all its programmes and activities against
Nicaragua. That would be the best service they could offer
to the people of this host country.
144. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation j7dm French): In
view of the lateness of the hour, I propose to adjourn the
meeting now. with the consent of the members of the
Council, the next meeting to continue consideration of
this item will take place tomorrow, Thursday, 12 December, at 3.30 pm. I would remind the Council that tomorrow at 11 a.m. there will be a meeting of the Council on
the situation in Cyprus, preceded by consultations.

The meetingrose at 6.20p.m.
90-6143S-Cktober

19!91-2,050

.
