United Nations

S/PV.5982

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5982nd meeting
Friday, 26 September 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Yoda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Burkina Faso)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Grauls
Mr. Li Kexin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Ms. Yade
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Terzi di Sant’Agata
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Arias
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Kumalo
Ms. Pierce
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
Briefing by the Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe
Letter dated 4 September 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Finland
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2008/594)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-52321 (E)

*0852321*

S/PV.5982

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefing by the Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe
Letter dated 4 September 2008 from the
Permanent Representative of Finland to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2008/594)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Alexander Stubb, Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Finland.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Alexander Stubb and
invite him to take a seat at the Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in response to a letter dated 4 September 2008
from the Permanent Representative of Finland to the
United Nations, addressed to the President of the
Security Council and contained in document
S/2008/594.
At this meeting the Security Council will hear a
briefing by His Excellency Mr. Alexander Stubb,
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Finland. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Stubb: I am very glad to be here today. I
shall be speaking in my capacity as Chairman of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), and if I may, I will deal with three main
points today.
To begin with, if I were to give a thesis for my
briefing today it would be that, to put it very simply,
the United Nations and the OSCE are partners in
destiny. I would like to highlight two ways in which

2

that the United Nations and the OSCE have cooperated
during the Finnish chairmanship of the OSCE.
First, we want to promote the implementation of
all United Nations principles, conventions and other
instruments established at the global level. So, in may
ways one could perhaps argue that the OSCE is in the
business of trying to help support all of those
principles that have been underlined here in the United
Nations.
The second way in which I see us cooperating is
that the OSCE early warning, crisis management and
post-conflict activities are crucial components of the
United Nations-based international order. So, in many
ways you could say that the United Nations and the
OSCE are both in the business of preventing and
resolving conflicts. Thus, we live in a kind of
symbiosis, and if one was to simplify, and I say that as
a European — the United Nations has a global reach
with its 192 Members, while the European Union has a
very regional reach with its 27 members — the OSCE
fits quite comfortably between those two organizations
with its 56 members, stretching from Vancouver to
Vladivostok.
Today, I shall deal with three challenges that I
believe the OSCE and the United Nations share, and
those three challenges are, of course, regional. The first
is Georgia, the second Kosovo and the third
Afghanistan. Having dealt with those three issues
briefly, I will draw on two lessons that I think we can
learn from the recent crisis. So, I will start off with
Georgia.
In my capacity as the Chairman of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, I
would never have thought that the chairmanship would
have become as exciting at the end of the day as it has.
Of course, that had to do with the events that took
place at the beginning of August in Georgia.
What was our aim as Chair? In many ways it was
to do three things: first of all, to broker a ceasefire, and
I think we succeeded in that fairly fast, within five
days. Here, I would like to pay tribute to the work done
by French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner and
French President Nicolas Sarkozy in their capacities as
Chairmen of the European Union. I would also like to
pay tribute to all those parties engaged in trying to
broker that ceasefire, including President Medvedev,
Prime Minister Putin, Foreign Minister Lavrov and

08-52321

S/PV.5982

President Saakashvili. It was a joint effort, we did it in
five days and that was the key aim.
The second aim of the OSCE has been to
supervise the withdrawal of the troops. Here, I think
we are, so as to say, getting there with what I would
call the Sarkozy II plan, with an aim of having the
troops withdrawn by 10 October.
The third aim has been to give an international
presence to the conflict and the crisis, and I think the
OSCE had an instrumental role in that, because we
were the only organization that had the infrastructure
to put military monitors on the ground and, after
negotiations, we were able to get 20 monitors in to
areas adjacent to South Ossetia. I think the role has
been crucial in monitoring the ceasefire and we have
done that from the beginning. There are two
negotiations that are still ongoing on that particular
subject of the military monitors. One is on an
additional 80, who would be sent to areas adjacent to
South Ossetia. I am cautiously hopeful that with the
constructive participation of all members of the OSCE,
we can get them in.
The other one is about the eight military monitors
who had an OSCE mandate in Tskhinvali in South
Ossetia. There, things have not gone as planned, but let
me stress that I think that we will be able to start
within the next few days if the security of the monitors
can be guaranteed on missions going from Georgia to
Tskhinvali. I would really like to pay tribute to the
efforts of my colleague, Sergey Lavrov, in trying to
help the eight monitors enter the region, so we can get
what one could call objective information. So, I am
cautiously hopeful on both of those accounts, on the 80
and on the eight for South Ossetia.
I have made two visits to Georgia, to Tbilisi,
together with Foreign Minister Kouchner, first just
when the war began. That was the ceasefire part. Then,
the second visit took place a few days afterwards, when
I went to see and observe how the ceasefire was being
implemented.
Another important step from the European Union
side has also taken place, which is that in the EU we
have decided to put in an additional 200 monitors. So,
to sum up, on Georgia and on what is going on right
now, we will continue our efforts in military
monitoring.

08-52321

Now, where do I see the United Nations as having
a role in the package of stabilizing Georgia? I think the
role of the United Nations is in long-term stability, and
I am convinced that the Security Council should have a
key role, as in all questions concerning international
peace and stability. What I have proposed is the
formation of an international platform made up of three
key organizations — the United Nations, the EU and
the OSCE — as well as the stakeholders in the conflict.
That platform should be convened as soon as possible.
I believe a good starting point is 15 October, when an
international conference is scheduled to be held in
Geneva. I am also looking forward to cooperating with
the future Chairs of the OSCE — Greece, Kazakhstan
and Lithuania — as well as other OSCE partners.
That concludes what I wanted to say on the crisis
in Georgia. I think we are moving in the right
direction, but all of us need to continue in international
engagement.
The second issue I wanted to raise is Kosovo,
which I shall do very briefly. All the OSCEparticipating States have supported continued OSCE
engagement in Kosovo. We have good cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE in the area.
Under resolution 1244 (1999), the OSCE is an essential
pillar of United Nations Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We have our largest operation there, with 800 mission
members on the ground throughout all of Kosovo’s
municipalities, and I think that helps build strong local
institutions. We will continue those efforts and hope
that the transition from UNMIK to the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) will be less
painful than it has been so far.
The final substantive issue I wanted to deal with
is Afghanistan. I will do that very briefly as well. The
importance of effective international action holds true
in several parts of the OSCE area, especially
Afghanistan. Afghanistan is an OSCE partner for
cooperation and shares common borders with three of
our participating States. Many more are engaged inside
the country in international frameworks such as the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF). So clearly the OSCE has a strategic interest in
the stabilization of the country.
At the last ministerial meeting, in Madrid last
November, OSCE Foreign Ministers pledged to

3

S/PV.5982

intensify OSCE engagement with Afghanistan. I hope
that that will continue, not least in the areas related to
policing and the fight against drug trafficking.

I shall now give the floor to those Council
members who wish to make comments or ask questions
in response to the briefing we have just heard.

We will continue our efforts in Afghanistan. The
United Nations and the OSCE both have important
roles. The United Nations is the main coordinator of
international involvement in Afghanistan, and I am
sure we can count on its support. All OSCE initiatives
will be conducted in full cooperation with UNAMA
and other entities, because it is in all of our interests to
have a more stable situation on the ground in
Afghanistan.

I invite the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
and Human Rights of France, Her Excellency
Ms. Rama Yade to take the floor.

I will conclude with some final thoughts or
lessons that I, in my capacity as Chairman-in-Office of
the OSCE, have drawn from recent events.
First of all, I think that recent events have
highlighted the fragility of the rules-based international
order that the United Nations, with the support of the
OSCE, strives to build. In that sense, the crisis in
Georgia has underlined the critical importance of
cooperation between the two organizations.
I draw two lessons from this. First, there really is
no such thing as a frozen conflict. I think it is time to
banish that term from the political lexicon and act
quickly to settle any outstanding conflicts in our
region. Let us forget all the talk about frozen conflicts
and try instead to resolve them.
The second lesson I draw is that we should
redirect the work of our international security
structures in the spirit of effective multilateralism so
that they provide genuine security and stability to
member countries and their inhabitants. I think that
both the OSCE and the United Nations should be a part
of such long-term efforts. On the part of the OSCE, I
would argue that we need to start those efforts at the
Helsinki ministerial meeting in December.
In summary, we are partners in destiny. I think
there are a few key ways in which we can cooperate.
We should focus a lot on Georgia, Kosovo and
Afghanistan and the lessons that we can draw from all
this. There should be no more frozen conflicts, and let
us focus on multilateral efforts.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Stubb for his briefing.

4

Ms. Yade (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to welcome the presence of the Chairman-inOffice of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Mr. Stubb, and to
thank him for his briefing. The priorities that he has
defined are in keeping with the challenges we face, and
we share them in full.
The European Union (EU) is tied to the OSCE,
the only organization that brings together all the States
from Vancouver to Vladivostok and is equipped with a
broad mandate. It has contributed to the strengthening
of international stability and security by establishing a
platform of common values. That is why France and its
EU partners believe it is imperative to preserve the
conditions that ensure the effectiveness of OSCE
actions — not only because the EU currently represents
almost half of the OSCE’s membership and provides
three quarters of its budget, but above all because the
EU and the OSCE are deeply complementary. They
share the same values and the same principles, but they
do not yet work together closely enough. One of the
objectives of the French presidency of the EU is
precisely to further strengthen this complementary
relationship. The presence at this table of several
ministers representing European States that are
members of the OSCE demonstrates that that priority is
widely shared within the EU.
The EU and the OSCE are cooperating closely to
resolve the crisis in Georgia. The joint visit of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of France and his Finnish
counterpart on 10 August demonstrated this
cooperation. On the ground, the OSCE Mission to
Georgia and the European Union Monitoring Mission
(EUMM) will of course be working closely together.
The OSCE also continues to play a very positive role
in Kosovo, which deserves support. The OSCE Mission
in Kosovo fulfils an important role in guaranteeing a
democratic and multi-ethnic future for Kosovo, in
particular in the preservation of minority rights. The
stability of the Balkans must be a shared goal for the
EU and OSCE.

08-52321

S/PV.5982

Finally, Central Asia is the region where the
activities of the OSCE have been most developed in
recent years. The EU, by adopting a strategy for
Central Asia, is also in the process of becoming a full
actor in the region. During our presidency of the EU
and in close coordination with the OSCE, we shall
focus our efforts on security issues in Central Asia.
Those issues were addressed in Paris on 18 September
at the first EU-Central Asia Forum addressing security
issues and will be considered at the conference of the
EU, the OSCE and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime on integrated border management and the
fight against narcotics in Central Asia.
It is in its comprehensive vision of security and
cooperation that the OSCE finds the fullest expression
of its value. It was founded on the belief that security
goes hand in hand with the promotion of human rights
and democracy. In that regard, I welcome the essential
role played by the OSCE Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights in providing election
monitoring in the OSCE region, and I encourage all
States Members to welcome those missions during
major elections.
This institution is essential for our organization.
The strength of the OSCE lies in its autonomy, which
must be preserved. France will pay attention to
promoting its irreplaceable expertise and to its
exemplary role in election monitoring.
The French presidency of the EU coincides with
the sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. This symbolic anniversary is an
opportunity to energetically recall the universality of
those values and principles. I welcome the fact that the
sixtieth anniversary will also be celebrated by the
OSCE, under the presidency of Finland.

would also like to assure him of Belgium’s full support
for his efforts to promote the agenda of the OSCE.
As a regional organization under Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, the OSCE continues
to be an important regional stakeholder. With its unique
concept of security — which includes the political,
military, economic, environmental and human
dimensions — and its presence in the field, the OSCE
is continuing to play a concrete stabilizing role in the
region.
It is of course impossible not to refer to the
situation in Georgia. Belgium would like to thank the
Chairman-in-Office and the entire OSCE for their
efforts to pacify the situation. In that connection, I
would like to refer in particular to the 19 August
agreement to deploy 100 additional observers to areas
adjacent to South Ossetia, in addition to the eight
observers in South Ossetia, 20 of whom were
immediately sent to Georgia.
In that regard, Belgium very much regrets that it
was not possible to achieve an agreement among
participating States on the modalities for the
deployment of the additional OSCE observers. That
has prevented the dispatching of the 80 remaining
additional observers at this stage, as initially planned.
Furthermore, Belgium believes that the OSCE,
together with other stakeholders, such as the European
Union and the United Nations, will have an important
role to play in the upcoming discussions to be held in
Geneva.
Belgium would like to thank the Chairman-inOffice for his briefing. We wish him every success for
the ministerial meeting to be held in Helsinki. I assure
him of Belgium’s full support.

Finally, the OSCE must continue to work in close
coordination with other international and regional
organizations. In that regard, the presence of the
Finnish chairmanship at the Security Council is a good
example of the vital cooperation between the European
Union and the OSCE.

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would very
much like to thank the Chairman-in-Office for his
briefing. I should also like to thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity today discuss the work of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and its partnership with the United Nations.

Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate. I should also like to thank
Minister Stubb for the briefing he has given us, as the
Chairman-in-Office, on the work of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). I

What the Chairman-in-Office said about
partnership between the United Nations and the OSCE
tracks very well with our thinking. I would also like to
echo what was said on behalf of the French presidency
of the European Union (EU) about the overall
relationship between the United Nations, the OSCE

08-52321

5

S/PV.5982

and those of us who have the honour to be members of
all three organizations.
I would like to start, if I may, with something that
the Minister did not touch on in detail, but which we
think is important — OSCE support for the
implementation of United Nations principles in
tackling a number of serious horizontal issues. I am
referring to such issues as counter-terrorism, small
arms and light weapons and trafficking in human
beings. I would also like to welcome Minister Stubb’s
work to re-energize the OSCE’s efforts in the area of
conflict resolution and crisis management, as well as
his desire for closer cooperation with the United
Nations.
Obviously, I think, many people are interested at
the moment in the issue of Georgia, as the Chairmanin-Office himself said. We would like to take this
opportunity to thank him for his efforts throughout,
including his role in helping to broker the six-point
plan. We look forward to closer United Nations-OSCE
cooperation on this issue and on humanitarian tasks, as
well as in playing a role in support of the EU special
representative for Georgia. We welcome the OSCE’s
being fully involved in the preparations for the Geneva
conference.
We are grateful to the Chairman-in-Office for his
update on the negotiations on the OSCE military
monitors. We share the disappointment of Belgium
about some of the difficulties that those negotiations
have encountered due to the objections of one Member
State. However, what the Chairman-in-Office went on
to say about the prospects for a positive result, building
on his own contacts with Foreign Minister Lavrov, was
very encouraging.
We look forward to seeing genuine and sufficient
access for the OSCE military monitors, in sufficient
numbers. As we said, the OSCE is uniquely placed to
play that role, with its European and wider
membership. It is important that we have mechanisms
to monitor withdrawals. In order to monitor
withdrawals properly, of course, proper access to South
Ossetia is essential. I would also like to take this
opportunity to call for the proper protection of the
OSCE monitors who are on the ground, as well as to
ask all parties to ensure that they have adequate
protection to do the job that has been assigned to them.
I should now like to turn to Kosovo, on which a
number of speakers have touched. The OSCE is

6

playing an important role in helping to develop a multiethnic and tolerant society in Kosovo. It has been there
since the inception of resolution 1244 (1999) and has
played a very encouraging role. Its continuing
engagement, in particular in ensuring the protection of
minorities and respect for human rights, is of critical
importance. It has a very valuable asset in its extensive
field presence, in particular as the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo downsizes.
We hope that OSCE engagement can reinforce the
efforts of other international actors on the ground,
above all those of the European Union.
Turning to Afghanistan, we strongly support
OSCE engagement on that country’s northern border,
including inside Afghanistan. That is helping to
stabilize the country. The OSCE has a role to play in
helping Afghanistan to secure its borders with the
Central Asian States, to improve policing and to
combat drug trafficking. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the chairmanship of the OSCE for
the efforts it has made in the cross-border area, as well
as to say that we support the package of project
proposals that is currently on the table in Vienna. We
also agree that OSCE engagement must be fully
coordinated with the United Nations, which is the
principal coordinator of international involvement in
Afghanistan.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I, too,
would like to welcome the Chairman-in-Office and
thank him for his comprehensive overview of the
activities of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) under Finland’s
leadership. The Chair’s presentation touched on the
OSCE’s multifaceted approach to security, which
includes the political and military aspects as well as the
economic, environmental and human dimensions. We
commend the OSCE’s efforts to further the principles
of the Helsinki Final Act and we strongly support the
Chair’s statement on the importance of OSCE-United
Nations cooperation.
We strongly commend the OSCE’s work in
Georgia and appreciate the organization’s ongoing
efforts to contribute to a comprehensive solution to the
conflict. I want to commend Foreign Minister Stubb
personally for the leadership he has demonstrated
throughout the Georgia crisis. The OSCE responded
quickly to the crisis, sending an additional 20 military
monitoring officers to Georgia. We regret that the
Russian Federation has blocked the OSCE monitors’

08-52321

S/PV.5982

access to South Ossetia. Furthermore, Russia’s position
regarding the monitors’ area of responsibility is now
holding up the deployment of an additional
80 monitors. International monitors must have access
throughout all of Georgia — the OSCE in South
Ossetia and the United Nations in Abkhazia — to
verify the implementation of the 12 August ceasefire
agreement and to shed light on human rights and
humanitarian concerns.
Turning to Kosovo, this year has been one of
transformation. Kosovo institutions that were built by
the Kosovars with the assistance of the OSCE and the
United Nations have become fully functional, and the
Kosovo people have rightly taken control of them.
Since independence, Kosovo has adopted a new
constitution, implementing legislation that enshrines
the rights of minorities. The OSCE mission in Kosovo
has played an important role in reaching out to
minorities, and we look forward to continued OSCE
engagement there.
Regarding Afghanistan, we are very pleased to
hear that concrete projects related to policing and to
the fight against drug trafficking will be under way by
the end of the year.
The OSCE also plays a critical role in promoting
democracy and reform through election observation.
The OSCE Office of Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights has set the gold standard for election
observation methodology. Its strong credentials and
expertise in that area are respected worldwide. The
OSCE will observe presidential elections in the United
States in November, and we welcome that effort. An
autonomous elections watchdog can contribute overall
to strengthening democratic institutions in countries in
transition and in established democracies.
I want to assure Mr. Stubb of the full support of
the United States in his efforts.
Mr. Terzi di Sant’Agata (Italy): Allow me first
of all to congratulate Foreign Minister Stubb on his
presentation and on his outstanding chairmanship of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) over the past year. Many have been the
results he has achieved thus far, and we wish him
continued success in his mandate.
Italy is strongly committed to the OSCE and
supports the priorities of the Finnish chairmanship and
Mr. Stubb’s efforts to revitalize the organization, which

08-52321

remains an important and much-needed actor in
promoting regional stability, security and cooperation.
My Government upholds the cooperation between
the United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, and regional and subregional organizations
in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter. Regional organizations
must reinforce and complement United Nations efforts
through an active role in maintaining international
peace and security in areas such as crisis management,
peacekeeping operations and counter-terrorism. We
believe that the OSCE has established, in that respect,
a successful record over the years.
The OSCE, together with the European Union,
has played a crucial role since the outbreak of the crisis
in Georgia and will continue to be instrumental in the
implementation of the 12 August and 8 September
agreements, as well as with regard to the Geneva
conference to be held in mid-October.
Italy welcomes the continued presence of the
OSCE in Kosovo, where it contributes, in close
cooperation with all international actors, to the
protection of human rights, particularly minority rights,
and plays an important role in ensuring regional
stability and security.
We also expect the OSCE to follow up on the
ministerial decision concerning its engagement in
Afghanistan with concrete projects and activities, as its
contribution to the ongoing international efforts.
In conclusion, my country believes that the
meeting of the Ministerial Council in December will be
an opportunity as timely as ever to continue to pursue a
constructive and open dialogue on all of the
outstanding issues and to highlight the work of the
OSCE and strengthen the confidence of Member States
in its role in the European security architecture.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): As other delegations have
done, I would like to thank the Chairman-in-Office of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), Foreign Minister Stubb, for his
briefing today, and also for all the skill and effort he
has put into chairing that organization. We note the
complementarity of the OSCE mandate with that of the
United Nations and the partnership that has been
developed. We also note with pleasure the
revitalization of the organization under the Finnish
chairmanship.

7

S/PV.5982

Three regional crises have been mentioned today,
and we commend the OSCE for its engagement in
Georgia, Kosovo and Afghanistan. We particularly note
the efforts dedicated to and the results achieved in the
OSCE engagement in Georgia.
The Chairman-in-Office was rather modest in
enumerating the achievements thus far. We know that
there are results that the OSCE has achieved in the
context of the Forum for Security Cooperation and the
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights,
particularly in Kosovo, with respect to minority rights —
and not only in the monitoring of elections but also, as
was mentioned by the Italian delegation, in the field of
the fight against terrorism.
We were particularly glad to hear the approach to
the “frozen conflicts” today. We think it is a good way
to solve the problems that exist and not sweep them
under the carpet.

The OSCE is to play an important role in settling
the crisis that broke out in August in the Caucasus. We
hope that the OSCE observers will effectively and
strictly carry out their mandate and cooperate with the
European Union observers, who, according to the
Medvedev-Sarkozy document of 8 September, must be
deployed in the security zone near the South Ossetia
area, by 1 October 2008.
We share the view of those who have said they
regret that the Permanent Council of the OSCE was
unable to take a decision about the deployment of the
additional 80 OSCE monitors. That happened because
the United States of America and certain other
members of the Permanent Council of the OSCE did
not fulfil the Medvedev-Sarkozy document of
8 September, but distorted some of its provisions.
For its part, the Russian Federation will do
everything it can to support the activities of the OSCE
monitors.

Finally, I would like to extend our best wishes for
the upcoming ministerial meeting in December in
Helsinki and pledge the full and continued cooperation
of my country with the efforts of the OSCE.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Alexander Stubb to
respond to comments made.

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Finland, Mr. Stubb, for his statement and for
his activities as Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE).

Mr. Stubb: I thank France, Belgium, the United
Kingdom, the United States, Italy, Croatia and the
Russian Federation for their comments and
observations and for their support for the work of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE).

The Russian Federation has consistently
supported the overall development and improvement of
cooperation of the United Nations and its Security
Council with regional and subregional mechanisms,
which harmoniously complement each other on the
solid basis of the United Nations Charter, in particular
Chapter VIII, truly taking into account the comparative
advantages that they each possess. Of course, what is
crucial here is a clear division of labour and full
respect for the primary responsibility of the Security
Council for the maintenance of international peace and
security, which will make it possible to increase the
capacity of the international community to resolve
crises. We note with satisfaction that, as a regional
mechanism, the OSCE has established close and
fruitful cooperation with the United Nations in a
number of key areas, primarily those related to security
and the settlement of regional conflicts.

I did not want to make my original intervention
into a Christmas tree, and that is why I limited myself
to a quite strict interpretation of what the OSCE is
doing at this moment. From the comments I received,
perhaps I would draw the conclusion that there is still
strong support to try to put a total of 100 observers into
Southern Ossetia, or areas adjacent to Southern
Ossetia, so we will continue our efforts in that line.
There was also strong support for the general work that
the OSCE does.

8

May I summarize. I was left with impressions on
two accounts. First, what are the key regions for the
OSCE? I would say the Western Balkans. We will
continue the efforts there, as the representative of
Croatia, among others, underlined. Secondly, it is the
Caucasus, by which I mean not only Georgia, but also,
of course, the conflicts in Nagorno-Karabakh,
Azerbaijan, Armenia and Moldova, in terms of
Transdniestra. Finally, there is Central Asia, which I

08-52321

S/PV.5982

did not mention in my intervention. In my capacity as
Chair I did make a grand tour of Tajikistan,
Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, Turkmenistan and Kazakhstan
during the summer, and it left me with the certain
impression that the OSCE has a very important task to
do there.
So what are the roles in the three regions? In the
Western Balkans it is institution-building. In the
Caucasus it is conflict management and post-conflict
management, and in Central Asia it is democratic
consolidation. Of course we will continue with the rest
of the work in border management, human rights,
elections, et cetera.
I am looking forward to the Helsinki Ministerial
Meeting on 4 and 5 December 2008, because for me, as
OSCE Chair, I think that will be a time for us to take

08-52321

stock of what has happened in the past few months and
perhaps also come out with an ambitious, short,
political declaration on the future of the organization.
I greatly appreciate all the comments received
from the Security Council. I have taken note and stock
of them and will take them with me and will continue
the reflection in our preparations for the Helsinki
Ministerial Meeting in December.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Stubb for the clarifications he has provided.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

9
