40

General Aasembly-Seventeenth Se11ion

reservations the claims of those peoples for their immediate accession to independence ;
4. Urges the Portuguese Government to give effect
to the recommendations contained in the report of the
Special Committee on Territories under Portuguese
Administration, in particular those set out in paragraphs
442 to 445 of that report, by taking the following
measures:
(a) The immediate recognition of the right of the
peoples of the Territories under its administration to
self-determination and independence;
( b) The immediate cessation of all acts of repression
and the withdrawal of all military and other forces at
present employed for that purpose;
( c) The promulgation of an unconditional political
amnesty and the establishment of conditions that will
allow the free functioning of political parties;
(d) Negotiations, on the basis of the recognition of
the right to self-determination, with the authorized representatives of the political parties within and outside the
Territories with a view to the transfer of power to
political institutions freely elected and representative of
the peoples, in accordance with resolution 1514 (XV);
( e) The granting of independence immediately thereafter to all the Territories under its administration in
accordance with the aspirations of the peoples;
5. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to give high priority to an examination of
the situation in the Territories under Portuguese administration, bearing in mind the present resolution and the
other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
6. Calls upon Member States to use all their influence
to induce the Portuguese Government to carry out the
obligations incumbent upon it under Chapter XI of the
Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions of the
General Assembly relating to the Territories under its
administration;
7. Earnestly requests all States to refrain forthwith
from offering the Portuguese Government any assistance
which would enable it to continue its repression of the
peoples of the Territories under its administration and,
for this purpose, to take all measures to prevent the
sale and supply of arms and military equipment to the
Portuguese Government;
8. Requests the Security Council, in case the Portnguese Government should refuse to comply with the
present resolution and previous General Assembly resolutions on this question, to take all appropriate measures
to secure the compliance of Portugal with its obli~ations
as a Member State.
1194th plenary meetinq,
14 December 1962.
1808 (XVII). Special training programme for
Territories under Portuguese administration

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Special Committee
on Territories under Portuguese. Administration, 6 in
particular chapters IV to VII of part two and chapter
III of part three thereof,
Having heard the petitioners,
Considering the inadequacy of social and educational
facilities in the Territories under Portuguese administration,

Bearing in mind that the process of education in these
Territories must be designed to familiarize the inhabitants with, and train them in, the use of the tools of
economic, social and political progress,
Considering that it is one of the sacred duties of the
United Nations to promote:
(a) Higher standards of living, full employment, and
conditions of economic and social progress and development,
( b) Solutions of international economic, social, health
and related problems, and international cultural and educational co-operation,
Considering that the United Nations, in carrying out
its duty under Article SS of the Charter, has created
machinery for economic, social and technical assistance,
and that substantial assistance has been rendered to
peoples of the less developed countries, including peoples
in colonial territories,
Considering the necessity of extending such assistance
to the Non-Self-Governing Territories under Portuguese
administration with a view to forming in these Terri. tories indigenous cadres for the future administration
of their independent countries,
Recor;nizing that the indigenous inhabitants of the
Territories under Portuguese administration, whose
countries can appropriately be designated as being economically under-developed, have a legitimate right to
receive benefits from the United Nations programmes
of technical co-operation,
Recoqnizing further that the United Nations has a
responsibility towards the inhabitants of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories,
Recognizing that:
(a) A special intensive type of fellowship programme
should immediately be organized to train the largest possihle number of indigenous inhabitants of the Territories
under Portuguese administration in the functions and
techniques of administration and in the fields of economics, law, health and sanitation, and in such other
fields as may be necessary,
( b) In addition, Member States should be invited to
make available scholarships for study abroad by students
from Territories under Portuguese administration,
l. Decides to establish such a special training
programme for Territories under Portuguese administration, including technical education, education for
leadership and teacher training;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in establishing
such a special training programme for the indigenous
people of these Territories, to make use as fully as possible of the existing United Nations programmes of technical co-operation-notably the Expanded Programme
of Technical Assistance and the Special Fund so as to
minimize the charge on the regular budget-and particularly to make available to those indigenous inhabitants of the Territories who are or who may be temporarily residing in various countries and territories
outside the Territories under Portuguese administration
the benefits of such programmes, with the consent and
co-operation of the host Governments;
3. Invites the specialized agencies to co-Operate in
the establishment and implementation of the special training programme mentioned above, by offering every possible assistance and such facilities and resources as they
may be able to provide;

Re1olntion1 adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

4. Invites Member States to make available, directly
or through voluntary agencies, for the use of students
from Territories under Portuguese administration, allexpense scholarships both for the completion of secondary
education and for various forms of higher education;
5. Invites Member States whose universities enjoy
administrative autonomy to permit direct communication
between the Secretary-General and the heads of those
universities with a view to the granting of scholarships
envisaged in the present resolution ;
6. Requests Member States to inform the SecretaryGeneral of any scholarships offered and of awards made

and utilized ;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to establish appropriate machinery for dealing with applications from
Territories under Portuguese administration for education and training outside the Territories ;
8. Requests Member States to facilitate the travel of
students from Territories under Portuguese administration seeking to avail themselves of such educational
opportunities;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to report on this
question to the General Assembly at its eighteenth
session;
10. Requests the Government of Portugal to cooperate in the implementation of the present resolution.
1194th plenary meetinq,
14 December 1962.
1809 (XVII). Special Committee on Territories
under Portuguese Administration
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1699 (XVI) of 19 December
1961 by which it decided to establish a Special Committee to examine as a matter of urgency, within the
context of Chapter XI of the Charter of the United
Nations and relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, such information as was available concerning
Territories under Portuguese administration, and to
formulate its observations, conclusions and recommendations for the consideration of the Assembly and any
other body which the Assembly might appoint to assist
it in the implementation of its resolution 1514 (XV) of
14 December 1960 on the granting of independence to
colonial countries and peoples,
Considering that in its resolution 1807 (XVII) of
14 December 1962 it requested the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples to give high prioritv to
the examination of the situation in the Territories undE'r
Portuguese administration,
1. Decides to dissolve the Special Committee on Territories under Portuguese Administration ;
2. Expresses its gratitude to the Special Committee
for its efforts and for its valuable contribution to the
accomplishment of the purposes of the United Nations
under Chapter XI of the Charter and resolution 1514
(XV):
3. Requests the Secretary-General to forward the
report of the Special Committee, 6 together with the summary records of the Fourth Committee on the question, 7
7 Ibid., Seventeenth Session, Fourth Committee, 1390th to
1408th, 1415th to 1421st meetings.

41

to the Government of Portugal, the Economic and Social
Council, the Economic Commission for Africa, the
Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East and
the specialized agencies concerned, including the International Labour Organisation.
1194th plenary meeting,
14 December 1962.

1846 (XVII). Report of the Committee on lnformation from Non-Sell-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by resolution 1700 (XVI) of 19 December 1961, it decided that the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories should
examine the political and constitutional information
transmitted by the Administering Members as well as
information relating to functional fields,
Recalling further that the Committee was instructed
to undertake intensive studies of political, educational,
economic and social conditions and problems of Territories located in the same area or region, except where
circumstances require individual consideration.
Considering that, by resolution 1654 (XVI) of '27
November 1961, it established the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples,
H avinq received the report of the Committee on
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories prepared in 1962,8
1. Takes note of the report of the Committee on
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories on
the work of its thirteenth session;
2. Notes with satisfaction that the Committee examined the political antl" constitutional information transmitted hy the Administering Members in the spirit of
Article 73 of the Charter of the United Nations;
3. Notes that the information on political and constitutional developments transmitted thus far has not been
detailed enough to allow the Committee and the General
Assembly fully to evaluate such developments:
4. Invites the Administering Members to continue to
transmit the fullest possible information on political and
constitutional developments, especially concerninf.," the
activitiE's of the political parties and groups in the NonSelf-Governing Territories, as well as information showing the extent to which the political. administratiw and
judicial machinerv in the Territories is in the hanrls
of the indigenous people;
~- N otcs that the report of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territorie~ was
formally transmitted to the Special, Committee on th<"
Situation with regard to the Implementation of thE'
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Co11ntries and Peoples:
6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
report to the Member States responsible for the aciministration of Non-Self-Governing Territories, to the
Economic and Social Council. to the regional economic
commissions, to the Trusteeship Council and to the
specialized agencies concerned, for their consideration.
1198th plenar'I) mrl'tinn,
19 December 1962.
8 !bid.,

Sc11pn/ernth Session, Supplement No. 15 ( A/5215).
