A/RES/72/113

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
18 December 2017

Seventy-second session
Agenda item 79

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 7 December 2017
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/72/458)]

72/113.

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fiftieth session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it
established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law with a
mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of
international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in
particular those of developing countries, in the extensive development of
international trade,
Reaffirming its belief that the progressive modernization and harmonization of
international trade law, in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of
international trade, especially those affecting developing countries, would
contribute significantly to universal econo mic cooperation among all States on a
basis of equality, equity, common interest and respect for the rule of law, to the
elimination of discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to peace, stability
and the well-being of all peoples,
Having considered the report of the Commission, 1
Reiterating its concern that activities undertaken by other bodies in the field of
international trade law without adequate coordination with the Commission might
lead to undesirable duplication of efforts and would not be in keeping with the aim
of promoting efficiency, consistency and coherence in the unification and
harmonization of international trade law,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Commission, as the core legal body within the
United Nations system in the field of international trade law, to coordinate legal
activities in this field, in particular to avoid duplication of efforts, including among
organizations formulating rules of international trade, and to promote efficiency,

__________________
1

17-22149 (E)

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/72/17).

201217

*1722149*

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fiftieth session

A/RES/72/113

consistency and coherence in the modernization and harmonization of international
trade law, and to continue, through its secretariat, to maintain close cooperation with
other international organs and organizations, including regional organizations,
active in the field of international trade law,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law; 1
2.
Commends the Commission for the finalization and adoption of the
Model Law on Electronic Transferable Records; 2
3.
Also commends the Commission for the finalization and adoption of the
Guide to Enactment of the Model Law on Secured Transactions, which provides
useful background and explanatory information for States in revising or adopting
legislation on the basis of the Model Law, which is aimed at establishing an
efficient secured transactions regime that would increase access to affordable
secured credit and promote sustainable development through the facilitation of
international trade and commercial activities, and requests the Secretary -General to
publish the Guide to Enactment of the Model Law, including electronically, in the
six official languages of the United Nations and to disseminate it broadly to
Governments and other interested bodies; 3
4.
Congratulates the Commission on its fiftieth anniversary, and notes with
satisfaction that the Congress to commemorate the anniversary, held in Vienna from
4 to 6 July 2017 during the fiftieth session of the Commission, entitled
“Modernizing International Trade Law to Support Innovation and Sustainable
Development”, acknowledged the centrality of international cooperation and
coordination to the achievements of the Commission, elicited innovative ideas for
modernizing international trade law in a sustainable manner that could not only
raise awareness of the work of the Commission and its potential to support crossborder commerce but also contribute to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, 4 and emphasized the leading role played by the Commission in
providing an inclusive, transparent and multilateral forum in which to address the
legal challenges facing international trade, and requests the Secretary -General to
ensure the publication of the proceedings of the Congress to the extent permitted by
available resources;
5.
Notes with satisfaction the contributions from the Fund for International
Development of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and from
the European Commission, which allow the operation of the repository of published
information under the Rules on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State
Arbitration 5 and that the Commission reiterated its strong and unanimous opinion
that the secretariat of the Commission should continue to operate the transparency
repository, which constitutes a central feature both of the Rules on Transparency
and of the United Nations Convention on Transparency in Treaty-based InvestorState Arbitration (Mauritius Convention on Transparency); 6
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to operate, through the
secretariat of the Commission, the repository of published informatio n in
accordance with article 8 of the Rules on Transparency, as a pilot project until the
end of 2020, to be funded entirely by voluntary contributions, and to keep the
__________________
2

Ibid., chap. III, sect. A.
Ibid., chap. IV, sect. A.
4
Ibid., chap. XV, sect. C.
5
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17), annex I.
6
Resolution 69/116, annex.
3

2/7

17-22149

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fiftieth session

A/RES/72/113

General Assembly informed of developments regarding the funding and budgetary
situation of the transparency repository based on its pilot operation;
7.
Takes note with interest of the decisions taken by the Commission as
regards its future work and the progress made by the Commission in its work in the
areas of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, dispute settlement, electronic
commerce, insolvency law and security interests, 7 and encourages the Commission
to continue to move forward efficiently to achieve tangible work outcomes in those
areas;
8.
Takes note of the decision by the Commission to entrust Working
Group III with a broad mandate to work on the possible reform of investor -State
dispute settlement, whereby it would: first, identify and consider concerns regarding
investor-State dispute settlement; second, consider whether re form was desirable in
the light of any identified concerns; and, third, if the Working Group were to
conclude that reform was desirable, develop relevant solutions to be recommended
to the Commission with a view to allowing each State the choice of whether and to
what extent it wished to adopt the relevant solution(s); 8
9.
Also takes note of the decision by the Commission to reaffirm the
mandate given to Working Group IV at its forty-ninth session to take up work on the
topics of identity management and trust services, as well as cloud computing, and to
revisit that mandate at its following session, in particular if the need arose to
prioritize between the topics or to give a more specific mandate to the Working
Group as regards its work in the area of identity management and trust services; 9
10. Endorses the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal
body within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, aimed
at increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities of international and
regional organizations active in the field of international trade law and at promoting
the rule of law at the national and international levels in this field, and in this regard
appeals to relevant international and regional organizations to coordinate their
activities with those of the Commission, to avoid duplication of efforts and to
promote efficiency, consistency and coherence in the modernization and
harmonization of international trade law;
11. Reaffirms the importance, in particular for developing countries, of the
work of the Commission concerned with technical cooperation and assistance in the
field of international trade law reform and development, and in this connection:
(a) Welcomes the initiatives of the Commission towards expanding, through
its secretariat, its technical cooperation and assistance programme, and in that
respect encourages the Secretary-General to seek partnerships with State and
non-State actors to increase awareness about the work of the Com mission and
facilitate the effective implementation of legal standards resulting from its work;
(b) Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for carrying out technical
cooperation and assistance activities and for providing assistance with legislative
drafting in the field of international trade law, and draws the attention of the
Secretary-General to the limited resources that are made available in this field;
(c) Expresses its appreciation to the Governments whose contributions
enabled the technical cooperation and assistance activities to take place, and appeals
to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations,
__________________
7

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/72/17),
chaps. III–VII.
8
Ibid., para. 264.
9
Ibid., para. 127.
17-22149

3/7

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fiftieth session

A/RES/72/113

institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law Trust Fund for Symposia and, where
appropriate, for the financing of special projects and otherwise to assist the
secretariat of the Commission in carrying out technical cooperation and assistance
activities, in particular in developing countries;
(d) Reiterates its appeal to the United Nations Development Programme and
other bodies responsible for development assistance, such as the World Bank and
regional development banks, as well as to Governments in their bilateral aid
programmes, to support the technical cooperation and assistance programme of the
Commission and to cooperate with the Commission and coordinate their activities
with those of the Commission in the light of the relevance and importance of the
work and programmes of the Commission for the promotion of the rule of law at the
national and international levels and for the implementation of the international
development agenda, including the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development; 10
(e) Recalls its resolutions stressing the need to strengthen support to
Member States, upon their request, in the domestic implementation of their
respective international obligations through enhanced technical assistance and
capacity-building, and welcomes the efforts of the Secretar y-General to ensure
greater coordination and coherence among United Nations entities and with donors
and recipients;
12. Recalls the importance of adherence to the rules of procedure and
methods of work of the Commission, including transparent and inclusi ve
deliberations, taking into account the summary of conclusions as reproduced in
annex III to the report on the work of its forty-third session, 11 requests the
Secretariat to issue, prior to meetings of the Commission and of its working groups,
a reminder of those rules of procedure and methods of work with a view to ensuring
the high quality of the work of the Commission and encouraging the assessment of
its instruments, and recalls in this regard its previous resolutions related to this
matter, and notes in that regard the discussions of the Commission during its fiftieth
session on its methods of work, including the request by Member States that the
Secretariat seek and take into account the views of States on the draft provisional
agenda as early as possible before the next session of the Commission, 12 as well as
achieve the right balance between written and oral methods of communication of
necessary information to the Commission; 13
13. Welcomes the activities of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law Regional Centre for Asia and the Pacific, in the Republic of
Korea, towards providing capacity-building and technical assistance services to
States in the Asia-Pacific region, including to international and regional
organizations, expresses its appreciation to the Republic of Korea and China, whose
contributions enabled continuing operation of the Regional Centre, notes that the
continuation of the regional presence relies entirely on extrabudgetary resources,
including but not limited to voluntary contributions from States, welcomes
expressions of interest from other States in hosting regional centres of the
Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly
informed of developments regarding the establishment of regional centres, in
particular their funding and budgetary situation;
__________________
10

Resolution 70/1.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/65/17).
12
Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/72/17), para. 479.
13
Ibid., para. 480.
11

4/7

17-22149

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fiftieth session

A/RES/72/113

14. Welcomes the offer of the Government of Bahrain, approved by the
Commission, to establish, subject to the relevant rules and regulations of the United
Nations and the internal approval process of the Office of Legal Affairs of the
Secretariat, a regional centre for the Middle East and North Africa in Bahrain as an
important step for the Commission in reaching out to increase familiarity with texts
of the Commission and to provide technical assistance to developing countries in
the region, it being understood that the establishment of a regional presence would
have to rely entirely on extrabudgetary resources, including but not limited to
voluntary contributions from States, 14 and expresses its appreciation to the
Government of Bahrain for its generous contribution to the project, and requests the
Commission, in its annual report, to keep the General Assembly informed of
developments regarding the project, in particular its funding and budg etary
situation;
15. Welcomes the offer of the Government of Cameroon, approved by the
Commission, to establish, subject to the relevant rules and regulations of the United
Nations and the internal approval process of the Office of Legal Affairs, a Region al
Centre for Africa in Cameroon as an important step for the Commission in reaching
out to increase familiarity with Commission texts and to provide technical
assistance to developing countries in the region, it being understood that the
establishment of a regional presence would have to rely entirely on extrabudgetary
resources, including but not limited to voluntary contributions from States,
expresses its appreciation to the Government of Cameroon for its generous
contribution to the project, and requests the Commission, in its annual report, to
keep the General Assembly informed of developments regarding the project, in
particular its funding and budgetary situation;
16. Appeals to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations
system, organizations, institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions
to the Trust Fund established to provide travel assistance to developing countries
that are members of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the
Secretary-General, in order to enable renewal of the provision of that assistance and
to increase expert representation from developing countries at sessions of the
Commission and its working groups, necessary to build local expertise and
capacities in those countries to put in place a regulatory and enabling environment
for business, trade and investment;
17. Decides, in order to ensure full participation of all Member States in the
sessions of the Commission and its working groups, to continue, in the competent
Main Committee during the seventy-second session of the General Assembly, its
consideration of granting travel assistance to the least developed countries that are
members of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the Secretary General;
18. Endorses the conviction of the Commission that the implementation and
effective use of modern private law standards in international trade are essential for
advancing good governance, sustained economic development and the eradication
of poverty and hunger and that the promotion of the rule of law in commercial
relations should be an integral part of the broader agenda of the United Nations to
promote the rule of law at the national and international levels, including through
the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group, supported by the Rule of Law
Unit in the Executive Office of the Secretary-General;
19. Notes the statement and the views of experts on the role of the
Commission in promoting the rule of law presented during the fiftieth session of the
__________________
14

17-22149

Ibid., paras. 295 and 296.
5/7

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fiftieth session

A/RES/72/113

Commission on ways and means of further disseminating international law to
strengthen the rule of law from the perspective of the areas of work of the
Commission and the comments transmitted by the Commission pursuant to
paragraph 22 of General Assembly resolution 71/148 of 13 December 2016,
highlighting its role in promoting the rule of law, in particular through wide
dissemination of international commercial law, including across the United Nations
system; 15
20. Notes with satisfaction that, in paragraph 8 of the declaration of the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law at the national and
international levels, adopted by consensus as resolution 67/1 of 24 September 2012,
Member States recognized the importance of fair, stable and predictable legal
frameworks for generating inclusive, sustainable and equitable development,
economic growth and employment, generating investment and facilitating
entrepreneurship and, in this regard, commended the work of the Commission in
modernizing and harmonizing international trade law and that, in paragraph 7 of the
declaration, Member States expressed their conviction that the rule of law and
development were strongly interrelated and mutually reinforcing;
21. Also notes with satisfaction that, in paragraph 89 of the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for
Development, adopted by the General Assembly by consensus as resolution 69/313
of 27 July 2015, States endorsed the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as
the core legal body within the United Nations system in the field of international
trade law, aimed at increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities of
international and regional organizations active in the field of international trade law
and at promoting the rule of law at the national and international levels in this field;
22. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in conformity with
resolutions of the General Assembly on documentation-related matters, 16 which, in
particular, emphasize that any invitation to limit, where appropriate, the length of
documents should not adversely affect either the quality of the presentation or the
substance of the documents, to bear in mind the particular characteristics of the
mandate and functions of the Commission in the progressive development and
codification of international trade law when implementing page limits with respect
to the documentation of the Commission; 17
23. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the publication of
Commission standards and the provision of summary records of the meetings of the
Commission, including committees of the whole established by the Commission for
the duration of its annual session, relating to the formul ation of normative texts, and
takes note of the decision of the Commission to continue the trial use of digital
recordings, in parallel with summary records where applicable, with a view to
assessing the experience of using digital recordings and, on the b asis of that
assessment, taking a decision at a future session regarding the possible replacement
of summary records by digital recordings; 18
24. Recalls paragraph 48 of its resolution 66/246 of 24 December 2011
regarding the rotation scheme of meetings between Vienna and New York;

__________________
15

Ibid., chap. XVI.
Resolutions 52/214, sect. B, 57/283 B, sect. III, and 58/250, sect. III.
17
Resolutions 59/39, para. 9, and 65/21, para. 18; see also Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/59/17), paras. 124–128.
18
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/69/17),
para. 276.
16

6/7

17-22149

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fiftieth session

A/RES/72/113

25. Stresses the importance of promoting the use of texts emanating from the
work of the Commission for the global unification and harmonization of
international trade law, and to this end urges States that have not yet done so to
consider signing, ratifying or acceding to conventions, enacting model laws and
encouraging the use of other relevant texts;
26. Notes the decision of the Commission to commend the use of the
Uniform Rules for Forfaiting of the International Chamber of Commerce, as
appropriate, in forfaiting transactions, to facilitate international receivables
financing and thus international trade more generally;
27. Notes with appreciation the work of the Secretariat on the system for the
collection and dissemination of case law on Commission texts in the six official
languages of the United Nations (the CLOUT system), notes the resource -intensive
nature of the system, acknowledges the need for further resources to sus tain and
expand it, and in this regard welcomes efforts by the Secretariat towards building
partnerships with interested institutions, and appeals to Governments, the relevant
bodies of the United Nations system, organizations, institutions and individuals to
assist the secretariat of the Commission in raising awareness as to the availability
and usefulness of the CLOUT system in professional, academic and judiciary circles
and in securing the funding required for the coordination and expansion of the
system and the establishment, within the secretariat of the Commission, of a pillar
focused on the promotion of ways and means of interpreting Commission texts in a
uniform manner;
28. Welcomes the continued work of the Secretariat on digests of case law
related to Commission texts, including their wide dissemination, as well as the
continuing increase in the number of abstracts available through the CLOUT
system, in view of the role of the digests and the CLOUT system as important tools
for the promotion of the uniform interpretation of international trade law, in
particular by building local capacity of judges, arbitrators and other legal
practitioners to interpret those standards in the light of their international character
and the need to promote uniformity in their application and the observance of good
faith in international trade;
29. Recalls its resolutions affirming the importance of high-quality, userfriendly and cost-effective United Nations websites and the need for their
multilingual development, maintenance and enrichment, 19 commends the fact that
the website of the Commission is published in the six official languages of the
United Nations, and welcomes the continuous efforts of the Commission to maintain
and improve its website, including by developing new social media features, in
accordance with the applicable guidelines; 20
30. Expresses its appreciation to Mr. Renaud Sorieul, Secretary of the
Commission since 2008, who will retire on 31 October 2017, for his outstanding
and devoted contribution to the process of the unification and harmonization of
international trade law in general and to the Commission in particular.
67th plenary meeting
7 December 2017

__________________
19

Resolutions 52/214, sect. C, para. 3; 55/222, sect. III, para. 12; 56/64 B, sect. X; 57/130 B,
sect. X; 58/101 B, sect. V, paras. 61–76; 59/126 B, sect. V, paras. 76–95; 60/109 B, sect. IV,
paras. 66–80; and 61/121 B, sect. IV, paras. 65–77.
20
Resolution 63/120, para. 20.
17-22149

7/7
