th
MEETING

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 725)

,..,..,,.....,.,............,.

‘y

Adoption of the agenda . , . . . . . . . . . , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 33 1 (1973);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under Security Council resolution
331(1973) (S/10929) . * . . . . . * . . , . . . . . , . I.. . . . . . . . . . . I.. . .

I

SIPV. 1725

,’

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The’new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND TWENTY-FIFTH

Held in New York on Thursday,

MEETING

14 June 1973, at 10.30 a.m.

President: Mr. Yakov MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

and Mr. S. M. Al-Saffar (Bahrain) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber,

Preserzt: The representatives of the following States:

2. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): 1 should
like to inform members of the Security Council of the
following. As President of the Council, I have received a
telegram from the President of the Republic of Chad,
Mr. Franqois Tombalbaye, which reads asfollows:

Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,

Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 725)
I, Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
(al Security Council resolution 33 1 (1973).
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under Security
Council resolution 331 (1973) (S/10929).
The meeting was called to order at 1 I a.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 331 (1973);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under Security
Council resolution 331 (1973) (S/l 0929)
1, The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): In accordance with decisions adopted by the Security Council at
previous meetings I intend, with the consent of the Council,
to invite the representatives of Egypt, Israel, Jordan, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Chad, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Nigeria, Algeria, Morocco, the United Arab
Emirates, Somalia, Guyana, Mauritania, Kuwait, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Lebanon, Iran and Bahrain to take part,
without the right to vote, in the consideration by the
Security Council of the situation in the Middle East.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Zayyat
(Egypt),
Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) and Mr. A. H. Sharaf
(Jordan) took places at the Council table; and Mr. S. A.
Salim (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. H. G. Ouang
matching (Chad), Mr, H Kelani (Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. E. 0. Ogbu (Nigeria), Mr. A. Bouteflika (Algeria),
Mr. M. Zentar (Morocco), Mr. A. Al-Pachachi (United Arab
Emirates), Mr. H. Nur Elmi (Somalia), Mr. R. E. Jackson
(Guyana), Mr. M. El Hassen (Mauritania), Mr. A. Y. Bishara
fKuwait),
Mr. J. Y. Jamal (Qatar), Mr. 0. Sakkaf (Saudi
Arabia), Mr. E. Ghorra (Lebanon), Mr. I? Hoveyda (Iran}

“I have the honour to request postponement for 24
hours of the suspension of the Security Council debate on
the situation in the Middle East, in order to enable
Mr. Baba Hassane, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of my
Government, to take an active part in the discussion. The
Minister will leave Fort Lamy on 14 June and arrive in
New York on 15 June, and will speak in the debate
during the afternoon meeting, By giving my country this
opportunity to discharge the mandate entrusted to it by
the most recent summit meeting of the Organization of
African Unity, your Council will be making yet another
contribution to the search for a peaceful settlement to
ensure lasting peace in the region under discussion.”
3. In the light of this request from the President of Chad
and the fact that in accordance with a Security Council
decision of 6 June this year Chad was invited to take part,
without the right to vote, in the consideration of the
question of the situation in the Middle East, I intend, if
there is no objection on the part of Council members, to
accede to the request of the President of Chad and, as an
exception, to give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Chad, Baba Hassane, to make a statement on the
question of the situation in the Middle East at the meeting
tomorrow, 15 June, after the Council has concluded its
discussion of the question of Cyprus, in view of the fact
that we are scheduled to suspend the discussion of the
situation in the Middle East today. If there is no objection,
it is so decided,
It was so decided.

4. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): Before
calling on the first speaker on the list for today’s Council
meeting, I call on the Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt
Waldheim.
5. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
At the Council’s 172lst
meeting, on 11 June, the Foreign Minister of Egypt
addressed three questions to me. I now wish to reply to
those questions.

6. In reply to the first question I want to state that
Ambassador Jarring informed the representatives of the

parties at the time of his intention to submit an aidem6moire relating to Israel and Jordan. In reply to a
question from the Egyptian representative whether Ambassador Jarring intended to submit an aide-memoire relating
to Syria, Ambassador Jarring stated that Syria had not so
far accepted Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and
had not agreed to enter into contact with him. If it were to
do so, an aide-m8moire relating to Syria might have been
submitted.
7. As noted in the aide-m6moire of 8 February 1971
addressed to Israel and the United Arab Republic
(S/10403, annex1/, its aim was to break the deadlock
between the parties and thus to enable discussions to
proceed on the provisions of peace agreements, including in
particular a just settlement of the refugee problem. Ambassador Jarring recognized that the question would be most
complicated and difficult and would involve the formulation of a detailed plan.

“Two, is the principle of territorial integrity that
everyone here upholds and defends-including the United
States of America, whose last five Presidents have asserted
their conviction that this principle should be inviolable in
the Middle East-applicable to all the nations or to all the
nations except the Arab nations?
“Three, is the principle of self-determination acclaimed
by all the United Nations Members, including Israel, valid
vis-&vis the hundreds of thousands, the millions, of Arab
Palestinians, or is it valid for everyone except the
Palestinians?
“Could the Council-our
Council--have adopted, or
could it adopt now, any decisions or resolutions that
would allow or can be interpreted to allow the breach of
these three principles? ” [I 721st meeting, paras. .5U-53.1
13. As President of the Security Council, I intend to
answer these questions put by Mr. El-Zayyat in the fol.
lowing manner. The basis for my answer is the relevant
provision of the United Nations Charter, and also the
decisions of the principal organs of the United Nations, the
Security Council and the General Assembly.

8. In reply to the second question, I wish to recall that,
under the Egyptian-Israeli Armistice Agreement of 1949,
Gaza, which is not Egyptian territory, is put under
Egyptian administration pending the conclusion of a peace
settlement. It was for this reason that Gaza was not covered
in the aide-mbmoire, as was explained at the time by
Ambassador Jarring to the United Arab Republic representative. The statement of the Foreign Minister of Egypt is
therefore in essence correct.

14. First, I should like to say something about the
principle of non-acquisition of territories by force or by
war and the closely allied principle of the territorial
integrity of States.

9. As regards the third question, the Council will recall
that the Secretary-General was not present at the fourPower meetings, nor was he associated with those meetings.
The practice at the time was for the representative of the
permanent member who had presided over a particular
meeting to brief the Secretary-General informally and for
his own information about matters discussed during that
meeting.

15. In the first place, the Charter of the United Nations
contains clear and precise provisions on this subject.
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter reads:
“All Members shall refrain in their international rela.
tions from the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any state, or in any
other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the
United Nations”.

10. I can confirm that a note on the oral report to my
predecessor on the meeting of four of the permanent
members of the Council on 24 June 1971 covers the general
sense of that meeting as stated on 11 June by the Foreign
Minister of Egypt.

16. In the second place, there are a number of funda.
mental documents of a general nature adopted by the
United Nations which have a direct bearing on this
question.

11. Obviously, detailed information can be provided only
by the representatives of those Powers which participated
in the talks.

17. For example, the Declaration on Principles of International Law Concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, which was adopted by the General
Assembly at its twenty-fifth
session as resolution
2625 (XXV), proclaims, as the first such principle, “The
principle that States shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any State,
or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of
the United Nations”. As a concrete justification for this
principle, the Declaration contains the following provision:
“The territory of a State shall not be the object of military
occupation resulting from the use of force in contravention
of the provisions of the Charter. The territory of a State
shall not be the object of acquisition by another State
resulting from the threat or use of force. No territorial
acquisition resulting from the threat or use of force shall be
recognized as legal.”

12. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): As you
know, at the 172 1st meeting of the Security Council on 11
June this year, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Arab
Republic of Egypt, Mr. El-Zayyat, noted that the Security
Council was conscious that there were three questions
which he had put earlier and to which he would like to
receive an answer. I would remind the Council of these
questions by Mr. El-Zayyat:
“One, does the principle of non-acquisition of territories by force or by war, or the necessity that the weight
of military victory should not be reflected-to use an
American expression-mean that no territory at all can be
thus acquired, or does it mean that the acquisition of
small choice morsels of territory is permissible while the
acquisition of unreasonably big territories is not?
2

duty to refrain from any forcible action which deprives
peoples of their right to self-determinationand freedom
and independence.

18. A similar provision is also contained in paragraph 5 of
the Declaration on the Strengthening of International
Security, adopted by the General Assembly at its twentyfifth session as resolution 2734 (XXV).

26. In the third place, there are also a number of specific
resolutions of United Nations organs applicable to the
Palestinian Arabs. For example, there is resolution
194 (III), adopted on 11 December1948, which statesin
paragraph11 that the GeneralAssembly‘Resolvesthat the
refugeeswishing to return to their homesand live at peace
with their neighboursshould be permitted to do so at the
earliest practicable date, and that compensationshouldbe
paid for the property of those choosingnot to return and
for lossof or damageto property which, under principlesof
international law or in equity, shouldbe madegoodby the
Governments or authorities responsible”.Also applicable
are General Assembly resolutions 2672 C (XXV) of
8 December 1970, 2729 D (XXVI) of 6 December 1971
and 2963 E (XXVII) of 13 December1972. The operative
part of the lastof the resolutionsI havereferredto readsas
follows:

19. In the third place, there are also relevant decisions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly on this
question, relating specifically to the situation in the Middle
East.
20. Apart from the well-known
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, which emphasizes
“the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war”,
this principle was also confirmed subsequently in Security
Council resolutions
252 (1968) of 21 May 1968,
267 (1969) of 3 July 1969 and 298 (1971) of 25 September 1971.
21. The General Assembly, in its turn, when discussing the
question of the situation in the Middle East, confirmed the
principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by force and of the inadmissibilityof the threat or
use of force againstthe territorial integrity of States in its
4 November 1970,
resolutions 2628 (XXV)
of
2799 (XXVI) of 13 December1971 and 2949 (XXVII) of
8 December 1972.

“The GeneralAssembly,
“. ..
“1. Affirms that the peopleof Palestineareentitled to
equal rights and self-determination,in accordancewith
the Charter of the United Nations;

22. Thus both the Security Council and the General
Assembly, in accordance with the Charter, regard the
principle of the non-acquisitionof territory by force and
the principle of the territorial integrity of States as a
universally recognized standard of international law, the
violation of which is inadmissiblein any circumstancesand
which is applicable to all cases,including specifically the
situation in the Middle East.

“2. ExpressesL)IZcemore its grave concern that the
people of Palestine have not been permitted to enjoy
their inalienable rights and to exercise their right to
self-determination;
“3, Recognizesthat full respectfor and realization of
the inalienable rights of the people of Palestine are
indispensablefor the establishmentof a just and lasting
peacein the Middle East”.

23. In connexion with the question as to whether the
principle of self-determination is applicableto the Palestinian Arabs, I shouldlike to say the following.
24. In the first place,the Charter containsclear provisions
in this respect. For example, Article 1, paragraph2, of the
Charter statesthat the purposesof the United Nations are,
inter alia: “To develop friendly relations among nations
based on respect for the principle of equal rights and
self-determination of peoples”, Article 5.5speaksof “peaceful and friendly relations among nations basedon respect
for the principle of equal rights and self-determinationof
peoples’?.From these and other relevant provisionsof the
Charter, it follows that the principle of equal rights and
self-determination of peoples is one of the fundamental
principles of the United NationsCharter.

27. Thus, accordingto the Charteranddecisionsof United
Nations organs, every people, without exception, has the
right to self-determination. United Nations decisionsspecifically confirm that this right also appliesto the Arab
people of Palestine.
28. I give the floor to the representativeof the United
Stateson a point of order.
29. Mr. SCALI (United Statesof America): Mr. President,
I have listened carefully to your statement,and I shallread
it with even greater care. But since there have been no
consultations on the three questions addressedto the
Council, I must assumethat you have spokenin your
individual capacity.

25. In the second place, it is also well known that the
Declaration on Friendly RelationsandCo-operationamong
States, which I have already mentioned, singlesout the
principle of equal rights and self-determinationof peoples
as a separate principle, In the relevant provisionsof the
Declaration which give concrete expressionto this principle, it is stated, inter alia, that “all peopleshave the right
freely to determine, without external interference, their
political status”. It is also stated that “Every State hasthe
duty to promote, through joint and separate action,
realization of the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples,in accordancewith the provisions of
the Charter”. It is alsoemphasizedthat every State hasthe

30. The PRESIDENT (translationfrom Russian):I call on
the representativeof Israel.
31. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): At the 1723rdmeetingof the
Security Council, on 12 June 1973,I stated:
‘L. * *
“If there were any doubts that debatesin the Security
Council can serve no useful purpose because they
3

inevitably lead to polemics and recrimination, the statement by the Soviet representative has removed them. If
there were need to convince anyone that, as declared by
Israel’s Foreign Minister, debates in the Security Council
cannot contribute to harmony and understanding but
generally widen and deepen the differences, the Soviet
representative’s statement has been a most convincing
factor,” [1723rd meeting, para. 79.1

to violate the standards of international law and the Charter
concerning the non-acquisition of territories by force.
40. Sir Laurence MCINTYRE (Australia): Mr. President,
let me first of all join other speakers in this debate in
welcoming you to the presidency of this Council for the
month of June. I think it is not exactly a new experience
for you. I asked you a few days ago if you could remember
how many times you had occupied this presidential chair,
and you said you could not remember, but I think we
worked out that it must be approaching 10 times. You have
now confirmed that it is nine times, which must be a record
that will be difficult for anybody to surpass. We need
clearly have no misgivings about your capacity to conduct
the Council’s business confidently and decisively, and 1
would also suggest, if I may, that the tact, courtesy and
patience with which you have directed our present debate
have contributed in no small degree to the relatively
restrained key in which it has so far pursued its course.

32. Today, in the light of the fact that it was possible for
the representative of the USSR to usurp the right to speak
for the entire Security Council and in view of the fact that
it was possible for him to misuse his office of President of
the Security Council to present unilateral, selective and
distorted interpretations of the United Nations Charter and
resolutions of organs of the Organization, I should like to
emphasize that there can be no more doubt about the fact
that the Security Council is not a forum which offers the
possibility of examining seriously and on its merits the
situation in the Middle East.

41. I do not forget either the very able, unruffled and
genial fashion in which your predecessor, Ambassador
Abdulla of the Sudan, performed his functions as President
during the month of May.

33. The representative of the USSR in the statement
which we just heard mentioned a series of documents,
Articles and provisions. He omitted, however, the crucial
one which applies in this situation and which overshadows
all the others-and that is Article 51 of the Charter of the
United Nations, which states:

42. I should like also to add my own words of welcome to
the Foreign Ministers who have come here from Africa and
the Arab countries to make their views known on the
subject that is now before us. The Foreign Minister of the
Arab Republic of Egypt, Mr. El-Zayyat, is of course an old
friend and colleague, and it is always a pleasure for us to
welcome him back here. As regards the other African
Foreign Ministers, we will all of us recall the imaginative
and constructive initiative that was taken by the Committee
of Ten of the Organization of African Unity in 1971 and
carried into effect by the mission of four Heads of State in
an attempt to find a way towards a breakthrough in the
Middle East dispute-an initiative which, if I may say so,
deserved more success than it was able to achieve.

“Nothing in the present Charter shall impair the
inherent right of individual or collective self-defence if an
armed attack occurs against a Member of the United
Nations . . .‘I.
34. Israel has been subjected to armed aggression on the
part of the Arab States since 1948. Nothing that has been
stated by the representative of the Soviet Union can
derogate from Israel’s inherent right to continue to defend
itself, to protect its territory and its population.
35, The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I call on
the representative of Egypt.
36. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT
just cited.

43. I have read with particular care the report that the
Secretary-General has submitted in response to the Coun.
cil’s resolution 33 1 (1973) [,$‘/I 0929/, and I have f~ und it
to be a model of objectivity and a very comprehensive
summary of developments in the Middle East since the
events of the middle of 1967. If I had had any intention of
recapitulating and analysing those developments in this
statement, that report has absolved me from the need to do
so, and I have no impulse at this time to go further back
and explore the origins of this intractable and grievous
situation. As has already been said in the course of this
debate, it is a history of missed opportunities and untimely
setbacks, brought about partly by failure to establish
communication on a common wavelength and partly by the
concatenation of acts of violence, from all of which it is not
difficult to ascribe blame on both sides. There is bound to
be a temptation in a situation of this kind to dwell on the
past, and the Middle East offers countless opportunities for
rumination and recrimination about what should have been
done or not done and about whose behaviour was honourable, or intransigent, or simply equivocal.

(Egypt): I take note of Article 51,

31. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I confined myself to mentioning the provisions of the Charter
and decisions of United Nations organs directly relevant to
the problems raised in the questions put by the representative of Egypt.
38. I take note of the statement by the representative of
the United States that he will read my statement carefully,
and I hope that after doing so he will change his opinion.
39. As for the statement of the representative of Israel, no
one really expected any other reaction from him to these
United Nations decisions. I added nothing of my own, but
merely mentioned the provisions of the Charter and United
Nations decisions relevant to the questions which the
representative of Egypt had raised, On the reference made
by the representative of Israel to Article 51 of the Charter,
which we are all aware of, I can only comment that it refers
to the right of States to self-defence, and not to any right

44. We can at any rate agree that there have been
injustices and excesses which have all formed part of the
4

vicious circle Of Violence and reprisal referred to by the
Secretary-General in his introductory statement (1717th
meeting] and which have effectively contaminated any
atmosphere that might have been conducive to rational
discussion and reasoned consideration and decision by the
parties directly concerned. Nobody could have done more
to help the parties to create such an atmosphere than
Ambassador Jarring, whose enormous patience and dedication to the fulfilment of his mandate as the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative can only remain a matter
of admiration to all of us.

gratuitous and superfluous. I can only speak about the
most useful course, for Australia cannot take the same
pessimistic view of the United Nations as I think Israel
tends to do . . . There is no more certain way to ensure
the continued ineffectiveness of the United Nations than
that the smaller nations of peace and freedom should
despair absolutely of that one world body of which they
form a majority, The greatest victims of the breakdown
through despair of the League of Nations were the Jewish
people. No nation would have more to lose than Israel by
a breakdown of the United Nations.

45. But while we cannot escape from the past, it is the
present and the future that we must concentrate on, and
the paramount need not to miss but to seize this current
opportunity
to help the Arab States and lsrael in the
direction of the kind of settlement that they must
ultimately reach between themselves. If we sit by and allow
attitudes and confrontations
to harden to the point of
petrifaction, we may find ourselves stuck with a mountain
of stones all set up, as it were, for a disastrous landslide at
the first disturbance of any of them.

“We have affirmed, and we continue to believe, that the
best prospect for an enduring peace in the Middle East
will flow from an agreement freely arrived at between the
parties, My Government will work to secure support for
negotiations towards such an agreement, both in the
United Nations and in all our diplomatic endeavours.”
49. On 6 June, in a communique issued at the conclusion
of his visit to India, Mr. Whitlam joined with the Indian
Prime Minister, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, in expressing concern at
the grave situation in the Middle East and reaffirming their
belief that Security Council resolution 242 (1967) provided
the basis for a just and durable settlement of this serious
and long outstanding problem.

46. Without wishing to be thought unduly optimistic it
seems to me that there are some signs, however faint, that
this debate has taken at times a somewhat different and
perhaps more hopeful course, at least in its early stages,
than have previous debates in this Council and the General
Assembly and its subsidiary bodies. It is naturally to be
expected that in any debate on the Middle East there is
bound to be dissension and recrimination over the past. We
have heard recriminations in this debate, and we have
become accustomed to hearing them before, But it seems to
me that there is an undertone-and call it no more than an
undertone-of
conscious restraint, of attentive listening,
and of probing for answers to questions asked with a
deliberate purpose and in a genuine search for information.

50. This then sums up the attitude of my Government
towards a settlement of the Middle East dispute-that the
best prospect for an enduring peace will flow from an
agreement freely arrived at between the parties and growing
out of the full implementation of resolution 242 (1967).
51. The importance of resolution 242 (1967) needs no
emphasis; we have been constantly reminded of it throughout this debate, and of the fact that it is the only resolution
to which Israel, Egypt and Jordan are fully committed. As
has been stressed more than once, we must be careful not
to jeopardize the full support that it enjoys, but must
instead ensure that it is respected and implemented as a
whole and in all its parts.

47. The Secretary-General
has reminded us that the
Security Council is the only forum where all the parties to
the conflict have been able to meet together in the same
room. Both Foreign Minister El-Zayyat and Ambassador
Tekoah have denied that they are here just to score points
off each other, and 1 want to believe them. Accordingly, I
like to think that they have been conducting, across those
few yards between their seats, and however tentatively, the
beginning of a kind of dialogue which could conceivably
open a small door towards negotiation. If I am right, this
would be an augury for which we ought to be grateful and
also encouraged.

52. We have heard it said by both Egypt and Israel-and
let us for the moment ignore any qualifications or glosses
that. may be put on it-that they are ready to enter into
talks without pte-conditions. If this reflects a genuine and
sincere desire on both sides-and this is of course a sine qua
non-it should surely not be beyond the ingenuity of
talented people, of whom there are many, both Arab and
Israeli, to approach a negotiating table, or if necessary
separate tables, or separate tables in distant rooms, with at
least some common purposes in mind.

48. At this point I should like to indicate the attitude of
my own Government towards the Middle East dispute. I
shall First of all quote an extract from an address given by
the Australian Prime Minister, Mr. Gough Whitlam, who is
also Foreign Minister, on 6 May on the occasion of the
celebration of the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the foundation of Israel. After recalling Australia’s traditional
friendship with both sides in the dispute and emphasizing
Australian
support
for the sovereignty of Israel,
Mr. Whitlam concluded in the following words, addressing
himself I might note primarily to the Jewish community in
Australia:

53. One broad common objective might be to rid themselves of the siege mentality, if I may call it that, which has
for so long afflicted the whole of the Middle East, and to
try to envisage the benefits of a condition of peace in which
all States of the fegion, living within secure and recognized
boundaries and with their sovereignty and territorial integrity fully respected, could look ahead to the ultimate
prospect of mutual co-operation for their common good.
54. Another and perhaps more difficult objective might be
to devise an acceptable balance between safeguarding the

“I am not in the business of telling Israel what is for her
own good. I know that such advice from me would be

5
1

in the area, which must be analysedand from which the
proper conclusionsmust be drawn. Jordan has been in the
midst of the sufferings of the past six years and of tile
international attempts to establish a just peace. Jordan
participated in the consultationsand activities which led to
the adoption in November 1967 of resolution 242 (1967).
It cannot watch passively the relentlessefforts made to
empty that resolution of its contents, isolate it from the
context in which it was adopted, and attribute alien and
subversive
meaningsto it.

vital principles laid down in the Charter and in resolution
242 (1967) and reconciling the practical realities of the
existing situation with the likely consequences of a continued stalemate.
55. Another and equally difficult aim would be to bring
about a territorial settlement or series of settlements to
replace on a permanent basis the temporary arrangements
arrived at as long ago as 1949 under the various Armistice
Agreements, starting from the premise that those agreements contained, in one form or another, an injunction that
their provisions were without prejudice to existing rights
and claims or to future territorial settlements or boundary
lines.

62. Wehave heard a number of contentions which reflect
this attack on the content of the United Nations effort to
bring peaceandjustice to the Middle East.

56. A fourth aim might be to devise a solution to the
plight of the Palestine refugees under which these unfortunate people could be assured of a permanent home or
homes and given hope in place of despair for the future and
perhaps even some kind of national identity of their own.

63. The first contention is that Security Council resolution 242 (1967) did not provide for Israel’sreturn to the
lines which existed before the outbreak of hostilities 011
5 June 1967. Sometimesthis contention is based on an
interpretation attributed to the semanticconstruction of
the provision for the withdrawal. On other occasionsthis is
basedon the claim that return to the lines of 5 June
conflicts with the provision for secure and recognized
borders.

57. All this may sound altogether premature, presumptuous and Utopian at this stage; but we cannot allow
ourselves to lapse into a state of congenital pessimism and
frustration. We must continue to draw hope from any sign,
however faint, of a desire on both sides to begin a search
for a basis of understanding and mutual accommodation. If
we in this Council see any such signs-and I am still
convinced that some hints have appeared in the course of
this debate-there must be a heavy obligation on all of us,
in any action we may take, in the framework of resolution
242 (1967), to help and not to hinder any tentative step
towards conciliation. We can be sure that the SecretaryGeneral will continue to do everything within the terms of
his authority to get the parties into a dialogue-whether
direct, indirect, “proximity” or even remote perhaps should
not greatly matter-and, of course, Ambassador Jarring still
retains his mandate from resolution 242 (1967).

64. The interpretation derived from the semantic con.
struction of the provision for withdrawal is totally invalid.
Paragraph1 in resolution 242 (1967), providing for Israeli
withdrawal, is governedby a clearly stated principle at the
very outset of the resolution, the principle of the inadmissibility of acquisition of territory by war. It is alsogoverned
by the broader and more basic principles of international
law and the United Nations Charter. The Charter is based
on respectfor the territorial integrity of States and on the
undertaking by Members not to use force against the
territorial integrity and political independenceof States.
The provision for withdrawal by the Israeli armed forces
from the occupiedterritories is, therefore, inseparablefrom
this broad and basic foundation of contemporary internationalorder. That is what commonsensedictates.

58. We can certainly expect no miracles, Any final
settlement is obviously going to be long in coming, There
will need to be a mixture of carrot and stick, but
sympathetic and patient encouragement is likely to be more
helpful to the parties concerned than criticism of past
failures and excesses. It may be that the parties will find it
possible to advance step by step; it may be that they will
take a long time over delivering a complete package or set
of packages. But a final and lasting settlement must
ultimately arrive; the alternative is surely too unthinkable
to contemplate.

65. In any case when we, the Arab parties, accepted
resolution242 (1967), that is what it obviously meant. The
semanticconstruction of the provision for withdrawal was
rightly subordinatedto the logical and contextual significanceof that provision in the light of international law, the
law of the United Nations and the modern concept’ OF”
international relations, Not long before the adoption of
resolution242 (1967), during the fifth emergency special
sessionof the GeneralAssembly,the Latin American group
had presentedto the General Assembly a draft resolution
which containedthe following operative paragraph:

59. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): The
next speaker on the list is the representative of Jordan, on
whom I now call.

“Urgently requests:
“(a) Israel to withdraw all its forces from all the
territories occupiedasa result of the recent conflict”.1

60. Mr. SHARAF (Jordan): This statement is not made in
the spirit of the right of reply. It is an’ attempt at the
positiveclarification of issuesbeforethe Council.

Israel did not vote againstthat draft resolution. The more
recent argumentsfor changedborders and partial withdrawal were not introduced then. Total Israeli withdrawal

61. In the courseof the debatein the Council a number of
issueswere raised,primarily by the representativeof Israel,
which require somecomment. The history and the roots of
the problem aside,there are immediateissuesandconcepts
pertainingto the efforts to establisha just andlastingpeace

1 See OjjYcial Records of the General Assembly, Fifth b’mergetrc)’
Special Session, Annexes,
agenda
iicm 5, documentA/L.523/Rcv.l.
6

from all the occupied territories was considered as the
natural state of things. So the semantic argument for
incomplete withdrawal and for acquisition of territory is
absurd and meaningless.

at present. That is the essence of resolution 242 (1967). It
is a resolution based on the idea of withdrawal in a peaceful
framework,
The argument that in addition to Arab acceptance of and commitment to a lasting and guaranteed
peace the Arabs should also cede most or some of their
national territories is certainly a distorted and destructive
interpretation of a balanced and realistic resolution. Jordan,
like its Arab neighbours, will not give up any part of its
occupied territory to the occupying Power.

66. But the Israeli spokesmen have advanced another
argument, the argument that total withdrawal conflicts
with the provision for the establishment of “secure
borders”. How are borders made “secure”? Neither common sense nor the honest interpretation of resolution
242 (1967) could lead to the conclusion that “secure”
borders means “expanded” borders. First of all, security is
not a one-sided concept. Security among nations is by
definition mutual. It certainly can have no other meaning in
a resolution on peace in the Middle East.

72. The second major contention which underlies Israel’s
position is the claim that the only way to a settlement is
direct negotiation and that the Arabs reject this course and
therefore reject peace. This exercise in distortion cannot
withstand any deep examination. Negotiation, like mediation, arbitration, adjudication or resort to United Nations
organs, is one of several methods or procedures for solving
an international dispute; it is not a solution in itself. When
we object to direct negotiations it is not because we do not
want peace or a peaceful solution. We have repeatedly said
we need and want peace. It is because we regard this
procedure for solving the substantive problems as no
guarantee of our rights and claims. We find in the
machinery of the United Nations a more equitable forum
and procedure that could effect a settlement without
prejudice to our rights and interests.

67. If “secure borders” were to mean expanded borders,
why should it not mean borders expanded at the expense of
Israel, rather than at the expense of the Arab States
neighbouring Israel? In fact, it would be more logical, in
view of the situation on the ground, to argue for expanded-meaning secure-borders
for the Arab countries
now under Israeli occupation after the withdrawal of Israeli
forces, if this notion were to be accepted.
68. But secure borders are not borders based on forcible
expansion. Secure borders are made so by other elements: a
major element is the absence of mutual grievance; a major
element is the solution of the explosive outstanding
problems between the countries sharing the borders. There
are also other, more concrete measures States can take to
make their borders physically secure, such as the establishment of areas of mutual demilitarization, and international
guarantees. Surely it was these elements of security that
resolution 242 (1967) envisaged.

73. The situation before us is one where there are two
parties making two distinct claims against each other.
Regardless of the substance of those claims, while the Arab
side is the aggrieved party historically and on the ground
today, the parallel claims exist. The Arab parties demand
that the occupation of their national soil be ended and the
Israeli occupation forces completely withdrawn.
74. Israel claims, at least ostensibly, that what it wants is
peace with its neighbours, and guarantees for its continuance, But Israel occupies the territories of Arab States,
and its leaders have repeatedly expressed the intention of
their Government to annex substantial slices-perhaps
all-of the occupied territories. The actions of Israel in the
occupied territories support such Arab fears and forebodings.

69, Secure borders are inviolable borders; they are not
borders made deceptively secure by the acquisition by one
State of a hill or a river belonging to the neighbouring
State-still
less by the planting of military settlements in
the heart of the neighbouring country. Jordan maintains
that this is the only way in which the concept could be
understood.
70. The Israeli claim that the return to the lines which
existed before the outbreak of hostilities is a return to a
situation which caused, war in ,1967 is a distortion of the
issues of peace and security in the area. What caused the
war of 1967 was not the faulty demarcation of armistice
lines: what caused it was the existence of an explosive
political situation. It was explosive because Israel had
allowed the grievance of its Arab neighbours to compound,
while it closed itself completely to any constructive
solutions to the problems which caused these grievances.
Then, the issue was the problem of the Palestinian people
rendered refugees and denied the choice of repatriation by
Israel. The nexus of Arab-Israeli conflicts later derived from
this major problem.

75. The Arab States directly concerned, which accepted
resolution 242 (1967), accepted it as a United Nations
gua,rantee and framework of action for the parallel fulfilment of the mutual claims. They accepted the obligation
for future peace and coexistence. They want a guarantee of
the integrity of their national soil and of the effective and
speedy evacuation of the occupying forces. Israel’s words
and actions give no such assurance. So the only way to a
just and balanced settlement is practical insurance of the
parallel implementation of these mutual claims through an
objective procedure.
76. We brought our case to the United Nations to ensure
that, We welcomed the advent, as a result of resolution
242 (1967), of the role of an impartial United Nations
representative working for a balanced fulfilment of the
parallel obligations. By insistence on direct negotiations
Israel is not pointing to the road of an equitable settlement:
it is excluding the more guaranteed procedure for an
equitable settlement. It is inviting the Arab countries which

71. But be that as it may, the important thing is that
Israeli withdrawal in accordance with resolution 242 (1967)
is to take place in a changed political and psychological
context:
it is to take place in the framework
of a
comprehensive solution to the main problems which obtain
7

are under occupation to give up any objective guarantee or
guarantees for an equitable outcome and to deliver their
rights and interests to the full weight of the Israeli
conquest.

previous record of accomplishment in many fields of
international relations and especially in the work of the
United Nations assures us that the conduct of our deliber.
ations is in most competent hands.

77. Jordan believes that the road to peace is not through
surrender to the demands of the forces of conquest. Peace
can be achieved only, and can last only, if it is based on
equity and a free undertaking. That is why we welcomed
and co-operated to the utmost with the impartial representative of the United Nations working within the framework of a balanced resolution, We shall continue to do SO
and maintain a positive attitude towards his mandate and
initiatives.

84. My delegation also wishes to express its thanks to the
outgoing President for guiding our work during the month
of May, and to assure my distinguished colleague and good
friend Ambassador Rahmatalla Abdulla of the Sudan of our
highest appreciation for the excellent manner in which he
has acquitted himself of his duties during his term of office,
85. My delegation would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for the report he has prepared in such a short time,
and for the efforts he and his Special Representative have
made to implement
Security
Council
resolution
242 (1967). I would like to express the high appreciation of
my delegation to Ambassador Jarring for the initiative,
patience and perseverance which mark his endeavour as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to help
bring the problem of the Middle East towards a solution, as
the report clearly shows.

78. There is a final point I wish to make. It pertains to the
often-mentioned concept of an imposed solution. The
concept has been repeatedly rejected with indignation by
the representatives of Israel. A number of delegations have
taken great pains to dissociate their proposals and intentions from it.
79. Well, we are all agreed on that. Jordan and its fellow
Arab States reject the idea of an imposed settlement. We do
not accept a settlement imposed on us by coercion. When
the Israeli spokesmen insist that they do not accept an
imposed solution, we find ourselves in agreement with
them. It is obvious that the days of big Powers imposing
their will on small nations and forcing them to conform to
their view of things are ended. The same applies to
imposition by smaller Powers. The age of the Charter does
not permit it, it does not allow the coercive imposition of
inequitable and unjust settlements by the stronger party on
the momentarily weaker party in a dispute. We reject this
concept sincerely and consistently. Israel claims to oppose
it as vehemently. But how consistently?

86. Although the Council has met many times during
these years to consider specific aspects of the Middle East
problem, usually upon a complaint by one of the parties,
this is the first time in six years that the Security Council
has had the opportunity to review the whole problem of
the Middle East, in particular the implementation
of
resolution 242 (1967).
87. The position of Indonesia with regard to the Middle
East conflict is well known and has been clearly set forth in
the statements of the Indonesian delegation both in the
General Assembly and in the Security Council. It is
unnecessary for me to restate this position at length. There
are, however, two basic elements which I would like to
reiterate also in view of the relevant questions put to the
Council by the Foreign Minister of Egypt.

80. When the United Nations steps into a situation to
prevent the prejudicial imposition of will by the conqueror
on the conquered, it is fulfilling its duty. It is preventing an
unjust imposed settlement, not performing one.

88. The first element is that my country supports the
struggle of the Palestinian people to secure their just and
lawful rights which have been recognized many times by
the General Assembly and the Security Council. No
settlement can be achieved without accommodation of the
just rights of the Palestinian people. The second element is
Indonesia’s firm support for the Arab countries to bring
about Israeli withdrawal from all the territories it is now
occupying as a result of the 1967 war.

81. We agree with Israel in rejecting an imposed settlement, We are asking the United Nations to protect us
against an imposed settlement by Israel.
82. Having made our position clear on these major points,
I wish to reiterate our basic goals. Jordan believes in peace.
It believes in a lasting peace in the Middle East. The peace
must be just and realistic. Jordan wants a constructive
resolution of the present conflict. It believes that this can
best, in fact only, be achieved through the insurance of
territorial integrity, justice to the people who suffered
mainly and most as a result of the conflict, and, perhaps
above all, the preservation of the honour and dignity of the
people and countries on whom the conflict has been
imposed.

89. Indonesia’s support has become itself firmly rooted in
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council. It is in these resolutions that the essential
principles for a just solution have been formulated, and it is
to those principles that we must turn in our search for such
a solution.
90. The rights of the Palestinians were first set forth 25
years ago in General Assembly resolution 194 (III). Those
rights were reaffirmed by the Security Council and the
General Assembly in subsequent resolutions. In this connexion my delegation would like to remind the Council of
its resolution 237 (1967) which called upon the Government of Israel “to ensure the safety, welfare and security of

83. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): Mr. President, on
behalf of my delegation, allow me to join previous
distinguished speakers in congratulating you upon your
accession to the presidency of the Council. It gives me
particular pleasure to see the chair occupied by so
distinguished and experienced a diplomat, one whose
8

the inhabitants of the areas where military operations have
taken place” and recommended “scrupulous respect of the
humanitarian
principles governing the treatment of
prisoners of war and the protection of civilian persons in
time of war contained in the Geneva Conventions of 12
August 1949”. Security Council resolution 242 (1967) does
not forget the refugees when it affirms in paragraph 2 (b)
tie necessity “for achievinga just settlementof the refugee
problem”.

atmosphereof peace and mutual good will than to aim at
the occupation by force of other people’sterritory in order
to secure boundaries. MY delegation is of the view that
really secureborders can in the long run only be effectively
guaranteednot in the first placeby soldiersand gunsbut by
peaceand mutual good will. In the caseof the Middle East
the return by Israel of all occupiedArab territories to their
rightful owners will pave the way toward such a situation
where boundarieswill be securebecausethere is peace,

91, These resolutions, taken together, leaveno doubt that
it is the consideredopinion of this body andof the Genera]
Assembly that the rights of the Palestinians,whetherliving
as refugees or under Israeli occupation, mustbe respected
and that accommodationof those rights is essentialto the
settlement of the present conflict. If there are peoplewho
demand that the rights of Israelisshouldbe respected,there
is all the more reason to claim the samerespectfor the
rights of the Palestinianswho are the originalinhabitantsof
the territory, but who now have to live on international
charity under most difficult conditions, to say the least,in
the refugee camps. If justice is claimed for the peopleof
Israel, the samejustice, for more valid reasons,shouldbe
demanded for the peopleof Palestine.

96. After readingthe report of the Secretary-General,one
unfortunately must conclude that the most earnestefforts
of the Secretary-Generaland of his SpecialRepresentative,
AmbassadorJarring, have not succeededin bringing about
the implementation of resolution 242 (1967). Israel continues to occupy the Arab territories which it initially
seizedin 1967. More than that, it hasin the interim begun
to take steps to integrate those territories into Israel, in
clear defiance of a seriesof resolutionsby the General
Assembly and by the Security Council. Although those
resolutionshave repeatedly condemnedthosepracticesand
have declared the results of suchpractices null and void,
Israel has not been dissuadedfrom continuing them.
Indeed, it has acceleratedthem, aswe can concludefrom
what is happeningin Jerusalem,in the Golan Heights,on
92. The inadmissibility of acquisition of territory by war
the West Bank of the Jordan, in the Sinai,apparentlyin an
is made equally clear in the resolutions of the Security
attempt to present the world with a fait accompli. In
Council, Resolution 242 (1?67) establishesthis inadmissi- addition, no attempt has been made by Israel to comply
bility in its second prearnbular paragraph,while in para- with Security Council resolution 237 (1967), paragraph1
graph 1 (iJ it clearly mentions “withdrawal of Israelarmed of which strictly enjoined it “to facilitate the return of
forces from territories occupied in the recent conflict” as those inhabitants who have fled the areas”-wheremilitary
one or the principles essentialto the attainment of a just
operations had taken place-“since the outbreak of hosand lasting peace.
tilities”.
93, In its answerto the initiative of AmbassadorJarringof
8 February 1971, Israel stated in its communicationof 26
February 1971 that Israel “will not withdraw to the
preJune 5, 1967 lines” /S/10403, ~ll?nexIIZ]. Israel’s
intention has become quite clear. Israelintendsto integrate
parts of the occupied territories into its nationalterritory in
order to establish what it considers“secureand recognized
boundaries”. This is, in our opinion, clearly acquisitionof
territory as the result of war, which is in flagrant
contravention of the principle of non-acquisitionof territory by force establishedby the Security Council and by
tllc General Assembly.
94. My delegation of course appreciatesthe need for
secure and recognized boundaries. But this cannot be
interpreted to mean that they should be imposedby
miIitary means, or that they should be the result of a
change by force of internationally recognizedfrontiers.
That would be clearly againstthe principle of the inadmissibifity of the acquisition of territory by war itself and
against the principle of respect of territorial integrity, and
consequently the inviolability of international frontiers, to
which we all adhere.
95. My delegation is of the view that the security of
boundaries depends not so much on military strategic
considerations, important though they are, as,in the first
place on the atmosphereof peaceand mutualgoodwill that.
exists between neighbouring countries. It is, in the opinion
of my delegation, much more imporlant to create this

97. The Government of Israelhastime and againignored
the resolutionsof the Security Council and of the General
Assembly. Security Council resolution 259 (1968) clearly
requires that he1
assistthe SpecialRepresentativein the
implementation of resolution 237 (1967), but Israelhasnot
done so. The General Assemblyhas adopted many resolutions which call upon Israel to respectthe rights of the
inhabitants of the occupied territories, yet nonehasbeen
heeded,
98. I will refrain from elaboratingon the developmentof
the Middle East problem since1967. Suffice it to refer to
the report of the Sccretaly-General. It is clear to my
delegation, however, from that report that Egypt reacted
positively to AmbassadorJarring’sinitiative of 8 February
1971 which would have enabled the parties to move
towards a solution, while Israelby its reaction scuttledthe
initiative. As to the situation now prevailingin the Middle
East, the Foreign Minister of Egypt, Mr. El-Zayyat, has
analysedit in a clear and sobermanner.His colleagues
from
other Arab and African countrieswhile conveying to the
Council the resolution of the Organizationof African Unity
on the Middle East have alsoelaboratedon practically all
important aspectsof the presentsituation and how it has
developed. I neednot repeattheir observations.
99. In the face of what realisticallycan onIy be considered
a failure of the efforts to implement the relevant resolutions, it is incumbent on the Security Council to go
beyond the ritual of makingstatementsfollowed by rights

9

of reply; the Council should make a serious effort and take
concrete steps to overcome the present impasse and move
towards a settlement of the problem.

to overcome the present impassein closed sessionor
through informal consultations rather than through de.
batingthe issuein open session.

100. My delegation agrees with the observation of the
Secretary-General which appears in paragraph 116 of his
report to the effect that the Security Council is the only
forum in which all parties to the conflict have been able to
meet together in the same room. Of course, to arrive at a
definitive solution the voice of the Palestinians as one of
the most directly interested parties should be heard. My
delegation also shares the hope expressed by the SecretaryGeneral that this unique circumstance may indeed be
utilized for constructive moves towards a settlement, The
Security Council should make every effort to ascertain
what those constructive moves towards a settlement can bB.
It will be most helpful if the Secretary-General on the basis
of his and his Special Representative’s experience in trying
to implement resolution 242 (1967) could share with the
Council his thoughts about the nature of those constructive
moves in informal exchanges of views. It is incumbent on
the Council to determine what further steps may be taken,
with a realistic chance of success to overcome the present
impasse and to attain that general settlement towards which
the efforts of so many, over so long a period of time, have
been bent, so far unsuccessfully.

103. One can imaginethat Israel and its supporterswould
very much like to maintain the status quo, as in a
short-sightedmanner they may consider it to be to the
advantageof Israel,particularly in view of Israel’sefforts to
consolidateits hold upon the occupied territories, It might
very well be that Israel’s thinking is dominated by its
presentpowerful military machinery, and by the assurance
of political, military, economicand financial support from
certain quarters. It is not easy to escape entirely the
impressionthat Israel is actually seekingto perpetuate the
status quo and deliberately acts to create an impasse
wheneverthat status quo appearsto be threatened by the
Council’saction or any other diplomatic move so as to
confront the world with the de facto integration of part or
of the whole of the Arab occupied territories into Israel,
The Council should make it irrevocably clear that acquisition of territory, even of “small choicemorsels”to use the
words of the Foreign Minister of Egypt, by force is a
flagrantviolation of one of the most fundamental principles
of the Charter,reaffirmed in Council resolution 242 (1967)
when it establishedthe inadmissibility of such acquisition,

101. My delegation agrees’with the view that resolution
242 (1967) should remain the basis for a solution of the
Middle East problem. New guidelines could be formulated
in order that continued efforts by the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative to implement resolution
242 (1967) will have a better chance of achieving concrete
results. It seems to my delegation rather unfair to request
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative on the
basis of paragraph 3 of resolution 242 (1967) to continue
their efforts in the same manner, while we have the
discouraging results of the last six years spelt out before us
in the report of the Secretary-General. To refresh the
Council’s memory, allow me to quote paragraph 3 of
resolution 242 (1967) which contains the terms of
reference of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral:
the Secretary-Generalto designatea Special
Representativeto proceed to the Middle Eastto establish
and maintain.contacts 6ith the Statesconcernedin order
to promote agreement and assistefforts to achieve a
peaceful and accepted settlementin accordancewith the
provisionsand principles in this resolution;”
‘Requests

I repeat, “in accordancewith the provisionsand principles
in this resolution.”
102. I canimaginethe difficulty if not the impossibilityof
the task of the Special Representativeif the provisionsand
principles referred to in his termsof reference are being
interpreted in severalways, if theredoesnot exist oneclear
and agreedinterpretation of thoseprovisionsand principles
by which he is supposedto be guided.I supposethat I am
not out of order, if I think aloudand wonder, whetherthe
membersassistedby the Secretary-Generalshouldnot try
to starch for those constructive moves mentioned by the
Secretary-Generalin his report andfor the stepsto be taken

104. It is not impossiblethat the world is gradually
becomingusedto living with this unsolvedproblem, It may
well be that, although people continue to pay lip service to
the warningthat the situation in the Middle East is a danger
to regionalaswell asworld peace,someof them do not in
fact believe this to be really the case,perhapsbecauseof
the atmosphereof dktente that is permeating the world.
Having lived so long with a dormant volcano they may
imaginethat it will not againerupt. It could also be that a
so-calledrealistic evaluation of so-calledfacts has led some
peopleto the conclusion that in reality the danger of an
explosion doesnot exist, becauseof their estimate, based
upon what they thought to be the Arab responseto the
continuing crisisin the Middle East, that the Arab countries
do not possessthe capability and sense of unity and
purposeto really start a new war.
10.5. The dangersof such a line of thinking must be
obvious to any impartial observer, and certainly to the
membersof this Council. No onewith a senseof justice or a
knowledgeof history can expect that the ,Ar@Lco,u.pfr@
will acquiescein the loss of their territories. No one can
imagine that the Palestinianswill be content to remain
refugeesforever, living miserablyon the far from adequate
charity of the international community. If other meansfail,
inevitably there will be a determined effort to redress
injustice andhumiliation inflicted by force alsoby the use
of force. If the United Nations andits Security Council are
not capableof restoring to the Palestinianstheir just rights,
if we cannot prevail upon Israel to vacate all those Arab
territories it occupiesasthe result of its aggression,then we
must expect that the Arabs will endeavour to redressthe
situation by the only meansleft to them, and that is by
force.
106. If the Israeliswere capable of waiting for centuries
for the right moment to act, I cannot seehow the Arabs
can be expected, under much better odds, to give up in

despair after 25 years. The failure of the international
community-represented
by this Council-to act and the
Council’s impotence to implement its own decisions may
eventually force the Arab peoples to choose the way of
farce, as we cannot expect them to follow the alternative of
capitulating to Israel’s demands as they now stand. With the
resources, manpower and determination they possess, the
Arab capability to use force is not as illusory as perhaps
some may think.
107. The danger to peace in the Middle East is real, very
real. The Security Council, as the guardian of international
peace and security, must be able to avoid the outbreak of a
new Arab-Israeli armed confrontation; it must be able to
contribute effectively to a solution of the Middle East
problem; it must be able to create conditions which are
conducive to the establishment of a lasting peace in the
Middle East.
108. It must be said at this point that my delegation is
especially looking to all the permanent members of this
Council, and in particular to the two super-Powers, whose
highest leaders are going to meet each other shortly, for
their positive contribution to the solution of the problem.
We are looking to them because of the special position
accorded them by the Charter as permanent members of
the Security Council with the right of veto, which gives
them special responsibilities. While some, perhaps, may be
tired of this plea for the unrestrained co-operation of the
permanent members in the search for a solution, it remains
a reality that because of their power, their prestige and
their right of veto their positive contributions will constitute a decisive factor for the success of any attempt which
the Council may contemplate to move the Middle East
problem towards a peaceful and accepted settlement.
109. Mr. PEREZ DE CUELLAR (Peru) [interpretation
from Spanish): Mr. President, I cannot initiate my participation in this debate without conveying to you my
satisfaction at seeing you preside over our work in this
month of June, In that task, you have placed at our service
your well-known talent, experience and authority. At the
same time I should like to express my delegation’s gratitude
to the representative of the Sudan, Mr, Rahmatalla Abdulla,
for the extraordinary efficiency and dignity with which he
presided over the Council last month.
110. It is the feeling of my delegation that when the
Council by consensus decided last April to take up the
situation in the Middle East as a whole, for the first time
since 1967, it undertook the clear responsibility
to
reactivate the highest level of diplomatic machinery
available to the international community in order to search
for a solution to the dangerous situation that has come to
be called a situation of %o peace and no war”.
111. The Secretary-General has made our task much easier
with his excellent report, which is orderly, objective and
realistic, In that report he reminds us of the important task
carried out by the various instruments established by the
General Assembly and the Security Council, and he rightly
informs us that this Council is the only forum which can
bring together in one and the same room all those who are
parties to the conflict.

112. The reactivation of the diplomatic machinery to
which I have referred is necessary and cannot be postponed
because the United Nations cannot by an act of omission
indicate that it favours the consolidation of a status quo
which is legally untenable and undermines peace and
security both in the region and throughout the world.
113. When it unanimously
adopted its resolution
242 (1967), the Security Council fulfilled its obligation
under the Charter, That resolution is the legal framework
for a solution, and at the same time it is the point of
departure for negotiations. We all know it was the result of
compromises worked out painfully, and that had a great
impact upon its text. But it is-and how could anybody
question it? -the best instrument or tool we have available.
In this debate it has repeatedly been stated that we must
protect that resohltion becauseit is a documentworked out
on the basisof a delicate balance,We agreewith that. But
unIessit is our intention to preserveit solely for archaeological purposes,resolution 242 (1967) can be preserved
only through proper implementation.
114. Accordingly, our first loyalty is owed to the principles contained in that resolution-that is, the conceptsof
international law included in Article 2 of the Charter, the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by conquest,
territorial integrity and the political independenceof all
States in the region. Arising from those principlesand in
accordance with them, resolution 242 (1967) enumerates
the obligations devolving upon the parties, which should
dischargethoseobligationsin applicationof Articles 24 and
2.5of the Charter.
115. Peru, together with the broad majority of Members
of the United Nations which supportedthe most recent
resolutions of the General Assembly on this point, considersthat AmbassadorJarring, the SpecialRepresentative
of the Secretary-General,was quite right in trying to put an
end to the impassethrough his initiative of g February
1971. In our opinion, in the aide-mimoireprepared by
AmbassadorJarring were raisedthe basicquestionsflowing
from paragraph1 of resolution 242 (1967). Positivereplies
from both parties would have prepared the scenefor the
quid pro quo which would allow the processof consultation to continue.
116. Therefore we find it necessaryto state that the
positive answer of the Arab Republic of Egypt to the
aide-memoireof 8 February is a step forward and constitutes a substantialconcessionand that, unfortunately, the
key phrasein the reply of Israel-“Israel will not withdraw
to the pre-5 June 1967 lines”-is an obstacle to the
continuation of the Jarring missionand a stepbackwardin
the implementation of resolution 242 (1967). I wish to
avail myself of this opportunity to pay a tribute to the
work which hasbeen donein the courseof five yearsby the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,Ambassador Gunnar Jarring, who by his ability, discretion,
impartiality and patience, is an admirable example of
serviceto the causeof peace.
117. Whatever might be the solution of the semantic
problem which arose, as far as I know, from one of the
official languagesof our Organization,I do not seehow the

that peace to which we all aspire, and, in particular, to
which those States that are partially occupied aspire, that
is, Egypt, Jordanand Syria.

Council could agree that under its auspices any acquisition
of territory by force could be sanctioned, because by acting
in that fashion it would be violating its own constitutent
Charter.

123. Mr. JANKOWITSCH (Austria): Mr. President, it is a
pleasureand a privilege to present to you the congratulationsandgood wishesof my delegationon your assumption
of the presidencyof the Council for the month of June
1973. In the personof AmbassadorMalik we greet not only
a most distinguishedUnited Nations diplomat but also a
representativeof a country with which Austria maintains
closeandfriendly relations.

118. True security cannot be basedon buffer territories
nor on the maintenanceof anoccupationsituation which is
always precarious. The key to security lies in the observanceof principles of coexistencewhich permit the
developmentof all the peoplesof the region. In the Near
East this implies the recognition on the part of the
neighbouringArab countriesof the State of Israel with all
the attributes inherent in that status under international
law, and those, of course, are reaffirmed in resolution
242 (1967). But, by the sametoken, in turn it implies the
withdrawal of forcesby Israelfrom the occupiedterritories,
and, what is equally important, a solution to the problem
of the Palestinepeople, which hasbeen living for so many
yearsuprooted andin a stateof despair.

124. The statement with which you, Mr. President,
opened our debate last week [I 717th meeting/ was a
valuable word of guidanceand reflected the wisdom and
experiencewhich have marked your many years of work in
the United Nations. Incidentally, as to the length and
extent of that experience, I have found this morning that
my colleague,the representativeof Australia, Sir Laurence
McIntyre, had engagedin researchsimilar to my own. 111
supplementingthat research,which testifies to the seniority
and experienceof our President,I was much impressedto
learn that that experience spansa period of 25 years and
that you presided over the Council for the first time in
August 1948. Your reference to the wide-rangingchanges
which have occurred in the international situation, the turn
from the times of dangeroustension of the cold war
towardsditente and peaceful coexistencethat you gave us
at the beginningof this debate,was a message
of hope and
promise.

119. The task which devolvesupon the Security Council,
after having laid down the guidelinesfor a just and lasting
peacein the region, is now to ensurecompliancewith its
decision taken six years ago. That is the purpose which
bringsus togethernow, with the presenceof the parties to
the dispute and their representativespresent here, among
whom I should like to mention in particular my friend
Mr. El-Zayyat, the Minister for ForeignAffairs of Egypt.
120. We have listened with the greatest interest to the
appealsmade by the spokesmenof the Organization of
African Unity, representedhereby eight States.The recent
decisionof that organization,which met in Addis Ababa, is
an important and authoritative contribution which goes
aIong with that of the group of non-aligned countries,
whosestatementon this particular question was made in
the Georgetown Declaration. Both statementsreflect the
concern of a broad sector of the international community
at the danger which is inherent in the situation in the
Middle East. The GeorgetownDeclaration, for that matter,
hasspecialsignificancefor Peru, sincethe President of our
Republic,GeneralVelascoAlvarado, announcedour desire
to becomemembersof the group of non-alignedcountries
at that time.

125. May I also take this opportunity to thank Ambassador Abdulla of the Sudan most sincerely for the
expeditious and skilful way in which he conducted our
work asPresidentof the Council during the month of May.
126. The particular relevanceof the subject matter under
discussion
by this Council is demonstratedby a number of
facts. It wasonly a short time agothat a body asprestigious
asthe Assemblyof the Headsof State of the Organization
of African Unity which met in Addis Ababa addresseditself
to this very same topic. The interest shown at that
Assemblyconcerningthe question‘of the Middle East was
already, and constructively, expressedin the Mission of
Enquiry conducted by African Heads of State under the
chairmanshipof President Senghor in 1971. The importance of the questionhasbeenbrought out furthermore by
the presenceof a numberof Ministersfor Foreign Affairs of
African countriesat this Council. We have listened to their
statementswith utmost attention.

121. We are approachingthe endof the initial stageof our
debate. We considerthat we havealready embarked upon
reactivating the diplomatic processto which I referred at
the beginningof my statement.The Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Peru, General de la Flor, stated at the twentyseventhsession
of the GeneralAssembly:
‘Ure repeat to this Assemblyour conviction that any
solution that we attempt to providefor the conflict in the
Middle East must be fitted into the framework of that
resolution [Security Council resolution 242 (1967)J if
guaranteesof lastingpeaceareto beachieved.“2

127. In the company of Foreign Ministers whose participation in our debate is a tribute to the work of the
Council, we welcomethe presenceof Mr. El-Zayyat, whose
initiative two months agowas at the origin of our debate.
128. In accordancewith the Security Council’s request in
resolution331 (1973), the Secretary-Generalhassubmitted
a report which hasjustly been qualified as comprehensive,
objectiveandmostreadable.In studying this report, we feel
a deepdebt of gratitude to the untiring, loyal and impartial
serviceswhich the Special Representativeof the past and
present Secretaries-General,Ambassador Gunnar Jarring,

122. Therefore, we have all the necessaryelementsso that
in the forthcoming stagesof our consideration of the
situation in the Middle East we can makeprogresstowards
2 Ibid.,

Twenty-seventh Session, Plenary Meetings, 2054th meet-

ing.para.186.
2

has given to the United Nations. We welcome his presence
here during our debate.

135. The wide acceptance which that resolution has
received results, to a large measure, from the fact that
several of its provisions represent principles on which the
orderly conduct of international relations must rest. The
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war, the
emphasis on the territorial inviolability and political independence of every State in the area, Israel and its Arab
neighbours, their right to live in peace within secure and
recognized boundaries, free from threats or acts of war, are
some of these principles as enumerated in the resolution.

129, In his report, the Secretary-General refers to the
“extremely complex and difficult” nature of the problem
“which no Government or group of Governments has been
able ta solve outside the framework of the United Nations”
f,S/I0929, para. IId]. The report makes it clear in this
context that if the United Nations has so far not succeeded
in bringing peace to the region, it played the decisive role in
bringing about the cease-fire arrangement in 1967 and has
contributed in no small measure to prevent the outbreak of
a further armed conflict. There can be no doubt, therefore,
that, as in the past, the United Nations will be called upon
to play a major part and that in conformity with the
Charter the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security remains with the Security
Council.

136. If such basic validity and relevance is attributed to
the provisions of the resolution, it follows that all of them
must be fulfilled so as to permit the resolution to achieve
its objectives. This includes the just settlement of the
problem of the Palestinian refugees,
137. Having known the grave political, social and humanitarian implications of the existence of a large number of
refugees-a phenomenon all too ccmmon in Europe over
decades-my
country has never been insensitive to the
plight and frustration of the Palestinians.

130. The statements that have been made so far have
highlighted once again a crisis fraught with danger, with
human suffering and despair, with violence and fear, If the
debate of a question that has defied a solution for nearly
three decades has, at times, vividly reflected the political
reality of the situation, we should be careful to Iabe it
harmful or negative because it did just that.

138. Prior to the adoption of resolution 242 (1967) the
Austrian Minister for Foreign Affairs taking part in the
debate at the twenty-second session of the General Assembly in October 1967 said the following:

131, In trying to understand the situation in the Middle
East, it must be a cause of deep concern that a region so
rich in cultural and economic achievements, with a history
that has profoundly influenced the course of human events,
which has given birth to three great religions, that a region
of such spiritual and material wealth should be torn apart
by hatred and strife. And it is understandable that Europe,
a neighbouring region, has a special interest in a peaceful
settlement.

“Any Such settlement, we believe, will have to be based
on the recognition of certain fundamental principles,
Among these will have to be the respect for the territorial
integrity of all nations of the area, and of the right of all
peoples to live in peace and security, Recognition of this
principle, which forms an integral part of the Charter of
the United Nations, is indispensable within the community of nations, From this, it follows that all States
must settle their international disputes by peaceful
means, and refrain from the threat of force or the use of
force against the territorial integrity or political independence of other States , , ,

132. Austria shares the feelings of concern so often and
emphatically voiced by the international community at the
tragic conflict besetting the countries of the Middle East,
Past and present history as well as geography have provided
a wide variety of human, cultural, economic and political
links between my country and the countries and peoples of
that area. We treasure these relations and we are most
anxious to see them further developed in the future.

“Of equal importance, and as a logical consequence of
the first principle, there will have to be recognition of the
fact that military occupation of the territory of other
States as a result of war or hostilities can be no title to
territorial gains, and that occupation forces will have to
be withdrawn.“3

133. It is then in this spirit of friendship and respect that
my delegation wishes to offer some observations on the
problem, In doing so, we are fully and painfully aware of
how Iittle we can say that has not been said before and how
modest, consequently, our contribution to this debate must
be. However, it may be sufficient at this stage to point out
and underline some of the elements on which, in our view,
any new attempt to make progress must be based.

139. After
the unanimous adoption of resolution
242 (1967) by the Security Council, my country consistently supported not only the resolution itself but ail
efforts based upon it directed towards the establishment of
a just and lasting peace.
140. It was thus only natural for.my country, as a member
of the Security Council, to find out what contribution
could be made in the common search .for peace in the
Middle East. Like other Governments, we have, as beat as
we could, examined the various aspects of the problem. In
doing so, we have endeavoured to determine where progress
has been made, where it could be made in the future and

134. In addressing itseif to the problem of the Middle East
at this time, the Security Council, as the report of the
Secretary-General points out, is not considering individual
aspects but “the problem as a whole”, Much has been said
in this context and at many previous occasions about the
Fundamental importance of resolution 242 (1967) of 22
November 1967, as the guideline, the framework and basis
for a solution in the Middle East and although the
resolution may be subject to different interpretations, its
basic contents, its message is clear.

3 Ibid., Twen@sccond

ing,pams.45-46.
13

Session, Plenary MeetinKs, 1578th

moet-

no avenue should be left untried. At the same time it would
hardly be conducive to the opening of a new trail towards
peace if one and only 6ne approach would be declared
acceptable by one or the other party.

what ingredients would have to go into my attempt to
make a new start.
141. Two common denominators readily emerge: The
acceptance by the parties of resolution 242 (1967) and
their declared willingness to seek a resolution by peaceful
means. Consequently, to maintain and strengthen this basis
of agreement between the parties, to develop to the fullest
extent possible the constructive potential contained therein
should be the main preoccupation of the Council in its
current debate, This would be a forward-looking strategy,
holding as its main concern the fulfilment of the provisions
of resolution 242 (1967) “to promote agreement and assist
efforts to achieve a peaceful and accepted settlement in
accordance with the provisions and principles in this
resolution”.

145. If, as I have indicated before, a basis for agreement
between the parties exists, the principal objective would be
to set in motion a process which builds on agreed elements,
advancing step by step, combining political realism and
strict respect for principles, creating confidence as it
continues, and, ultimately, resulting in an over-all settle.
merit.
146. It was with such considerations in mind that my
Government, particularly during the period preceding this
debate, has maintained close contact with members of this
Council and especially with the parties concerned to see
what might be done in a common effort to this effect.

142. In’ appraising the possibilities for progress, account
will have to be taken not only of the basis established by
the Security Council in 1967 but also of the experience
gathered in the six years that have since elapsed. This
experience is exhaustively and objectively depicted in the
report of the Secretary-General. Our debate has centered on
the evaluation of this experience to a great extent, focusing
on the continued existence of an anomalous situation,
characterized by tension, rnilitaly occupation and a persistent threat of the outbreak of hostilities.

147. At the same time, my Government is fully aware of
the complexity of the problem and of the need for caution
in any efforts designed to assist the parties and promote
agreement. It is in a spirit of friendship and respect for the
parties who deserve our understanding in the pursuit of
objectives vital to them and vital also to peace in their
region and to peace in the last decades of the century that,
with an open mind, we shall be ready to join with other
members of this Council in any further future constructive
efforts to advance the cause of peace in the Middle East.

143. From all that I have said before it would seem
self-evident that the long experience and skill invested in
this Organization, the United Nations, over many years
should be taken advantage of to the highest degree possible.
In renewing our belief in the role of the United Nations, we
are fully aware of other constructive efforts which serve the
same goal and as such deserve our appreciation and support.
Several of these efforts have been mentioned in the report
of the Secretary-General and referred to by previous
speakers,

148. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russinn): I thank
the representative of Austria for his statement and for the
friendly words he said about me and about my country, as
well as on the subject of relations between Austria and the
Soviet Union. For my part, may I express my deep
satisfaction at the fact that the friendly relations between
our countries are developing, and the profound conviction
that they will continue to develop in an equally friendly
manner in the future.

144. In the search for a solution, however, the primary
role of the parties is obvious, As to the method in which
the parties may wish to establish and pursue these efforts,

The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

14
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

73-820ol-June

1979-2,200
