S/2003/503

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 April 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 16 April 2003 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 16 April 2003,
from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
I should be grateful if the present letter could be brought to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

03-33809 (E)

280403

*0333809*

S/2003/503

Annex
Letter dated 16 April 2003 from the Secretary-General of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) addressed to the
Secretary-General
Following on from our 14 April discussion on the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF), I am writing with regard to the North Atlantic Council’s
decision today to continue and enhance NATO support to ISAF as established under
Security Council resolution 1386 (2001) and extended under resolutions 1413
(2002) and 1444 (2002).
NATO is already providing support to ISAF III, led by Germany and the
Netherlands. Today, at the request of several allies who are leading ISAF troop
contributors, the North Atlantic Council of NATO took the formal decision to
enhance significantly its support to ISAF, beginning in August 2003. These
contributing nations have determined through their experiences in Afghanistan that
there is a need for more continuity in the planning and command structure of ISAF.
As NATO already plays a significant role in support of the existing ISAF force, and
as 14 NATO nations already contribute approximately 95 per cent of the ISAF
troops, this enhanced support is a logical continuation of NATO efforts to date.
NATO has agreed that this additional support will consist of the following:
• An in-theatre deployed composite headquarters, including the required
communications and logistics support
• A force commander from a troop-contributing allied nation
• Strategic coordination, command and control exercised by the supreme
headquarters of the allied powers in Europe (SHAPE), with an ISAF
operations coordination cell to involve participating nations
• The political direction and coordination responsibilities currently undertaken
by ISAF lead nations, which will be undertaken by the North Atlantic Council
in close consultation with non-NATO contributors to ISAF. If deemed
necessary, ad hoc joint meetings of the North Atlantic Council plus
contributors will be convened.
Increased involvement by NATO will be within the context of the United
Nations mandate of ISAF, and we will operate according to current and future
Security Council resolutions. ISAF will therefore continue to operate distinct from
Operation Enduring Freedom. Formal reporting requirements to the Security
Council will be met in accordance with the relevant resolutions. We will work in
close consultation with the Afghan Interim Authority in the implementation of the
force mandate, as well as with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
I am in parallel writing to President Karzai regarding these decisions, and all
non-NATO troop-contributing nations are being informed. I look forward to staying
in close contact with you on this matter and will, of course, keep you abreast of
additional decisions and steps by NATO.
(Signed) George Robertson

2
