V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

44

to Combat Desertification and on the establishment
and operation of a special account for financing the
implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification,45

Aware of the urgency for implementing the Plan of
Action to Combat Desertification46 in view of the acute
seriousness of the problem in a large number of countries affected by desertification,

1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme on the efforts made to undertake the
preliminary arrangements for implementing the Plan
of Action to Combat Desertification and of the leading
role played by the United Nations Environment Programme, in consultation and close co-operation with
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the World Meteorological Organization,
the United Nations Fund for Population Activities and
other agencies concerned, in the preliminary arrangements undertaken within a short time for the implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations
Conference on Desertification and the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
2. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the resolutions
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Desertification;
3. Takes note also of the establishment of the
Consultative Group for Desertification Control and
urges the Group to expedite its work to assist the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme in the mobilization of resources for the
formulation and implementation of projects and programmes within the framework of the Plan of Action
to Combat Desertification, and in ensuring proper
co-ordination of activities carried out with resources
mobilized by the Group;
4. Reaffirms its decision to establish in principle
a special account within the United Nations for the
financing of the national, subregional and regional
projects within the framework of the implementation
of the Plan of Action;
5. Invites the donor countries and international
financial institutions to participate actively in the work
of the Consultative Group for Desertification Control;
. 6. (!alls upon donor countries, as well as upon the
mternat10nal and multilateral financial organizations,
to increase their financial and technical assistance to
the developing countries engaged in combating desertification, in particular to the least developed among
them, in response to their requests for the financing of
concrete projects;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to solicit the
views of Governments on the additional measures and
means of financing for the implementation of the Plan
of Action to Combat Desertification and to report on
the :esults to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth
session.
85 th plenary meeting
15 December 1978
44 A/33/260.
411 A/33/117.
46 A/CONF.74/36,

chap. I.

33/90.

89

Mexico Declaration of the World Food
Council

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-Vll) of 16
September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 3348 (XXIX) of 17
December 1974, by which it established the World
Food Council to serve as a co-ordinating mechanism
to provide over-all integrated and continuing attention to the successful co-ordination and follow-up of
policies concerning food production, nutrition, food
security, food trade and food aid, as well as other
related matters, by all organizations of the United
Nations system,
Further recalling its resolution 32/52 of 8 December 1977, in which it decided to review, at its thirtythird session, the implementation of the Programme
of Action to Eradicate Hunger and Malnutrition contained in the Manila Communique of the World Food
Council,47
Having considered the report of the World Food
Council on the work of its fourth session, held at
Mexico City from 12 to 15 June 1978, 48
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 1978/69 of 4 August 1978,
l. Expresses its appreciation and thanks to the
Government and people of Mexico for the excellent
facilities and generous hospitality provided for the
World Food Council at its fourth session;
2. Takes note of the report of the World Food
Council;
3. Adopts the Mexico Declaration of the World
Food Council49 concerning the world food situation
and implementation of the Manila Communique of the
World Food Council: Programme of Action to Eradicate Hunger and Malnutrition;
. 4. 1?xpresses its deep concern at the slow progress
m solv1~g the fundamental food problems facing the
developmg countries, in particular the food priority
countnes ~nd other developing countries with large
food deficits and whose food production situation is
still deteriorating;
5. Endorses the important recommendations and
decisions in the Mexico Declaration concerning urgent
necessa~y a~tion and modalities for increasing food
production m the developing countries, improving
huI?a_n nutrition and reducing hunger and malnutrition,
ass1stmg the countries of the Sahelian zone of Africa
improving food security, increasing and improving
food aid and improving the contribution of trade to
the solution of food problems;
. 6. Urges Governments_ and international organizations to co-operate fully with the World Food Council
47 Official Records of the General Assembly Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/32/19), part o~e para. 1.
48 Ibid., Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. '19 (A/33/19
and Corr.I).
49 Ibid., part one, para. 1.

90

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

in its efforts to identify the major obstacles to increasing food production, to mobilize greater action in
this area and to formulate, in close collaboration with
developing countries, donor countries and major international financial and development assistance agencies,
proposals to overcome obstacles to the mobilization of
internal and external resources for this purpose;
7. Recommends that the World Food Council, at
its fifth session, should give consideration to the impact
of trade, including the protectionist measures harming
the exports of the developing countries, on the solution
of the food problems of the developing countries and
put forward specific recommendations thereon;
8. Urges Governments to implement fully the recommendation to establish the international emergency
reserve of 500,000 tons of cereals as a continuing
reserve, with yearly replenishment determined by the
Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes,
which would be placed at the disposal of the World
Food Programme;
9. Expresses its deep regret and concern at the
suspension of the negotiations to replace the International Wheat Agreement, 1971,50 and urges that the
Governments participating in those negotiations reach,
as a matter of urgency, a definitive agreement and
reaffirm their commitment to world food security and
that they also, inter alia, seek to establish as early as
possible an international system of grain reserves of
adequate size to provide world food security and
reasonable market and price stability;
10. Urges also that the new food aid convention,
directed towards securing at least 10 million tons of
cereals as food aid per annum, be concluded and implemented by traditional donor countries and by those
in a position to do so as a matter of urgency;
11. Calls upon traditional donor countries and
those in a position to do so, considering the growing
need of the developing countries for agricultural inputs
and their increasing costs, to increase their assistance
for agricultural inputs, especially fertilizer, through the
appropriate bilateral and/or multilateral channels, in
particular the International Fertilizer Supply Scheme
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, 51 and also to make substantial contributions to the Seed Improvement and Development
Programme and the Action Programme for Prevention
of Food Losses of the Food and Agriculture Organization, so as to reach the desirable funding level of
$20 million for each;
12. Strongly calls upon donor countries to do their
utmost to preserve the nutritional value, in particular
the protein element, of their food aid;

lotions and programmes regarding food adopted since
the World Food Conference, to formulate actionoriented recommendations thereon and to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session.
85 th plenary meeting
15 December 1978
33/108.

United Nations University

50 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 800, No. 11400, p. 45.
51 Approved by the Council of the Food and Agriculture

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2951 (XXVII) of 11 December 1972, 3081 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973,
3313 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974, 3439 (XXX)
of 9 December 1975, 31/117 and 31/118 of 16 December 1976 and 32/54 of 8 December 1977,
Recalling also its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII)
of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Having considered the report of the Council of the
United Nations University on the work of the University52 and the report of the Secretary-General, 53
Noting decision 5.2.3 of 19 October 1978 adopted
by the Executive Board of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its one
hundred and fifth session, in which the Board, inter
alia, emphasized the need for further progress in the
strengthening of co-operation between the United
Nations University and the agencies of the United
Nations system, affirmed its conviction that the development of the University required and deserved
greater financial support and reiterated its appeal to
Member States to contribute generously to the University Endowment Fund and, additionally or alternatively, to make special contributions for research and
training activities,
1. Notes with satisfaction that the programme activities of the United Nations University are making
steady progress in three priority programme areas
-world hunger, human and social development, and
use and management of natural resources-and expresses its confidence that the University will continue
its intensified efforts for the early achievement of the
results that will represent substantial contributions to
the solution of the pressing problems of global concern;
2. Recognizes that the major activities of the
United Nations University are concerned with problems and institutions in developing countries and
encourages continuation of that emphasis;
3. Encourages the United Nations University to
continue to concern itself with various activities taking
place in the United Nations system, thereby further
developing its co-operative and co-ordinated relationships with relevant agencies and bodies of the system
and orienting its programme activities in the direction
of the urgent concerns of Member States;
4. Notes that fund-raising results have not proved
adequate to sustain the programmes of the United

Organization of the United Nations in its resolution 1/63
of 19 July 1974 (see Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, Report of the Council of FAO, Sixtythird Session, para. 26).

62 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 31 (A/33/31).
5H A/33/333 and Corr.I.

13. Requests the World Food Council, at its fifth
session, taking into consideration the various annual
assessments made by the Council, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and other
bodies and bearing in mind the ongoing preparations
for the international development strategy for the third
development decade, to undertake a comprehensive
mid-decade review and assessment of the progress
made in the implementation of the decisions, reso-
