s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/24728
29 October 1992
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: FRENCH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the
Council, at its 3128th meeting, held on 29 October 1992, in connection with
the Council's consideration of the item entitled "An agenda for peace:
preventive diplomacy, peacemaking and peace-keeping":
"Pursuant to the President's statement of 30 June 1992 (S/24210),
the Security Council has begun to examine the Secretary-General's report
entitled 'An agenda for peace' (S/24111).
This examination of 'An agenda for peace' by the Security Council
will be coordinated with the discussions carried out in the General
Assembly. The Council welcomes in. this regard the contact already
established between the Presidents of the two organs and invites its
President to continue and intensify such contacts.
The Security Council intends to examine the proposals of the
Secretary-General which concern it or are addressed to it. For this
purpose, the members of the Council have decided to hold a meeting at
least once a month on the report, such meetings being prepared for, as
nec~ssary, by a working group.
One objective of this examination is to arrive at conclusions which
would be considered during a special meeting of the Security Council.
The Council will determine the date of this meeting, bearing in mind the
progress of the work at the present session of the General Assembly, but
it hopes to hold the meeting by next spring at the latest.
The Security Council has followed with close interest the views
expressed by Member States in the General Assembly during the general
debate as well as during the discussion on item 10 of the agenda of the
General Assembly. It has also noted the report of the special session of
92-65973

3688d (E)

291092

291092

291.092

I• • •

S/24728
English
Page 2
the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations (A/47/386). It has now
identified the Secretary-General's proposals which concern it or are
addressed to it.
Without prejudice to the further examination of other proposals of
the Secretary-General, and taking into account the greatly increased
number and complexity of peace-keeping operations authorized by the
Council during recent months, the Council believes that two suggestions
contained in 'An agenda for peace' should be considered at this moment:
The Security Council, in accordance with the recommendations
contained in paragraph 51 of the Secretary-General's report,
encourages Member States to inform the Secretary-General of their
willingness to provide forces or capabilities to the United Nations
for peace-keeping operations and the type of units or capabilities
that might be available at short notice, subject to overriding
n~tional defence requirements and the approval of the Governments
providing them. It further encourages the Secretariat and those
Member States which have indicated such willingness to enter into
direct dialogue so as to enable the Secretary-General to know with
greater precision what forces or capabilities might be made
available to the United Nations for particular peace-keeping
operations, and on what time-scale;
The Security Council shares the view of the Secretary-General in
paragraph 52 of his report concerning the need for an augmentation
of the strength and capability of military staff serving in the
Secretariat and of civilian staff dealing more generally with
peace-keeping matters in the Secretariat. The Council suggests to
the Secretary-General that he report to it, as well as to the
General Assembly, on this subject as soon as possible. The
Secretary-General might consider in his report the establishment in
the Secretariat of an enhanced peace-keeping planning staff and an
operations centre in order to deal with the growing complexity of
initial planning and control of peace-keeping operations in the
field. The Council further suggests to Member States that they
consider making available to the Secretariat appropriately
experienced military or civilian staff, for a fixed period of time,
to help with work on peace-keeping operations.
Moreover, the Security Council intends to study those paragraphs
which are addressed to it, including paragraph 41 concerning the special
economic problems which may concern other States when sanctions are
imposed on a State, paragraphs 64 and 65 concerning the role of regional
organizations, and paragraph 25 concerning resort by the United Nations
to fact-finding."
