United Nations

A/RES/55/201

General Assembly

Distr.: General
8 February 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 95 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/55/582/Add.2)]

55/201. Convention on Biological Diversity
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 54/221 of 22 December 1999 on the Convention on
Biological Diversity 1 and other relevant resolutions, including its resolution 49/119
of 19 December 1994, in which it proclaimed 29 December, the date of the entry
into force of the Convention, the International Day for Biological Diversity,
Recalling also the provisions of the Convention on Biological Diversity,
Reaffirming that the conservation of biological diversity is a common concern
of humankind,
Recalling that States have, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles of international law, the sovereign right to exploit their
own resources pursuant to their own environmental policies and the responsibility to
ensure that activities within their jurisdiction or control do not cause damage to the
environment of other States or of areas beyond the limits of national jurisdiction,
Recalling Agenda 21, 2 in particular its chapter 15 on the conservation of
biological diversity, chapter 16 on the environmentally sound management of
biotechnology and related chapters,
Having considered the report of the Executive Secretary of the Convention on
Biological Diversity as submitted by the Secretary-General to the General Assembly
at its fifty-fifth session, 3
Emphasizing the importance of public education and awareness for the
implementation of the Convention at all levels,
Noting the recommendation of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention
on Biological Diversity at its fifth meeting that the date of the International Day for
Biological Diversity be changed to give it greater visibility,
1

See United Nations Environment Programme, Convention on Biological Diversity (Environmental Law
and Institution Programme Activity Centre), June 1992.
2
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June
1992 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted by the
Conference, resolution 1, annex II.
3
See A/55/211.

00 57121

A/RES/55/201

Deeply concerned about the continuing loss of the world’s biological diversity,
and, on the basis of the provisions of the Convention, reaffirming the commitment to
the conservation of biological diversity, the sustainable use of its components and
the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic
resources, including by appropriate access to genetic resources and appropriate
transfer of relevant technologies, taking into account all rights over those resources
and technologies, and by appropriate funding,
Recognizing the contribution of indigenous and local communities embodying
traditional lifestyles, and women within those communities, to the conservation and
sustainable use of biological resources,
Noting the continuing dialogue in the Committee on Trade and Environment of
the World Trade Organization on the provisions of the Agreement on Trade-related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, 4
Encouraged by the work carried out to date under the Convention, and
satisfied that most States and one regional economic integration organization are
parties to the Convention,
Recognizing the importance of the adoption by the Conference of the Parties,
in its decision EM-I/3 of 29 January 2000, 5 of the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety
to the Convention on Biological Diversity, and the subsequent signature of the
Protocol by seventy-five parties to the Convention,
Expressing its appreciation to the Government of Kenya for hosting the fifth
meeting of the Conference of the Parties, held at Nairobi from 15 to 26 May 2000,
Also expressing its appreciation to the Government of Spain for hosting the
first meeting of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Inter-sessional Working Group on article
8 (j) of the Convention regarding the traditional knowledge, innovations and
practices of indigenous and local communities, held at Seville from 27 to 31 March
2000,
Welcoming the generous offer of the Government of France, accepted by the
Conference of the Parties at its fifth meeting, to host the first meeting of the
Intergovernmental Committee for the Cartagena Protocol, held at Montpellier from
11 to 15 December 2000,
Welcoming also the generous offer of the Government of the Netherlands,
accepted by the Conference of the Parties at its fifth meeting, to host the sixth
meeting of the Conference of the Parties and the second meeting of the
Intergovernmental Committee for the Cartagena Protocol, which will be held at The
Hague from 8 to 26 April 2002,
Urging the parties to the Convention to undertake thorough preparations to
advance progress at the sixth meeting of the Conference of the Parties,
Recalling its invitation to the Executive Secretary of the Convention to report
to the General Assembly on the results of future meetings of the Conference of the
Parties,

4

See Legal Instruments Embodying the Results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations,
done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994 (GATT secretariat publication, Sales No. GATT/1994-7).
5
See UNEP/CBD/ ExCOP/1/3 and Corr.1, part two, annex.

2

A/RES/55/201

1.
Urges Member States that have not joined the Convention on Biological
Diversity1 to become parties to it, without further delay;
2.
Calls upon Member States that are parties to the Convention to sign and
ratify the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety5 as soon as possible;
3.
Takes note of the results of the fifth meeting of the Conference of the
Parties to the Convention, held at Nairobi from 15 to 26 May 2000; 6
4.
Reaffirms the importance of the decision of the Conference of the Parties
on the adoption of its programme of work and the thematic approach to guide its
work in the development of the Convention for the foreseeable future, including its
in-depth consideration of ecosystems and other cross-cutting issues; 6
5.
Notes the decision by the Conference of the Parties to undertake a limited
number of pilot scientific assessments in preparation for the sixth meeting of the
Conference of the Parties, to be involved in the proposed millennium ecosystem
assessment, and its request to the Subsidiary Body on Scientific, Technical and
Technological Advice to identify opportunities for collaboration;
6.
Stresses the importance of capacity-building activities, especially in
developing countries, for the implementation of the Convention and the Cartagena
Protocol, particularly the development of systems to allow parties to implement the
Convention and the Protocol, and encourages developed countries to provide
adequate support for those activities;
7.
Urges developed countries to facilitate the transfer of environmentally
sound biotechnology for the effective implementation of the Cartagena Protocol, in
accordance with relevant articles of the Convention and the Protocol;
8.
Decides to proclaim 22 May, the date of the adoption of the text of the
Convention, as the International Day for Biological Diversity henceforth;
9.
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, the Executive Director of
the United Nations Environment Programme and the Executive Secretary of the
Convention to take all steps necessary to ensure the successful observance of the
International Day for Biological Diversity;
10. Welcomes the decision of the Conference of the Parties to contribute to
the ten-year review of the implementation of Agenda 21 2 and the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21, 7 and decides to invite the Executive
Secretary and, if appropriate, the President of the sixth meeting of the Conference of
the Parties to report to it at its relevant session;
11. Recognizes the importance of the rapid development and implementation
of the Strategic Plan for the Convention, and encourages States parties to provide to
the Executive Secretary, in accordance with decision V/20 adopted by the
Conference of the Parties,6 their detailed views on the matter as soon as possible;
12. Welcomes the collaborative work between the Convention and related
conventions, in particular the Convention on Wetlands of International Importance
especially as Waterfowl Habitat, adopted at Ramsar, Islamic Republic of Iran, on
2 February 1971; 8
6

See UNEP/CBD/COP/5/23 and Corr.1, annex III.
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
8
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 996, No. 14583.
7

3

A/RES/55/201

13. Also welcomes the decision of the Conference of the Parties regarding its
programme of work for forest biological diversity, and encourages the parties to
cooperate with the United Nations Forum on Forests, in particular with regard to
respecting, preserving and maintaining the knowledge, innovations and practices of
indigenous and local communities embodying traditional lifestyles, in accordance
with article 8 (j) and related provisions of the Convention;
14. Takes note of the fact that the provisions of the Agreement on Traderelated Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 4 and the Convention are interrelated,
in particular with respect to intellectual property rights and relevant provisions of
the Convention, and invites the World Trade Organization and the World Intellectual
Property Organization, within their respective mandates, to explore this relationship,
taking into account the ongoing work in other relevant forums and bearing in mind
decision V/26 B of the Conference of the Parties;6
15. Encourages Member States that are members of the World Trade
Organization to support the request by the Executive Secretary for observer status at
the meetings of the Council for the Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights and the Committee on Agriculture;
16. Welcomes the progress made in implementing cooperation with the
secretariats of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 9 and
the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in Africa, 10 and
encourages further cooperation;
17. Stresses the need to enhance complementarities between the Convention
on Biological Diversity and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change in order to ensure that their activities are mutually supportive;
18. Invites all funding institutions and bilateral and multilateral donors, as
well as regional funding institutions and non-governmental organizations, to
cooperate with the secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity in the
implementation of the programme of work;
19. Notes the work of the Global Environment Facility in assisting
developing countries and countries with economies in transition in the
implementation of the Convention, and urges the Facility to enhance its support for
the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity within the context of national
sustainable development, and, within its mandate, in identifying and coordinating
additional financial resources from bilateral and international organizations as well
as the private sector for this purpose;
20. Welcomes the initiatives of the Facility in the area of capacity
development to assess the capacity-building needs and priorities of developing
countries, relating to the conservation of biological diversity, and to develop a
strategy and implement a multi-year plan for responding to such needs and
priorities, and calls upon other multilateral and bilateral organizations to cooperate
with the Facility in strengthening the capacity of developing countries for the
conservation and management of biodiversity;

9

Ibid., vol. 1771, No. 30822.
Ibid., vol. 1954, No. 33480.

10

4

A/RES/55/201

21. Notes the efforts that the Facility is making towards developing
programmes for assisting developing countries in capacity-building activities
relating to the Cartagena Protocol;
22. Calls upon States parties to the Conventiony to settle urgently any arrears
and to pay their contributions in full and in a timely manner so as to ensure
continuity in the cash flows required to finance the ongoing work of the Conference
of the Parties, the subsidiary bodies and the Convention secretariat;
23. Invites the Executive Secretary of the Convention to report to the General
Assembly on the ongoing work regarding the Convention;
24. Requests the conferences of the parties to the multilateral environmental
conventions to take into consideration the schedule of meetings of the General
Assembly and the Commission on Sustainable Development when setting the dates
of meetings of the conferences of the parties so as to ensure the adequate
representation of developing countries at those meetings;
25. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the
sub-item entitled “Convention on Biological Diversity”.
87th plenary meeting
20 December 2000

5
