Resolutions adopted on the Reporta of the Sixth Committee

would promote the realization of the purposes of the
United Nations,
Bearing in mind its resolution 2131 (XX) of 21 D~cember 1965,
Convinced of the significance of continuing the effort to achieve general agreement on the statements of
the seven principles of international law set forth in
General Assembly resolution 1815 ( XVII), but without prejudice to the applicability of the rules of procedure of the Assembly, with a view to the adoption of
a declaration which would constitute a landmark in
the progressive development and codification of those
principles,
Recalling that, in its resolution 2499 A (XXIV) of
31 October 1969 concerning the celebration of the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, it invited
the Special Committee on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States to expedite its work with a view to facilitating the adoption of an appropriate document by the
General Assembly during the commemorative session,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee,12 which met in New York from 18 August to
19 September 1969,
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Special Committee for the valuable work it has performed and the
progress reflected in the statements of the two principles it discussed;
3. Decides to ask the Special Committee, as reconstituted by the General Assembly in resolution 2103
( XX), to meet in the first half of 1970 at Geneva or
at any other suitable place for which the SecretaryGeneral receives an invitation, in order to continue
and complete its work;
4. Requests the Special Committee, in the light of
the debate which took place in the Sixth Committee
during the present and previous sessions of the General
Assembly and at the 1964, 1966, 1967, 1968 and 1969
sessions of the Special Committee, to endeavour to
resolve, in the light of Assembly resolution 2327
( XXII), the remaining questions relating to the formulation of the seven principles, in order to complete
its work, and to submit to the Assembly at its twentyfifth session a comprehensive report containing a draft
Declaration on all of the seven principles;
5. Calls upon the members of the Special Committee to devote their utmost efforts to ensuring the success
of the Committee's session, in particular by undertaking, in the period preceding the session, such consultations and other preparatory measures as they may
deem necessary;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to co-operate with
the Special Committee in its task and to provide all
the services, documentation and other facilities necessary for its work;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-fifth session an item entitled "Consideration
of principles of internati-:mal law concerning friendly
relations and co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations".

1825th plenary meeting,
8 December 1969.
12 Jbid., Twenty-fourth Session, Supplement No.19 (A/7619).

107

2534 (XXIV). Resolution relating to article 66
of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties and the annex thereto
The General Assembly,
Taking note of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties, 13 adopted on 22 May 1969 by the United
Nations Conference on the Law of Treaties, and in particular paragraph 7 of the annex thereto,
Taking note of the resolution 14 relating to article 66
of the Convention and the annex thereto, adopted on
23 May 1969 by the United Nations Conference on
the Law of Treaties,
Considering that, under the terms of paragraph 7
of the annex to the Convention, the expenses of any
conciliation commission that may be set up under article
66 of the Convention shall be borne by the United
Nations,
Noting the arrangements suggested in the note by
the Secretary-General15 on the administrative and
financial implications of the conciliation procedure provided for in the Convention,
1. Approves the provisions of paragraph 7 of the
annex to the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take action
accordingly.
1825th plenary meeting,
8 December 1969.
2549 (XXIV). Report of the Special Committee
on the Question of Defining Aggreuion
The. General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression on the
work of its session held in New York from 24 February
to 3 April 1969, 16
Taking note of the progress made by the Special
Committee in its consideration of the question of defining aggression and on the draft definition, as reflected in the report of the Special Committee,
Considering that it was not possible for the Special
Committee to complete its task, in particular its consideration of the proposals concerning a draft definition of aggression submitted to the Special Committee
during its sessions held in 1968 and 1969,
Considering that in its resolutions 2330 (XXII) of
18 December 1967 and 2420 (XXIII) of 18 December
1968 the General Assembly recognized the widespread
conv~ction of the need to expedite the definition of aggression,
Considering the urgency of defining aggression and
the desirability of achi~ving this objective, if possible,
by the twenty-fifth anmversary of the United Nations,
l. Decides that the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression shall resume its work in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 2330
( XXII) , at Geneva in the second half of 1970;
1a A/CONF.39/27 and Corr.I.
14 See Official Records of the General Assembly Twentyfourth Session, Annexes, agenda item 94 (a) and (c), document A/7592, para. 12.
1~ Ibid., document A/C.6/397.
16 Ibid., Twenty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/7620).

General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

108

2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the necessary facilities and
services;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-fifth session an item entitled "Report of the
Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression".
1831st plenary meeting,
12 December 1969.
2550 (XXIV). United Nations Programme of
Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law

The General Assembly,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International
Law,17
Considering that, in the conduct of the Programme,
it is desirable to use as far as possible the resources
and facilities made available by the international organizations concerned, by Member States and by others,
1. Authorizes the Secretary-General to carry out in
1970 the activities specified in his report, and in particular to provide:
(a) Fifteen fellowships at the request of Governments of developing countries;
(b) Current United Nations legal publications to
institutions in developing countries which have previously received United Nations legal publications under
the present Programme, and to other institutions in
developing countries for which requests for such publications are made by the Member States concerned;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for its
participation in the Programme, particularly in respect
of the assistance provided in the development of the
teaching of international law;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research for its partici_Pation in the Programme, particularly in the orgamzation of regional seminars and training courses, in the
preparation of studies in international law and in the
conduct of the fellowship progr,uume in international
law sponsored jointly by the United Nations and the
Institute;
4. Reiterates its request to Member States and interested bodies and individuals to make voluntary contributions towards the financing of the Programme and
expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have made voluntary contributions for this
purpose;
5. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To pursue his consultations with the bodies
concerned in order that regional seminars and training
courses under the Programme should continue to include topics relating to international trade law, so as
to meet the need for developing local expertise in
intern~tional trade law, particularly in the developing
countries;
lT Ibid.,

(b) To consult with the Advisory Committee on the
United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of
Inte~n~tional Law and with United Nations organs,
spec1ahzed agencies and other organizations and institutions active in the field of international trade law
concer~ing the feasibility of establishing, within their
respective programmes at selected universities or other
institutions in developing countries, regional institutes
or chairs for training in the field of international trade
law;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session on the implementation of the Programme during 1970 and,
following consultations with the Advisory Committee
?n the Progra~me, to submit recommendations regardmg the execution of the Programme in 1971;
. 7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-fifth session an item entitled "United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International
Law''.
I 83 I st plenary meeting,
12 December 1969.

2551 (XXIV). Forcible diversion of civil
aircraft in flight

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned over acts of unlawful interference
with international civil aviation,
Considering it necessary to recommend effective
measures against hijacking in all its forms, or any
other unlawful seizure or exercise of control of aircraft,
Mindful that such acts may endanger the life and
health of passsengers and crew in disregard of commonly accepted humanitarian considerations,
. A ware that international civil aviation can only func!•on properly in conditions guaranteeing the safety of
its operations and the due exercise of the freedom of
air travel,
l. Calls upon States to take every appropriate
m~asure to ~nsure that their respective national legislat10ns provide an adequate framework for effective
legal measures against all kinds of acts of unlawful interference with, seizure of, or other wrongful exercise
of control by force or threat thereof over civil aircraft
in flight;
'
2. Urges States in particular to ensure that persons
on board who perpetrate such acts are prosecuted;
3. Urges full support for the efforts of the International Civil Aviation Organization directed towards
the speedy preparation and implementation of a conv~ntion providing for appropriate measures, inter alia,
with respect to making the unlawful seizure of civil
aircraft a punishable offence and to the prosecution of
persons who commit that offence;
4._ Invites States to ratify or accede to the Convention on Offences and Certain Other Acts Committed on Board Aircraft, signed at Tokyo on 14 September 1963, 18 in conformity with the Convention.
1831st plenary meeting,
12 December 1969.

Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda item 91,

document A/7740.

18 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 704 (1969), No. 10106.
