General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

54

Resoiution

flt'm

/Jat~· o/ adoptum

B.

Confidencc-huilding 111easures.

48

12 Decem her 1980

C.

Non-stationing of nuclear weapons on the territories ofStates wherc there
are no such weapons al present

48

12 Decemher 1980

D.

Study on ali the aspects of regional disarmament

48

12 Decemher 1980

E.

Study on the relationship hetween disarrnament and international security

48

12 Decemher 1980

F.

Study on nuclear weapons

48

12 Decemher 1980

75
75
76
76

G.

Conclusion of an international wnvention prohibiting the devclopment,
production. stockpiling and use of radiological weapons

48

12 Deccm her 1980

76

H.

Prohibition of the production of fissionahle material for wcapons purposes ....

48

12 Decemher 1980

77

l.

Report of the Committee on Disarmament

48

12 Decemher 1980

77

J.

Disarmament and international security

48

12 Decembcr 1980

78

K.

~

/~

l'agt'

Strategic arms limitations talks

48

12 Decembcr 1980

78

35/157

Israelí nuclear armament (A/35/700) .

49

12 Decem her 1980

79

35/158

lmplementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of lnternational
Security (A/35/701, A /35 /L.48)

50 (a)

12 Decemher 1980

80

35/46.

Declaration of the 1980s as the Second Disarmament Decade

The General Assembly,
Reca//ing its resolution 34/75 of 11 December 1979, in
which it decided to declare the decade of the l 980s as the
Second Disarmament Decade,
Having considered the elements of the Declaration of
the l 980s as the Second Disarmament Decade prepared
by the Disarmament Commission,'
Adopts the Declaration of the 1980s as the Second
Disarmament Decade, as set forth in the annex to the
present resolution.
79th plenary meeting
3 December 1980
ANNEX
Declaratlon of the 1980s as the Second Disarmament Decade

l.

GENER,\I

l. In proclaiming the decade of the 1970s as the first United
Nations Disarmament Decade, the General Assembly, in its resolution
2602 E (XXIV) of 16 December 1969, enumerated its objectives as
follows:
(a) Ali Governments should intensify without delay their concerted and concentrated efforts for effective measures relating to the
cessation of the nuclear-arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament and the elimination of other weapons of mass destruction.
and for a treaty on general and complete disarmament under strict and
effective international control:

(b) Consideration should be given lo channelling a suhstantial part
of the resources freed by measures in the field of disarmament to promote the economic development of dcveloping countries and. in particular, their scientific and technological progress.
2. Although these objectives were reiterated by the General
Assembly in later sessions. the first Disarmament Decade ended without their accomplishment. While it is true that sorne limited agreements were reached, effective measures relating to the cessation of the
nuclear-arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament have
continued to elude man's grasp. Furthermore, no progress has been
made in channelling for the purpose of' economic and social develop1 Official Records ofthe General Assembly. Thirtv,fi/ih Session. Supplement No. 42 (A/35/42), para. 19.

ment any amount of thc enormous resources which are wasted on the
unproductive arms racc.
3. Through the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of
the General Assembly, contained in resolution S-10/2 of 30 June 1978,
which was adopted by con sen sus, the Assembly, after expressing its
conviction that disarmament and arms limitation, particularly in thc
nuclear field, were essential for the prevention of the danger of nuclear war, for the strengthening ofinternational peace and security and
for the economic and social advancement of ali peoples, laid down a
Programme of Action' enumerating the specific measures of disarmament which should be implemented over the next few years.
4. In spite of the positive and encouraging outcome of the special
session devoted to disarmament, the decade of the 1980s has started
with ominous signs of deterioration in the international situation.
lnternational peace and security are threatened by the use or threat of
use of force against the sovereignty, national independence and territorial integrity of States, by military intervention and occupation,
hegemonism, interference in the interna! affairs of States, the denial of
the right of self-determination of peoples and nations under colonial
and alien domination, and by the further escalation of the arms racc
and efforts to achieve military superiority. lt is clear that, ifthe emerging trend continues and meaningful efforts are not made to check and
reverse this trend, international tensions will be further exacerbated
and the danger of war will be greater than foreseen at the time of thc
special session on disarmament. In this connexion, it is pertinent to recall that in the Final Document the General Assembly emphasized
that, on the one hand, the arms race in ali its aspects runs counter to
efforts to achieve further relaxation of international tension to establish a viable system of international peace and security and, on the
other, that peace and security must be based on strict respect for thc
principies of the Charter of the United Nations. lt is ironic that. whilc
intensive discussions are under way in various forums on global
economic problems and on the depletion of resources available for
coping with present international economic problems, military expenditures by major military Powers are reaching ever higher levels.
involving the greater diversion of resources that could have helped to
promote the well-being of ali peoples.
5. The close relationship hetween disarmament and development
was also underscored in the Final Document, which stated that the resources released as a result of the implementation of disarmament
measures should be devoted to the economic and social development
of ali nations and contribute to the bridging of the economic gap
between developed and developing countries. lt is, therefore, only
appropriate that simultaneously with the proclamation of the Third
United Nations Development Decade' and the launching of the
global round of negotiations, the 1980s should be declared as the
Second Disarmament Decade.
· Resolution S-10/2. sect.111.
'See sect. V, resolution 35/56, annex.

111.
11.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

GOALS AND PRI'-( 11'1 LS

6. The goals of the Second Disarmament Dernde should be conci,ived in the context of the ultima te objective of the efforts of States in
the disarmament process, which is general and complete disarmament
under effective international control. as elaborated in the Final Document.
l. Consistent with this over-all ohjective. the goals of the Second
Disarmament Decade should he the following:
(a) Halting and reversing the arms race, particularly the nucleararms race;
(b) Concluding and implementing effective agreements on disarmament, particularly nuclear disarmament. which will contribute
significantly to the achievement of general and complete disarmament
under effective international control;
(e) Developing on an equitable basis the limited results obtained in
the field of disarmament in the 1970s in accordance with the provisions of the Final Document;
(d) Strengthening international peace and security in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations:
Making available a substantial part ofthe resources released by
disarmament measures to promote the attainment of the objectives of
the Third United Nations Development Decade and, in particular. the
economic and social development of developing countries, so as to accelerate the progress towards the new international economic order.
(e)

8. The disarmament process and the activities during the Second
Disarmament Decade should be in accordance with the fundamental
principies enshrined in the Final Document and should be carried out
in such a balanced and equitable manner as to ensure the right of each
State to security through the adoption of appropriate measures, taking into account the importance of nuclear disarmament and conventional disarmament, the special responsibility of the States with the
largest military arsenals, the specific requirements of regional siluations and the necessity for adequate measures of verification. At each
stage, the objective should be undiminished security at the lowcst possible leve] of armaments and military forces.
9. Progress in disarmament should he a<,;companied hy the
strengthening of the peace-making and peace-keeping functions of the
United Nations in accordance with the Charter.
111.
A.

AcTIVI rl~S

General

10. The decade of the 1980s should witness renewed intensification by ali Governments and the United Nations of their efforts to
reach agreement and to implement effective measures that will lead to
discernible progress towards the goal of general and complete disarmament under effective international control. In this connexion,
special attention should be focused on certain identifiable elements in
the Programme of Action as adopted by the General Assembly at its
tenth special session which should, as a mínimum, be accomplished
during the Second Disarmament Decade both through negotiations in
the multilateral negotiating forum, the Committee on Disarmament,
and in other appropriate forums. Adequate methods and procedures
ofverification should be considered in the context ofinternational disarmament negotiations.
B.

Comprehensive programme o( disarmament

11. Having been recognized as an importan[ element in an international disarmament strategy, the comprehensive programme for disarmament should be elaborated with the utmost urgency. The Committee on Disarmament should expedite its work on the elaboration of
the programme with a view to its adoption no later than at the second
special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament.
scheduled for 1982.

C.

Priorities

12. The accomplishment of those specific measures of disarmament which have been identified in the Final Document as worthy of
priority negotiations by the multilateral negotiating organ would
create a very favourable international climate for the second special
session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament. Ali efforts
should be exerted, thereforc, by thc Committee on Disarmament urgently to negotiate with a view to rcaching agreement, and to submit

55

agreed texts where possible bef'ore the sernnd special session dcvoted
to disarmament on:
(a)

A comprehensive nuclear-test-han treaty:

(b) A trcaty on the prohibition of thc development, production
and stockpiling of ali chemical weapons and their dcstruct1on:
(e) A treaty on the prohihition of the development. product1on
and use of radiological weapons:
(d) Effective international arrangements to assure non-nudearweapon Sta tes against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, taking into account ali proposals and suggestions that have heen made in
this regard.
1 l. rhe same priority sh,,uld be given to the followin¡1. measures
which are dealt with outside the Committee on Disarmament
(a) Ratification of the Treat} on the 1.imitation of Strategic Offensive Arms (SAL T 11) and commenccmrnl of negotiations for
a SALT 111 agreement:
(h) Ratification of Additional Protocol I of thc Treaty l'or thc l'rohibition ofNuclear Weapons in Latin Amerirn (Treaty ofTlatelolco);'
(e) Signature and ratification of the agrcement negotiated by the
United Nations Conference on Prohibitions or Restrictions of Use of
Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be. F.xcessively lnjurious or to llave lndiscriminate Effects;
(d) Achievement of an C1greement on mu1ual reduction of armed
forces and armaments and associated measures in central Europe:

(e) Negotiations on effectivc confidence-building measures and
disarmament measures in Europe among thc States parlicipating in
the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Furope, takin¡1. into
account initiatives and proposals to this effect;
(/) Achievement of a more stable situation in Europe ata lower
leve] of military potential 011 the basis of approximate equality and
parity by agreement on appropriate mutual reduclion and limitation
of armaments and armed forces in accordam:e with paragraph 82 of
the Final Document. which would con tribute to the strengthcning of
security in Europe and comtitute a significan! step towards cnhancing
intcrnational peace and security.
14. Other priority measures that should he pursued as rapidly as
possihle during the Second Disarmament Decade includc:
(a) Significan! progress towards the achievement of nuclear disarmament, which will requ1rc urgent negotiation of agreements at appropriate stages and with adequate measures of verification satisfactory to the Slales concerned for ·
(i)

Cessation of the qualitative improvement and devclopmenl of
nuclear-weapon sy,tems:

(ii)

Cessation of the prnduction of ali types of nuclear weapons
and their mea ns of delivery. and of the production of fissionahle material for weapons purposes:

(iii)

A comprehensive, phascd programmc with agreed timcframes. whenever feasible, for progressive and balanced rcduction of stock piles of nuclear weapons and their mcans of
delivery, leading to their ultimate and complete elimination at
the earliest possihle time:

(b) Prevention of the emergen ce of new types of weapons of mass
destruction and new systems of such weapons;
(e) Further strategic arms limitation negotiations between the twn
parties, leading to agreed significan! reductions of. and qualitative
limitations on, strategic arms. Thcse should constitute an importan\
step in the direction of nuclear disarmament and, ultimately. of the
establishment of a world free of such weapons:
(d) f· urther steps to develor an international consensus to preven!
thc proliferation of nuclear weapons in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 65 to 71 of the Final Document:

(e) Strengthening ol"thc existing nuclear-weapon-free rnne and thc
establishment of othcr nuclear-weapon-frec /ones in accordancc with
thc relevan[ paragraphs of the Final Documcnt;
(/) htahlishment of wnes of peace in accordance with the relevan t prnvisions of the Final Document;
(g) :vleasurcs to securc the avoidance of the use of nuclear
weapons. the prevention of nuclear war and relatcd ohjedivcs. wherc
possibk through international agreemcnt. hearing in. mind various
'IJnited Nations. Treatr Series. vol. 6.14. No. 9068. p . .12h.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

56

proposals designed to secure these objectives and in accordance with
paragraphs 57 and 58 of the Final Document, and thereby to ensure
that the survival of mankind is not endangered:
(h) Further steps to prohibit military or any other hostile use of
environmental modification techniques:

(i) Multilateral regional and bilateral meas u res on the limitation
and reduction of conventional weapons and armed forces, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Final Document:

/j)

Reduction of military expenditures:

(k) Confidence-building measures, taking into account the particular conditions and requirements of different regions. with a view to
strengthening the security of States.
D.

Disarmament and deve/opment

15. Peace and development are indivisible. During the Second
Disarmament Decade, utmost efforts should be made towards the
implementation of the specific measures whereby disarmament will
contribute effectively to economic and social development and thus
facilitate the full and early realization of the new international
economic order. To this end, renewed efforts should be made to reach
agreement on the reduction of military expenditures and the reallocation of resources from military purposes to economic and social
development especially for the benefit of developing countries.
16. Efforts should also be made to strengthen international cooperation for the promotion of the transfer and utilization of nuclear
technology for economic and social development, especially in the
developing countries, taking into account the provisions of ali relevant paragraphs of the Final Document, in particular to ensure the
success of the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of lnternational Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, to be
convened in principie by 1983, as decided upon in General Assembly
resolution 34/63 of 29 November 1979, as well as other promotional
activities in this field in the United Nations system, including those
within the framework of the lnternational Atomic Energy Agency.
E.

recognize and understand the dangers in the present world armaments situation, so that world public opinion will be mobilized on behalf of peace and disarmament. This will be of great importance to the
strengthening of international peace and security, the jusi and peaceful resolution of disputes and conflicts and effective disarmament.
20. 1n the course of the decade of the l 980s, therefore, governmental and non-governmental information organs of Member States
and those of the United Nations and the specialized agencies, as well
as non-governmental organizations, should, as appropriate, undertake further programmes of information relating to the danger of the
armaments race as well as to disarmament efforts and negotiations
and their results, particularly by means of annual activities conducted
in connexion with Disarmament Week. These actions should constitute a large-scale programme further to alert world opinion to the
danger of war in general and of nuclear war in particular. In keeping
with its central role and primary responsibility in the sphere of disarmament, the United Nations, in particular its Centre for Disarmament. should intensify and co-ordinate its programme of publications, audio-visual materials, co-operation with non-governmental
organizations and relations with the media. Among its activities, the
United Nations should also, in the course of the Second Disarmament Decade, sponsor seminars in the different regions of the world at
which issues relating to world disarmament, in general, and to the
particular region, especially, will be cxtensively discussed.
G.

21. As part of the process of facilitating the consideration of issues
in the field of disarmament, studies on specific questions should be
undertaken on the decision of the General Assembly, when necessary
for preparing the ground for negotiations or reaching agreement.
Also, studies pursued under the auspices of the United Nations, in
particular by the United Nations lnstitute for Disarmament Research
established by Asscmbly resolution 34/83 M of 11 December 1979
within the framework of the United Nations I nstitute for Training and
Research, could bring a useful contribution to the knowledge and exploration of disarmament problems, especially in the long term.

Disarmament and international security

17. An essential condition for progress in the field of disarmament is the preservation and strengthening of international peace and
security and the promotion of confidence among Sta tes. Nuclear
weapons pose the greatest danger to mankind and to the survival of
civilization. lt is essential to halt and reverse the nuclear-arms race in
ali its aspects in order to avert the danger of war involving nuclear
weapons. The ultimate goal in this context is the complete elimination
of nuclear weapons. Significant progress in nuclear disarmament
would be facilitated both by parallel political and international legal
measures to strengthen the security of States and by progress in the
limitation and reduction of armed forces and conventional armaments of the nuclear-weapon States and other States in the regions
con cerned.
18. Ali States Members of the United Nations have, in the Final
Document, reaffirmed their full commitment to the purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations and their obligation strictly to observe
its principies as well as other relevan! and generally accepted principies of international law relating to the maintenance of international
peace and security. Disarmament, relaxation of international tension,
respect for the right to self-determination and national independencc.
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, the peaceful settlement
of disputes in accordance with the Charter and the strengthcning of international peace and sec'urity are directly related to each other.
Progress in any of these spheres has a beneficia! effect on ali of them:
in turn, failure in one sphere has negative effects on others. 1n the decade of the 1980s, ali Governments, in particular the most advanced
military Powers, should therefore take such steps as will con tribute to
the widening of trust among nations of the world as well as in the
various regions. This implies a commitment on the part of ali States to
avoid actions likely to increase tension or create new areas of threats to
international peace and security and. in their relationship with other
countries, strictly to respect the sovercignty and territorial integrity nf
States, and the right of peoples under colonial or foreign domination
to self-dctcrmination and national independcnce.

F.

Public awareness

19. As stated in paragraph 15 or the Final Document, it is essential that not only Govcrnments but also the peoples of the world

Srudies

H.

lmplementation. review and appraisal

22. In the accomplishment of the activities earmarked for the
Second Disarmament Decade, ali Governments, particularly the most
advanced militar} Powcrs, should make an effective contribution. The
United Nations should continue to play a central role. The Committee on Disarmament should fully discharge its responsibility as the
single multilateral disarmament negotiating body. The General
Assembly should, at its annual sessions and, in particular, at its second
special session devoted to disarmament to be held in 1982, make an
effective contribution to the pursuit of the goals of disarmament.
23. lt is pertinent also to recall that paragraphs 121 and 122 ofthe
Final Document státed:
(a) That bilateral and regional disarmament negotiations may also
play an important role and could facilitate the negotiation of multilateral agreements in the field of disarmament:

(b) That al the earliest appropriate time, a world disarmament
conference should be convened with universal participation and with
adequate preparation.
24. In order to cnsure a co-ordinated approach and to consider the
implementation of the Declaration of the 1980s as the Second Disarmamen t Decade, this question should be included in the agenda of the
second special sess1on of the General Assembly devoled to disarmament, envisaged for 1982.
25. In addition, the General Assembly will undertake al its fortieth
session, in 1985, a review and appraisal, through the Disarmament
Commission, of progress in the implementation of the mcasures
identified in the prcscnt Declaration

35 / 47.

Preparations for the second special session of the
General Assembly devoted to disarmament'

The General Assembly,
Recalling section I I I of its resolution 33 /71 H of 14
December 1978. in which it decided to convene a second
' See also sect. X. 8.1, decisions 3514 ¡ 7 and .15 /430.
