S/2008/756

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 December 2008
Original: English

Letter dated 3 December 2008 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I wish to refer to my letter dated 30 November 2007 (S/2007/695) informing
the President of the Security Council of the progress made by the Cameroon-Nigeria
Mixed Commission, and his reply of 5 December 2007 (S/2007/710), in which he
took note of my intention to continue the activities of the United Nations support
team to the Mixed Commission with funding from the regular budget. In the same
spirit, by the present letter, I would like to inform you of the latest achievements and
activities undertaken by the Mixed Commission. As you know, the United Nations
established the Mixed Commission to facilitate the implementation of the
10 October 2002 ruling of the International Court of Justice on the
Cameroon/Nigeria boundary dispute. Through my good offices, and with the support
of the United Nations Secretariat, I have continued to facilitate the implementation
of the ruling of the International Court of Justice.
The mandate of the Mixed Commission includes supporting the demarcation of
the land boundary and delineation of the maritime boundary, facilitating the
withdrawal and transfer of authority along the boundary, addressing the situation of
affected populations and making recommendations on confidence-building
measures. In the course of 2008, the Mixed Commission has been able to facilitate
the process smoothly and peacefully, and to keep an open dialogue and
communication between the two countries. The following are some of the activities
for which the United Nations support team to the Mixed Commission has provided
substantive, technical and logistical support.
Achievements to date in the implementation of the ruling of the International
Court of Justice include withdrawal and transfer of authority in the Lake Chad area
(December 2003), along the land boundary (July 2004) and in the Bakassi peninsula
(June 2006). The delineation of the maritime boundary was completed in May 2007,
and the boundary line transposed onto an agreed map in March 2008. Concerning
the demarcation of the 1,950 kilometre land boundary, the Mixed Commission
expects to complete two of four field assessments along the boundary by the end of
2008, amounting to a total assessed boundary length of approximately 1,250
kilometres, at least 180 kilometres of which require further clarification. Concerning
the physical demarcation, the majority of preliminary mapping and preliminary
large-scale mapping through satellite imagery have been completed, as has the
contract which provides survey control stations used to carry out the final survey of
constructed pillars. The first quality assurance contract was completed in 2008.

08-63951 (E) 101208

*0863951*

S/2008/756

Reports by United Nations civilian observers monitoring the situation in areas
of withdrawal and transfer of authority in the Lake Chad area, along the land
boundary, and in the Bakassi peninsula have concluded that the prevailing situation
concerning the rights of affected populations is satisfactory. In addition, the Mixed
Commission has continued to support the formulation of confidence-building
measures to ensure the security and welfare of these affected populations and
promote initiatives to enhance trust between the two Governments and their people.
Initiatives on social amenities within the Lake Chad area continue to be promoted,
and support for resource mobilization for the Lake Chad Basin Commission was
provided in 2008.
In accordance with the Greentree Agreement of 12 June 2006, the transfer of
authority from Nigeria to Cameroon of the remaining “Zone” of the Bakassi
peninsula was successfully completed on 14 August 2008, marking a critical
milestone in the implementation of the ruling of the International Court of Justice
and the peaceful resolution of the boundary dispute between the two countries. In
preparation for the handover, the follow-up Committee, which was established to
monitor the implementation of the Greentree Agreement, continued to hold regular
meetings preceded by field visits. The Committee met once on 11 July 2008 in
Geneva, and plans to meet again in the course of December 2008.
In 2009, the Mixed Commission will continue to provide Cameroon and
Nigeria with surveying and cartographic support to facilitate the joint field
assessment in connection with the demarcation of the land boundary. The Mixed
Commission expects to cover the remaining length of the land boundary field
assessment in 2009. It will oversee the implementation of projects by external
contractors, including the start of boundary pillar emplacement, which should be
completed in 2011. Following a request from the parties, the Mixed Commission
intends to provide, in 2009, substantive guidance and engage in legal and technical
capacity-building with Cameroon and Nigeria with a view to facilitating, by 2010,
the resolution of areas of disagreement arising from the field assessment. All
remaining land boundary demarcation activities are expected to be completed by
2012.
With regard to the maritime boundary, negotiations are expected to continue in
2009 to help Cameroon and Nigeria agree on modalities for exchanging information
on the exploitation of oil and gas fields in the vicinity of the maritime boundary,
paving the way for cross-border cooperation in this field in the near future.
Meanwhile, in 2009, United Nations civilian observers will continue to
monitor the situation of affected populations in the Lake Chad area, along the land
boundary and in the Bakassi peninsula. In Bakassi, the Greentree Agreement
provides for a special transitional regime of five years in the “Zone” during which
special legal protection shall be granted to Nigerian residents, an arrangement which
will require continued monitoring and reporting by United Nations observers.
Moreover, the Nigerian Government has called upon the United Nations to provide
coordinated assistance and support to its voluntary repatriation programme for the
transfer of its citizens from Bakassi. The Chairman of the Mixed Commission shall
ensure leadership in the coordination of United Nations supported projects
implemented by United Nations country teams operating in Cameroon and Nigeria.
In addition, the United Nations will continue to advise the parties on the
implementation of confidence-building measures and projects to promote joint

2

08-63951

S/2008/756

economic ventures, cross-border cooperation and environmental safeguards, all of
which are necessary to ensure the sustainability of good neighbourliness between
them. Key areas identified for action by the Governments and their partners include
food security, education, health, water and basic infrastructure, including the
rehabilitation of the Mutengene-Abakaliki cross-border road. Ongoing support to
the Lake Chad Basin Commission will be required, taking into consideration the
provisions of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, as and when appropriate.
After 2009, the following activities will conclude the work of the Mixed
Commission:
(a) Assisting the parties in addressing remaining areas of disagreement
arising from the field assessment;
(b) Coordinating and certifying demarcation contracts, including the
completion of pillar emplacement by 2011, and all remaining land boundary
demarcation activities by 2012;
(c) Following up and supporting the activities of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission and the Gulf of Guinea Cooperation Council;
(d) Promoting cross-border cooperation, including maritime cooperation on
oil and gas fields straddling boundaries and joint security monitoring along the land
boundary, and reviving the Joint Bilateral Commission which existed between the
two countries;
(e) Implementing exit strategies by handing over the activities of the Mixed
Commission to the Joint Bilateral Commission and other subregional structures.
I would like to underscore that, up to 2003, the Mixed Commission was funded
entirely from extrabudgetary funds. During the period from 2004 to 2007, the
activities of the Mixed Commission were funded through the United Nations regular
budget. The Governments of Austria, Brazil, Canada, Italy, Norway, Pakistan,
Sweden and Uruguay have provided in kind support for the substantive and
technical work of the CNMC (military and legal experts), in addition to the
logistical support provided by the Governments of Cameroon and Nigeria, and the
voluntary contributions of the two countries, Cameroon and Nigeria, as well as of
Canada, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
European Union to the trust fund for the demarcation activities.
Given the cost-effectiveness of the mission and the important tasks remaining
at this juncture to help advance the peaceful implementation of the ruling of the
International Court of Justice, it is my intention to ask for resources from the regular
budget for the Mixed Commission for the period from 1 January to 31 December
2009.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

08-63951

3
