S/PV.7526

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7526th meeting

Thursday, 17 September 2015, 10.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin/Mr. Safronkov. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Mahamat Zene
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mrs. Audouard
Mr. Hmoud
Mr. Baublys
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2015/684)
Letter dated 15 September 2015 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2015/713)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-28350 (E)
*1528350*

S/PV.7526

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2015/684)
Letter dated 15 September 2015 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2015/713)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Australia, Germany, India, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Pakistan, Slovakia,
Sweden and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, and Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/684, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I also wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/713, which contains a letter
dated 15 September 2015 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Haysom.
Mr. Haysom: When I last briefed the Council (see
S/PV.7467), I observed that Afghanistan continued to
need the support of the international community, as

2/37

17/09/2015

well as the sustained attention of the Security Council,
as it faced down its difficult economic, security and
political challenges. I remain firmly of that view.
Afghanistan’s path to stability and self-reliance cannot
be taken for granted. The current refugee exodus
reflects the despondency of many Afghans. Afghans
have clear memories of their recent but violent past,
face an opaque future and now keenly monitor their
environment for signs of international disengagement
or, more hopefully, of domestic stabilization. A clear
signal of continued international support will mitigate
the uncertainty fuelling that exodus.
Shortly after my last briefing, many points of
friction emerged within the National Unity Government
and between the National Unity Government and
elements of the political elite, driven by deteriorating
security and economic conditions, among other things.
Although neither of these were of the Government’s
making, charges of inaction and miscalculation surfaced
in the media. Since then, there have been a number of
positive developments, including signs of progress in
the functioning of the National Unity Government. With
a few exceptions, all senior-level national posts have
now been filled and both the Council of Ministers and
Cabinet are active. I continue to encourage President
Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah
to finalize the appointments process, particularly
those of governors, Minister of Defence and Attorney
General.
The Government has also made progress in
addressing the issue of electoral reforms by establishing
the Special Electoral Reform Commission, which was
one of the key commitments of the National Unity
Government. The Commission, of which one of my
deputies is a non-voting member, has already tabled
its first set of recommendations. The Cabinet has
proactively endorsed seven and returned three for
further study. The recommendation to change the
electoral system will have, in particular, far-reaching
consequences for the country’s future political
landscape. I therefore encourage the Government to
build a consensus around this issue before it makes
its final decision. Electoral reforms are critical for the
development of the country’s democratic foundation
and they should be a source of stability, bringing people
together, not dividing them.
A senior officials meeting of the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework process — the first since
London — was held in Kabul in early September. It was

15-28350

17/09/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

judged by the participants to be a success. It proved to be
an important element of the bridge between past donor
commitments and future pledges to meet Afghanistan’s
need for ongoing support. The meeting, during which a
new mutual accountability framework was established,
provided an opportunity for the whole-of-Government
to establish its commitment to a credible reform agenda.
This is necessary to give confidence to donors ahead of
critical meetings in Warsaw and Brussels in 2016, at
which donor commitments are expected to be renewed.
It should, however, be noted that decisions to
commit funds to Afghanistan beyond 2017 will be
made not at these conferences in 2016, but in capitals
in coming months. Before then, the Government will
need to deliver on its agreed performance indicators,
and most notably indicators that demonstrate that
corruption is being effectively tackled. Afghanistan
has benefited from exceptional levels of development
assistance, even as global demands on aid budgets have
multiplied. Participants at the senior officials meeting
agreed on their mutual responsibility to ensure that this
aid is more effectively targeted and delivered.
At the sixth Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan, held the day before the
senior officials meeting, the region affirmed the need
for greater economic cooperation, integration and
connectivity. The logic that informs the recognition
that economic growth and stability in Afghanistan
benefit the entire region was universally acknowledged,
as was the recognition that the problems of the
region — such as the transboundary traffic in narcotics
and people — cannot be resolved by one country alone.

S/PV.7526

steps to reduce civilian casualties. We trust that the
Government’s civilian casualty mitigation policy will
incorporate all of the elements set out in UNAMA’s
mid-year report on the protection of civilians, in
particular in relation to the transparent investigation
of civilian casualty incidents. UNAMA stands ready to
assist the Government of Afghanistan in this regard.
UNAMA also continues its dialogue with all
parties to the conflict in order to reduce the toll of the
conflict on civilians, increase protection and respect
for basic human rights, and ensure humanitarian access
to all parts of the country. The Mission also encourages
the Government to continue its efforts to implement
the national plan on the elimination of torture, and in
particular urges the ratification of the Optional Protocol
to the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
It welcomes the stated intention of the Government
to take the first steps to that end at this session of the
General Assembly.
This year’s conflict has been one of the most intense
faced by the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF).
However, while they are once again proving their mettle
and resilience, as a number of analysts have observed,
insurgents have demonstrated a capacity to mass
large numbers of fighters in isolated areas. This has
challenged the ANSF’s ability to maintain the ground
that it occupies or to hold on to it once it has retaken
contested sites. As predicated in earlier briefings, we
anticipate the intensification of the violence in the
country to continue through 2015.

The conflict continues to take a horrid toll on Afghan
civilians. In the first eight months of 2015, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
documented the highest level of civilian casualties
since it began keeping records. The monitoring of
civilian casualties by UNAMA’s Human Rights Unit, it
should be noted, has been recognized as a model of best
practice both within and outside the United Nations. I
say this because its finding — notably on responsibility
for the violence — have been contested by parties to
the conflict.

This underscores the importance of renewing
a viable peace process. As noted by the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/2015/684), the real progress
in launching such a process was suggested by formal
talks between the Taliban and a Government delegation
in Murree in July. However, it appears that peace talks
are on hold, first as a result of an internal succession
dispute within the Taliban following the unexpected
announcement of Mullah Omar’s death, and secondly,
as a result of a hiatus in Pakistan and Afghanistan’s
collaboration to create an inclusive Afghan-led peace
process.

Anti-Government elements continue to cause
the majority of civilian deaths and injuries, although
casualties caused by Afghan security forces continue to
rise. UNAMA is encouraged by recent statements made
by President Ashraf Ghani that he will take official

A series of bombings in Kabul in early August
precipitated a spike in anti-Pakistan sentiment and a
hardening of rhetoric from the Afghan Government,
including the President. The President complained
that the hand he had extended to Pakistan in respect

15-283503/37

S/PV.7526

The situation in Afghanistan

of mutual assistance in dealing with terrorism in both
territories had not been reciprocated. He called on
Pakistan to curtail the insurgency, notably that of the
Hakkani network operating from Pakistani territory.
After an exchange of high-level visits, including that
of Pakistan National Security Advisor Sartaj Aziz,
the level of accusation and counter-accusation has
diminished and undertakings have been exchanged to
renew constructive collaboration towards the ultimate
objective of a stable Afghanistan.
I reiterate my call for direct engagement between
the Taliban and the Government. A war-weary Afghan
population is clamouring for peace and deserves it.
The threats faced by Afghanistan do not all emanate
from its own territory. Many of the insurgents originate
from neighbouring countries. It is entitled to call for
international support, particularly from the region, in
dealing with them. It is the responsibility of the leaders
of the region and other stakeholders to prioritize support
for a peaceful and secure Afghanistan. In this regard,
UNAMA calls on all neighbours to play a constructive
role in suppressing the threat of terrorism, including but
not limited to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
and in promoting an inter-Afghan peace process.
UNAMA will continue to engage, in the background,
with the Government, the Taliban, neighbouring
countries, and the international community to promote
a process that will allow Afghans to find an arrangement
by which they can live in peace. With regard to an
inclusive peace process, UNAMA welcomes the recent
launch of Afghanistan’s National Action Plan on
resolution 1325 (2000), on women, peace and security,
which will promote the participation of women in any
national reconciliation process.
As requested by the Council, UNAMA, on behalf of
the Secretary-General and in full consultation with the
Government of Afghanistan and donors, has conducted
an examination of the role, structure and activities of
all United Nations entities in Afghanistan. Discussion
clarified the needs and expectations of Afghanistan.
It allowed the United Nations to examine how it could
best align its own projects with Afghanistan’s priorities
and focus on institutional strengthening and capacity
building. It is our hope that the report will be useful to
the Council in its future mandate deliberations.
I conclude by expressing my appreciation to
Ambassador Tanin, for whom this is the last Council
debate in his capacity as Afghanistan’s Permanent

4/37

17/09/2015

Representative to the United Nations. I have appreciated
his advocacy for his country and his constructive
engagement.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Haysom for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov: This debate is taking place just a
few days before world leaders are to start discussing a
visionary and transformative development agenda that
links peace and security to sustainable development
and highlights the centrality of the rule of law and
accountable institutions. The situation in Afghanistan
makes the need for such an integrated approach
abundantly clear.
The recently held meeting just mentioned by my
colleague Nicholas Haysom highlighted the need for
effective measures to counter the narcotics trade, which
is undermining the country’s development and fuelling
terrorism. Last year, Afghanistan accounted for an
estimated 85 per cent of global opium production,
and 77 per cent of global heroin production. Opium
cultivation and processing remains one of Afghanistan’s
leading economic activities, with the gross value
of the opiate economy estimated in $2.84 billion in
2014. Accounting for some 13 per cent of the national
gross domestic product, the export value of opiates
considerably exceeded the value of the export of any
licit good and service.
Illicit drugs are supporting instability, insurgency,
corruption and organized crime, while weakening
State institutions and Afghanistan’s overall ability to
promote peace and good governance. Resolution 2210
(2015) stresses the importance of addressing mutually
reinforcing, cross-cutting issues of counter-narcotics,
anti-corruption and accountability.
Since I reported to the Council in December
2014 (see S/PV.7347), we have in fact seen efforts by
the new Government to address opium production
and trafficking, corruption and economic crime. In
the face of those severe challenges. Afghanistan has
sought to strengthen the effectiveness of the country’s
institutions, and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) has endeavoured to support those
steps.
Our work is undertaken in close coordination
with United Nations system partners, especially the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. In

15-28350

17/09/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

June, UNODC and the Ministry of Counter Narcotics
launched the Afghanistan Drug Reporting System.
The system provides access to the most up-to-date
data on all available narcotics-related indicators in the
country, including on eradication, cultivation, drug
prices, treatment capacity, alternative livelihoods and
seizures, to inform analysis, policy development and
evaluation. That has helped to further reinforce the
Ministry’s leadership and coordination role in national
counter-narcotics efforts.
Such efforts cannot be limited to law enforcement
alone. In response, the Ministry has launched a national
mobilization against narcotics to involve communities,
civil society, the media and development agencies.
UNODC supports that initiative, as well as the
development of the new Afghan national drug control
action plan, which will be finalized soon.
The Afghan Government has made advancing
relationships with its neighbours a priority, and
UNODC has continued to promote effective counternarcotics cooperation in the region and beyond. The
triangular initiative involving Afghanistan, Iran and
Pakistan, as well as the initiative with Afghanistan,
Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and other initiatives, have
served as important platforms for regional cooperation.
UNODC is also planning a high-level meeting with
partners of Afghanistan and neighbouring countries, to
be held in December in Vienna prior to the Paris Pact
policy consultative group meeting.
Operationally, we are coordinating interventions
through our Afghanistan country programme, the
regional programme for Afghanistan and neighbouring
countries and the programme for Central Asia, as well
as the global container control programme, the maritime
crime programme and the networking the networks
initiative. Through the latter, UNODC is helping to
develop interregional platforms for practical, real-time
cooperation among law enforcement coordination
centres, financial intelligence units and networks of
prosecutors, so as to enable the exchange of information
and criminal intelligence as well as the coordination of
multilateral operations.
We are working with the relevant Afghan agencies
on the cross-cutting issue of illicit financial flows. That
is critical for building confidence, creating a safe and
sound financial sector capable of supporting private
sector-led growth, as well as enhancing Afghanistan’s
ability to address fraud and corruption. Our experts on

S/PV.7526

countering money laundering and terrorist financing are
providing technical assistance on the ground. UNODC
supports Afghanistan in its stated priority of rooting out
corruption by helping to review the relevant legislation
and revise the national anti-corruption strategy. We are
also supporting Afghanistan in the implementation of
the United Nations Convention against Corruption.
Nevertheless, the situation remains undeniably
difficult. The increase in Afghan opiate production
over recent years has been accompanied by a sharp
increase in local consumption. Supporting and
expanding evidence-based prevention and treatment
services in Afghanistan, including for HIV, remains a
major challenge.
We similarly face difficulties with implementing
alternative livelihoods initiatives. Although the land
area under opium cultivation in Afghanistan is just 3 per
cent of the total agricultural land under cultivation,
there are pockets where opium plays a major role in
the rural economy. Opium accounted for an average
of 12 per cent of all farmers’ incomes in the southern
provinces last year, and accounted for almost 30 per
cent of the total area of agricultural land in Helmand
province. Approached holistically as part of broader
efforts to create economic opportunity and modernize
the agricultural sector, alternative development has the
potential to break this vicious cycle.
Nevertheless, widespread international political
support for alternative development has not been
matched by funding. Overall gross disbursements of
alternative development funds from member countries
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe accounted for just 0.1 per cent of global
development assistance in 2013.
We will present the full results of the 2015
Afghanistan opium survey shortly, as our report is
being finalized. Today I can confirm that the figures
available at this stage clearly indicate a decrease in
cultivation, especially in critical provinces. While that
trend may partially reflect global heroin market selfregulation, it is nevertheless positive news, particularly
in view of the results of last year’s survey, which
reported a sharp increase in opium poppy cultivation
and heroin production in Afghanistan. Moreover,
our data indicate that there has been an increase this
year in the eradication of opium poppy. For example,
eradication in Helmand increased from 787 hectares in
2014 to 1,747 hectares in 2015.

15-283505/37

S/PV.7526

The situation in Afghanistan

It is important that we acknowledge the positive steps
that have been taken. We must endeavour to sustain and
strengthen hard-won progress where it has been made.
If we want to achieve sustainable progress, we need the
steadfast commitment and engagement of the Afghan
authorities and the international community. That also
means that, in the face of budgetary constraints and
competing global demands, Afghanistan’s partners
provide the resources needed to deliver meaningful,
integrated and targeted support. We cannot afford to
do less.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Tanin for all his efforts and to welcome
him to the United Nations family.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
On behalf of all the members of the Security
Council, I would like very warmly to welcome
Ambassador Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan to the United Nations. This is the last
time he joins us in the Council in that capacity. We are
grateful to Ambassador Tanin for his cooperation with
the Security Council. We wish him every success in his
future endeavours. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to express
my sincere congratulations to you, Sir, on your
leadership of the Security Council for this month. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his recent report
on the situation in Afghanistan and its implications
for international peace and security (S/2015/684), and
my good friend, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, for his comprehensive briefing. I also thank
Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, for his briefing
and his presence today. I am very grateful for the role
Spain is playing as the penholder of Afghanistan and
for its capable work in the Security Council.
This is my last statement to the Security Council
on the situation on Afghanistan, as I am leaving at the
end of this month to assume my new responsibilities.
As I sit in the midst of friends and colleagues in the
Council Chamber, I would like to express my heartfelt
appreciation, especially to those I have had the pleasure
of working closely with in the past few years. I thank
them for their friendship and cooperation.

6/37

17/09/2015

In recent months, Afghanistan has experienced a
challenging security situation in terms of increasing
violence and heinous attacks by the Taliban and other
terrorist and violent extremist groups. While the
enemies of Afghanistan have failed to achieve the
aim of gaining control of territories and breaking the
will of the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF),
they have continued their brutal campaign of violence
and coercion trying to destabilize the country and
terrorize the Afghan people. We have seen those
heinous attempts in a number of highly sophisticated
recent terrorist attacks, such as that of 7 August, which
claimed hundreds of casualities, including women and
children.
In the face of increasing violence and instability, the
ANSF, which assumed full responsibility for security
after the departure of thousands of international forces,
have through their sacrifices, patriotism, resilience and
commitment demonstrated time and again that they
are ready to face the challenges posed by the Taliban
and terrorist and violent extremist groups. The ANSF
are at the forefront of the defence of the country and
security of the Afghan people; they present a bulwark
against letting Afghanistan slip back into the chaos
and destruction of the vicious civil war, as happened
in 1990s.
The National Unity Government is committed to
making every effort to move Afghanistan on a path
of stability, peace and security. The Government
has reached out with the message of peace and
reconciliation, not only to the Afghan Taliban, who
are willing to stop fighting and join the peace process,
but also to neighbouring countries. One of the first
steps taken by President Ghani was to embark on a
process of ending the undeclared state of war between
Afghanistan and Pakistan and starting a new era of
peace and cooperation. That process has been largely
supported by the Afghan people and the first rounds of
peace talks with the Taliban led to a surge of optimism
about the prospects for peace and an end of the violence.
Despite some of the apparent setbacks in the process of
peace talks following the announcement of the death
of the Taliban leader Mullah Omar and the benighted
leadership changes in its ranks, we are hopeful that the
prospect of a political settlement will not fade; however,
it requires reciprocal steps, a responsible attitude on
the part of all sides, mutual determination and real
commitment.

15-28350

17/09/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

The regional cooperation agenda is not limited
to peace and security, but extends to the economy,
development and prosperity as well, since the future
of the region can be fostered and strengthened only
through connectivity and greater cooperation. We all
know that the stability of Afghanistan at the heart of
Asia is essential to the stability of the wider region.
Integrating Afghanistan as the centre of an economic
hub focused on transit, transportation and trade for
the next two decades remains imperative to achieving
economic self-sufficiency and shared economic
prosperity.
Afghanistan’s vision for advancing regional
economic goals — whether through its role as the
Asian roundabout between the energy suppliers in
Central Asia and the energy consumers in South
Asia, or through the growing number of crossborder agreements to share services in health, rural
development and training — is bound up with its
economic agenda for the transformation decade. The
sixth Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan, held earlier this month in Kabul, also
elaborated further on ways to develop and consolidate
partnerships towards promoting regional economic
cooperation in Afghanistan and across the region. We
look forward to the next ministerial-level meeting of the
Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process in Islamabad as another
important step in strengthening confidence-building
and partnership in the region.
As we approach the first anniversary of the
establishment of the National Unity Government,
greater attention is being paid to ensuring the effective
implementation of vital reforms to strengthen economic
growth, improve governance, eradicate corruption,
introduce electoral reforms and protect human rights,
particularly the rights of women. The promotion of good
governance is a cornerstone of the Government’s reform
agenda. One of the central pillars of the reform agenda
is to effectively tackle the scourge of corruption. The
institutions created by the Government — such as the
National Procurement Commission, the comprehensive
reorganization and review of the Supreme Court
and other measures dealing with institutions and
individuals involved in corruption — are essential to
the transformation of the anti-corruption efforts into
practical, measurable outputs.
The efforts of the National Unity Government
against corruption also include a series of important
measures in dealing with the illicit drug trade, with its

S/PV.7526

overall implications for the economy, polity, society
and the rule of law in all parts of the country. The
Government is focused not only on curbing this illicit
trade, but also on tackling all financial channels that
are providing the basis for criminal networks to be
linked at all levels in the region and globally. In order
to achieve that goal, the Government has formed an
interministerial commission to clamp down on the
narcotics trade and the financial corruption that goes
with it.
To further the reform process, the National Unity
Government has taken important steps to revise the
election law and presented its reform proposal to the
Government. The recommendations of the Commission
include the allotting of one-third of Parliament’s 250
seats to political parties, the restructuring of the
current Independent Election Commission; the creation
of a clear voter identification system ahead of future
polling, and moving to an electoral system that divides
provinces into smaller voting districts that can be easily
quarantined in case of fraud. The proper implementation
of that reform process would bring about necessary
changes by ensuring free and fair elections in the future.
In order to reflect those reforms, the election law was
revised earlier this week by a presidential decree, and
a calendar for the parliamentary and district council
elections will also be announced in the near future.
Afghanistan’s partnership with the international
community has been paramount to the achievements
of Afghanistan over the past 14 years, and is essential
to realizing the lasting goal of peace, stability, and
prosperity in the years to come. Without the engagement
of the international community and the United Nations,
be it in the form of aid, expertise, manpower or the
sacrifices of soldiers and civilian workers, the progress
seen in Afghanistan would not be possible today.
The Afghan people and the Government are grateful
and recognize the contributions of the international
community as a whole, and particularly those of all
Afghan partners.
The role of the United Nations has been pivotal in
Afghanistan in the past 14 years, not only by coordinating
international civilian activities for establishing peace
and security, but also by supporting the Government
in all areas of political stability, good governance,
institution-building, aid coherence, human rights and
the coordination of humanitarian needs. The Tripartite
Commission and the Government of Afghanistan
have embarked upon a full re-examination of the role,

15-283507/37

S/PV.7526

The situation in Afghanistan

structure and activities of all United Nations entities in
Afghanistan. I am happy to say that Mr. Haysom and
his colleagues played an important role in moving this
process forward. The Commission examined the United
Nations engagement in the country, with a focus on the
areas where the United Nations adds the most value
and with a view to ensuring that the United Nations
serves to maximize the support of the international
community for Afghanistan and its people.
The discussion focused on three themes: the United
Nations principle of engagement, the Government’s
commitment and obligations and the future United
Nations presence in Afghanistan. The Government is
certain that the outcome of these efforts will provide the
country, the Security Council and the United Nations a
framework for the effective engagement of all United
Nations activities and entities, including UNAMA and
all United Nations agencies, funds and programmes in
Afghanistan. The framework for review will allow the
beginning of a new relationship between Afghanistan
and the United Nations in the coming years.
The success of the transformation decade is
strongly based on the constant engagement and support
from our international partners, not only today but in
the future. To further this goal, the agreement reached
during the senior officials meeting earlier this month
on a renewed mutual accountability framework is a
significant milestone in Afghanistan’s relationship
with the international community. Afghanistan looks
forward to the future conferences on Afghanistan in
Warsaw and Brussels.
Although much has been gained in Afghanistan,
much remains to be addressed. As President Ghani has
noted, 2015 will test Afghanistan’s will and capacity as
a nation to address reforms across all sectors — social,
economic, security and electoral. I would like to
reiterate that the challenges faced by Afghanistan are
many; but the country and the people have proven, time
and again, that it wants peace over conflict, progress
over repression, unity over factionalism, prosperity
over hostility and inclusive growth over isolation.
Today Afghanistan’s vibrant civil society, free
media, improved social indicators and successful
democratic transition of power all signal that there
is significant potential to put the last three decades
of devastation behind us and move forward. In order
to do so, Afghanistan must protect the gains made in
the last 14 years and present a united front against all

8/37

17/09/2015

agents who are working to destabilize the country. The
role of our neighbours in the region, as well as of the
international community, is essential in supporting
Afghanistan during its transformation decade to
achieve lasting peace and stability.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Mr. Haysom; the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime at Vienna,
Mr. Fedotov; and the Ambassador of Afghanistan.
Spain fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.
It is my honour to be accompanied by an important
delegation from the Spanish Senate, headed by the
Chair of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, who wish
to have a better and first-hand understanding of the
work of the Security Council.
We welcome the positive steps taken by the
Government of Afghanistan since our previous meeting
(see S/PV.7467) on Afghanistan in order to deal with the
political, economic and security problems facing the
country and to advance along the path of the reforms,
which the Afghans themselves decided to undertake,
a path on which they can and will continue to have
the international community’s support. We commend
the progress made in the political transition process,
which has almost been completed, with the important
appointments to the leadership of the main Afghan
institutions, both at the central and local levels. We
encourage Afghans to complete and build upon that
process.
I would like to make a special reference to the
progress made in terms of electoral reform. The
re-established Special Electoral Reform Commission
has presented an initial package of recommendations.
This is a vitally important area and we welcome the
initiative of the Special Representative in giving it the
priority it deserves.
The same can be said with regard to the measures
taken so far to implement the reform agenda set out
at the London Conference, including those relating to
accountability and countering corruption. The rate of
translating these reforms into concrete results has made
and will make clear the level of commitment of the
Government. Once again, I wish to repeat the fact that

15-28350

17/09/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

President Ghani and the National Unity Government
enjoy Spain’s full support in this process, which will
continue to be led and owned by Afghans themselves.
We also welcome with cautious satisfaction the
positive information provided by Mr. Fedotov with
regard to poppy production and crop eradication, as
well as his positive assessments of the efforts made by
the Afghan Government. We also share his concern
and the concern of the Afghan authorities about the
serious problem represented by the cultivation and
consumption of narcotics in Afghanistan. Without a
doubt, this is not an exclusively Afghan problem, but its
serious impact on the country requires our maximum
attention and support to the actions being taken by the
Afghan Government.
We are concerned by the stalemate in the peace
and reconciliation process in Afghanistan in the face
of the promising prospects that emerged following the
meeting held on 7 July in Pakistan, prospects which
the Security Council immediately welcomed in a press
statement (SC/11967). Since then, there has been the
frustrating cancellation of a second round of contacts.
We urge that the path that has been undertaken be
continued as soon as possible. The support, solidarity
and consultation with neighbouring countries is vital
and should be made a priority. From this Chamber, we
make an urgent appeal for this. We are also especially
concerned that, as was pointed out by the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/2015/684), the attacks continue
to grow in both intensity and geographic scope,
and an increase in indiscriminate attacks in Kabul
and other urban areas has been observed in recent
months. Violence and terror, particularly when they
are executed indiscriminately against the defenceless
civilian population, are not, and never will be, the way
forward.
We would like to express once again our support
for the work and sacrifices being made by the Afghan
National Security Forces in the face of the attacks by
insurgents who are seeking to weaken the Government.
I would like also to reiterate Spain’s commitment to
supporting the Afghan security forces and agencies,
which is shown through our participation in the
Resolute Support Mission, which provides security
training, advisers and assistance.
In the area of women and peace and security, we
welcome the submission by President Ghani, on 30 June,
of a national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000)

S/PV.7526

for 2015-2022. The plan enshrines the Government’s
pledges with regard to the increasing role that Afghan
women are being called upon to play in the areas of
participation, protection, prevention, and relief and
recovery — the four pillars of resolution 1325 (2000). It
is crucial to continue working in that area to achieve the
full implementation of the provisions and to continue to
promote and protect the rights of women and girls.
We also welcome the commendable steps taken by
the Government to end and prevent the recruitment and
use of children by the national armed forces, such as
the signing of the National Action Plan of 2011 and the
adoption of the road map. Nevertheless, much remains
to be done. Children remain the most affected by the
conflict in Afghanistan and continue to be recruited,
detained and deprived of their rights to education and
medical care. It is vital that we continue to demand
accountability from those who are responsible for those
and other violations against children, without forgetting
those instances that, unfortunately, are still occurring
within the Afghan National Police and local police
forces. It is also necessary to establish child protection
units in all police recruitment centres, end the illegal
detention of children, and develop reintegration and
rehabilitation programmes.
Lastly — and this is particularly relevant for Spain
as penholder — we welcome the completion of the work
of the Tripartite Review Commission — comprised of
representatives of the Afghan Government, UNAMA,
United Nations agencies and programmes, and
donors — which, pursuant to resolution 2210 (2015),
has been working in Kabul over the past several months.
We welcome the comprehensive nature of the work that
has been achieved and the commitment that has been
demonstrated by all parties, under Afghan leadership.
As the Security Council has requested, that analysis
has allowed a better and great harmonization of United
Nations actions and structures in Afghanistan and the
activities of donors, taking into account the priorities
established by the Government itself. The Commission’s
conclusions will feed the Council’s reflections and
work when the time comes to consider the extension of
the UNAMA mandate.
I cannot close without expressing my deepest
appreciation to Ambassador Tanin for the excellent
work that he has undertaken in recent years
representing his country and working for the benefit
of the Organization. For Spain, it is a privilege to be
the penholder on Afghanistan, and I am very pleased

15-283509/37

S/PV.7526

The situation in Afghanistan

that he will continue working with us within the United
Nations system. We wish him our very best.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General for his latest report (S/2015/684)
and for supplying the Council with the report of the
Tripartite Review Commission on the United Nations
in Afghanistan (S/2015/713, annex). I welcome the
briefings of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Haysom and Executive Director Fedotov.
I would also like to pay tribute to Ambassador
Tanin at his final debate. He has represented his country
admirably through a period of great transition, and he
leaves as Afghanistan enters its transformation decade,
with full ownership of its national affairs. I wish him
every success in his new role.
I would like to share the words of teacher caught up
in a suicide bombing in Jalalabad — one that claimed
32 lives. Recovering in his hospital bed, the teacher
said, “Death does not frighten me, but, if I die, what
will happen to my children?” Those words are from
a United Nations interview in April. They could have
come from any parent, anywhere in the world. The echo
a shared fear — a fear that our children will not grow
up, safe, healthy or happy.
Sadly, as the Secretary-General’s report on the
protection of civilians shows (S/2015/453), that fear
has yet to be eradicated for everyone in Afghanistan.
Between January and the end of June, over 1,500 civilians
were killed in Afghanistan; one-fifth of them were
children. That violence is setting back Afghanistan’s
prospects for prosperity and better opportunities for
all. It is damaging children’s education, setting back
the rights of women and girls, and making it harder to
secure the political settlement so desperately needed
for a stable and secure Afghanistan.
What can we do, as a Council, to support the Afghan
Government and the work of United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)? We should we
maintain our focus on Afghanistan and concentrate on
three things: security, politics and people.
First, we must maintain our support for the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces. As current
fighting in Helmand shows, the challenge that they are
facing is intensifying. But they are also showing that
they are capable of meeting it, and more. I pay tribute
to their bravery and sacrifice. To support the continued
efforts of the Afghan security institutions, the United

10/37

17/09/2015

Kingdom is contributing $110 million each year until
at least 2017, and we are proud of our commitment to
the Afghan National Army Officer Academy, which
graduated its first female officers over the summer. I
urge Member States to continue their vital support to
the Afghan National Forces.
However, security will count for little without
a strong political settlement underpinning it. We
welcome President Ghani’s commitment to peace and
the commitment made by Pakistan and others in the
region to reaching a political settlement. The Murree
talks in July were an important step towards that goal.
Let us therefore urge all the parties to return to the
negotiating table. A peace process is the only route to a
secure and stable Afghanistan, and the Council should
give its full support.
We should also take this chance to welcome the
progress of the National Unity Government during
its first year in office. The Government set out its
achievements at the senior officials meeting earlier
this month. Those included agreeing and sticking to
a macro-economic reform plan with the International
Monetary Fund, tackling impunity by re-opening
the Kabul Bank fraud cases, and agreeing major new
investments in power transmission.
All of those have been done in the face of
challenging circumstances. There is much now to
do. Let us therefore show our support to the National
Unity Government and help it deliver its ambitious
agenda. There are important benchmarks to measure
next year, such as creating jobs — including for
women — improving fiscal stability and providing
better education and health services. Those will all help
Afghanistan make its case for continued international
support at next year’s ministerial meetings and, more
importantly, show that it is keeping its promises to its
people.
Afghanistan’s neighbours also have a clear
interest in supporting the National Unity Government.
Economic cooperation — including on trade, energy
and infrastructure — is vital to the prosperity of
Afghanistan and the region. The United Kingdom will
be there to support the process, but that transformation
can be achieved only if others match Afghanistan’s
ambition for a productive Eurasian partnership.
It is with the people of Afghanistan that I wish
to conclude. For so long now, stories like those of
the teacher in Jalalabad have come to typify our

15-28350

17/09/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

impressions of Afghanistan. But for every victim, there
are countless others whose stories we do not hear. Like
that of Mahjabeen from Herat, who at the age of 41, with
no formal education, opened her first business. She is
now putting her daughter through university. Or that of
Sohila, who, thanks to Save the Children, is going to
school for the first time, like countless other Afghan
girls. Or that of Aqeela Asifi, who just this week was
recognized by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees for her tireless pursuit of
education for refugees.
It is the stories of these people of Afghanistan
that underline why progress on security and a political
settlement are so important. If we are to hear more of
them, we must do all we can to support Afghanistan.
We cannot allow them to be silenced.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join earlier speakers
in thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Nicholas Haysom and Mr. Yury Fedotov for
their respective briefings. I also take this opportunity to
register our appreciation to Mr. Haysom and all members
and personnel of United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their dedication in carrying
out their duties under challenging circumstances. I
thank Ambassador Tanin for his splendid work and
wish him success in his new capacity.
Allow me to me begin by reiterating Malaysia’s
firm support for the reconciliation and reintegration
efforts undertaken by the Government of Afghanistan.
We also commend the Afghan Government’s continuing
commitment and efforts to address the increasing
political, economic and security challenges faced
by the country. We take these as strong testimony of
Afghanistan’s aspiration to achieve national unity and
stability, which could positively contribute to regional
stability.
Malaysia is also pleased to note the encouraging
progress made on the issue of electoral reform,
particularly on the re-establishment of the Special
Commission on Electoral Reform in July, as well as the
presentation of its recommendations last month. We are
also encouraged by the various strategies announced
by the Afghan authorities, which demonstrate the
Government’s determination to undertake reforms.
We urge the Government to swiftly implement the
strategies, which, in our view, will further strengthen
the capacity of national institutions.

S/PV.7526

With regard to the peace talks between the
Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban, while it
was unfortunate that the second round of talks scheduled
for 31 July was postponed, the completion of the Taliban
transition just two days ago has once again revived
our hopes. Malaysia reiterates that a peaceful political
settlement is the only way to achieve sustainable peace
and stability in the country. We remain hopeful that
talks will resume in the near future.
Despite the many positive and noteworthy
developments, Malaysia remains concerned by the
security situation in the country. As reflected in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/684), the conflict
in Afghanistan has expanded in both intensity and
geographic scope throughout the reporting period.
Furthermore, the significant increase in violent incidents
between the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
its affiliates and the Taliban have resulted in further
hardship endured by the Afghan people, as well as the
loss of innocent civilian lives. In particular, children
continue to be severely affected by the escalation of the
conflict.
As a subscriber to the Secretary-General’s
Children, Not Soldiers campaign, Afghanistan has
taken many commendable steps towards ensuring its
national security forces are child-free. In addition to
the criminalization of child recruitment for the Afghan
National Security Forces, the Government is also
drafting age-assessment guidelines that we hope will
be endorsed soon and widely disseminated. Malaysia
is, however, alarmed that during the current reporting
period the conflicts in Afghanistan recorded the highest
number of child casualties since the establishment of the
United Nations monitoring and reporting mechanism in
2009. The significant increase in the number of attacks
on schools and educational personnel is also an alarming
trend, preventing access to education and a return to
normalcy. In this regard, we urge the Government to
maintain its commitment to the full implementation
of its action plan and road map to end and prevent the
recruitment and use of children.
Malaysia believes that at this stage it remains
imperative for the United Nations and the international
community to continue to lend their support,
encouragement and assistance to Afghanistan through
reconstruction and redevelopment efforts to rebuild the
country. At the same time, it is vital that the political
and development activities of the United Nations and

15-2835011/37

S/PV.7526

The situation in Afghanistan

the international community be in greater alignment
with the priorities set by the Afghan Government.
In that context, Malaysia is pleased to note that
the work of the Tripartite Review Commission was
completed successfully. The report of the Commission
provided realistic assessments and important insights
into the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United Nations
country team in Afghanistan. More importantly, the
report contains constructive recommendations that are
crucial to maximizing the potential of all the efforts and
resources of the United Nations and the international
community.
Malaysia looks forward to the deliberation and
eventual implementation of these recommendations,
which would enable us to then leverage the comparative
advantages of the United Nations and the international
community to support the reconstruction and
redevelopment of Afghanistan.
Malaysia commends the positive progress
achieved in the ongoing efforts to counter narcotics
in Afghanistan. In particular, the significant progress
made in eradicating opium cultivation and the
intensified law-enforcement efforts against illicit
drugs are a manifestation of the determination of the
Government of Afghanistan to counter narcotics. We
are also pleased to note the close cooperation between
the Government of Afghanistan and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). In that context,
the establishment of the Afghanistan drug reporting
system is an important step towards streamlining
and enhancing the coordination of ongoing efforts
to counter narcotics in Afghanistan. Similarly, the
National Mobilization against Narcotics initiative
recently launched by the Afghan government and
UNODC is also a commendable effort to address the
issue of illicit drugs in a comprehensive manner by
engaging all segments of society.
Malaysia is pleased that UNAMA and the
Government of Afghanistan have continued to
maintain a close partnership, which is vital to ensuring
sustainable peace and stability in the country. We hope
that these will lead to a more productive and effective
collaboration within the host country, the United
Nations system and the international community.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Malaysia’s sincere
commitment to supporting the Afghan Government in
its effort to achieve peace, security and stability.

12/37

17/09/2015

Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We thank
Special Representative Haysom and Executive Director
Fedotov for their briefings. We thank and extend our
heartfelt congratulations to Ambassador Tanin for the
work he has done for Afghanistan and for the wider
membership during his time in New York. We wish him
well in his new assignment.
New Zealand continues to support Afghanistan — its
Government and its people — and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
Afghanistan has had to confront and to deal with very
considerable challenges over the last 15 years. We
commend all of those who have helped steer the country
down the path from the essentially lawless State that
gave sanctuary to those that brought down the Twin
Towers to the much more stable State we see today.
When we remember that larger context, we
can only pay tribute to the resilience of the Afghan
people and their determination to hold together their
country, notwithstanding their internal differences. We
commend, too, Afghanistan’s leaders for continuing
to work through the challenges of the power-sharing
arrangements that they took on for the wider good of
their people. And we salute the bravery and dedication
of the Afghan National Security Forces, who have taken
on the challenge of securing the safety of the nation and
its people.
That said, we recognize that in the current security
environment, the pace of progress is increasingly
difficult to sustain, as Executive Director Haysom has
made clear to us. Yet, for the good of all Afghan people,
particularly Afghan women, who have an essential role
to play in the future of Afghanistan, that effort must be
sustained.
We recognize that leadership changes have
complicated dynamics within the Taliban and have
made it much harder for the Government to pursue
the peace process on which they have courageously
embarked, despite the attempts made from within
the country and from outside its borders to derail the
process of national reconciliation that is essential to
the achievement of a peaceful and secure future. New
Zealand fully supports the Government of Afghanistan’s
pursuit of reconciliation, and we encourage it to stay
the course. Sadly, there is now playing out a new twist
in the struggle for power as the Taliban, Al-Qaida,
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
other associated groups increasingly seek regional and

15-28350

17/09/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7526

national ascendancy. That, too, is taking a heavy toll on
the Afghan National Security Forces and the civilian
population.

resolution 2210 (2015), which we have just received. It
will usefully inform future discussions on the role of
the United Nations in Afghanistan.

Meanwhile, as Mr. Fedotov has outlined in stark
detail, the cultivation of and trade in narcotics and related
criminality such as money-laundering, corruption and
financing impose further stresses on local, regional
and national governance structures. These undermine
stability, security, economic and social development
and the health and well-being of society in a country
less able than most to cope with such pressures.

Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Mr. President, I wish to thank you for convening today’s
debate on the situation in Afghanistan. We also wish
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his briefing, and
the Executive Director of United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yury Fedotov, for his
statement.

Against that background, it is important to
maintain the integrity and effectiveness of the Taliban
and Al-Qaida sanctions regimes. As a Council, we need
to think carefully about how we can use the sanctions
regime imposed by the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) to better
support peace and reconciliation efforts in Afghanistan.
New Zealand encourages greater use of the travel
ban exemption procedures, where the purpose of the
travel is to enable listed individuals to participate in
peace negotiations. As Chair of the 1988 Committee,
I recognize the need to ensure that the Committee’s
processes support such participation.

The year 2015 is the first year of the 10-year
transformation decade in Afghanistan. Since the
beginning of the year, the Afghan Government has
made an effort to maintain national stability, remained
committed to promoting Afghanistan’s economic
development, steadily advanced the rule of law and
achieved positive results. The rebuilding of State
institutions and the economic and social development
of the country continue to face challenges and
complexities and require long-term effort on the part
of various sectors within Afghanistan. Also required
is the international community’s assistance and
support based on respect for Afghanistan’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. I would like to
emphasize the following points.

At the same time we need to be frank about those
associated with the Taliban who display no genuine
interest in peace but rather profit from the ongoing
instability. These individuals have vested financial
interests in the narcotics trade and illegal mining, and
I encourage Member States to submit listing requests
to the Committee in respect of such individuals and
entities.
Afghanistan needs the visible and united support of
this Council and the international community. UNAMA
is a tangible manifestation of that support. The work
of UNAMA and the delivery of well-coordinated
international assistance to Afghanistan can assist
the Afghan Government in laying down the political
and security foundations necessary for the country to
advance in a proper sustainable manner.
At the same time, we recognize that the work of the
United Nations in Afghanistan — that of UNAMA and
of the wider United Nations system — must be fit for
purpose, coordinated and undertaken in tandem with the
work of the Government of Afghanistan and the donor
community. In that regard, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the Tripartite Review Commission
(S/2015/713, annex), as called for in paragraph 48 of

First, China supports the Afghan National Unity
Government in the effective exercise of authority
and in the strengthening of its governance. In the
nearly one year since the Afghan National Unity
Government took office, positive results have been
achieved in Afghanistan’s political, economic and
social development and in the rule of law, which is
quite encouraging. However, the Afghan Government
is still faced with numerous challenges in terms of State
governance, and the international community should
give it its due trust and support and help it to enhance
its exercise of authority and capacity for governance.
We hope that the different sectors in Afghanistan will
strengthen the country’s unity, continue to resolve
differences through dialogue and consultation, and
remain committed to the broad picture of national
reconstruction and socioeconomic development.
Secondly, China is ready to continue to play a
positive role in taking forward the Afghan reconciliation
process. China has always supported this reconciliation
process. We are pleased to note that the Afghan
Government and the Taliban held formal peace talks

15-2835013/37

S/PV.7526

The situation in Afghanistan

in July in Pakistan. We appreciate the efforts made by
both Afghanistan and Pakistan. China hopes that the
two sides, Afghanistan and Pakistan, will value and
maintain the good momentum of the relations between
the two countries and strengthen coordination and
cooperation in the reconciliation process. China is
ready to work with the relevant parties to continue to
play a positive and constructive role in taking forward
the Afghan reconciliation process.
Thirdly, the international community should
continue to help the Afghan Government strengthen
its security-building and maintain national stability.
The security situation in Afghanistan remains fragile,
and there have been frequent occurrences of security
incidents that have brought about heavy civilian
casualties. In July 2015, at the Council of the Heads
of State of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization,
President Xi Jinping of China said that the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization needed to properly respond
to the Afghan situation, strengthen cooperation with
Afghanistan in the security sector and help Afghan
security forces strengthen capacity-building. China
supports the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and
other international and regional organizations in the
light of the Afghan need and will continue to help
Afghanistan build capacity in its security forces and
police sector so as to improve its ability to respond
to security threats and challenges and play a more
positive role in maintaining and advancing national
reconciliation and economic rebuilding. We hope that
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and other international organizations in Afghanistan
will strengthen their coordination with the country and
further improve their assistance to Afghanistan, thus
making further contributions to solving the Afghan
issue.
Fourthly, China welcomes Afghanistan’s increased
participation in regional cooperation. Afghanistan’s
peace and prosperity is in the common interests of the
countries of the region, but it cannot be achieved without
those countries’ cooperation and shared participation.
China supports Afghanistan in taking advantage of its
geographic location and in strengthening its cooperation
in trade, energy and interconnectivity with the rest
of the region and in creating a good environment for
harmonious coexistence and common development. We
hope that the countries of the region will effectively
respond to terrorism, drug trafficking and other common
threats and challenges by strengthening cooperation.

14/37

17/09/2015

China hopes that this fifth Foreign Ministers meeting
of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process will yield positive
results.
The year 2015 marks the sixtieth anniversary of
diplomatic relations between China and Afghanistan
and is also the Year of China-Afghanistan Friendly
Cooperation. We will continue to nurture the ChinaAfghanistan strategic cooperation partnership and we
are ready to help the Afghan Government accelerate its
economic and social development within the framework
of the New Silk Road initiative.
On 26 September, China, Afghanistan and the
United States will jointly hold a high-level meeting on
Afghan peacebuilding and regional cooperation. We
welcome the active participation of all relevant parties
in order to jointly contribute to the achievement of
lasting peace in Afghanistan at an early date.
Mrs. Audouard (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Nicholas Haysom and Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) Yury
Fedotov for their briefings. I also thank the Afghan
Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his statement and echo the
tributes that have been paid to him and wish him success
in his new role. France aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered by the observer of the European Union.
As highlighted in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2015/684), Afghan progress in political terms
has been significant. We welcome the National Unity
Government’s efforts to make progress with reforms,
particularly electoral reform. The recent appointments
of the Governor of the Central Bank and a Judge of
the Supreme Court are also important decisions. The
Government’s commitment to moving the peace process
forward, in consultation with the countries of the region,
also deserves our praise. The holding of discussions
in Pakistan at the beginning of July with the main
stakeholders was a positive development in seeking
a lasting political solution to the Afghan conflict. In
this respect, the support of countries of the region is
vital to ensuring that the Afghan reconciliation process
is successful and to ensuring also that conditions for
sustainable development in Afghanistan are met.
But many challenges remain, particularly in terms
of security. The conflict continues to spread, and the
level of violence is increasing, with civilians being the
primary victims. Afghan security forces have made
considerable progress, seem to be more and more

15-28350

17/09/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

in a position to deal with attacks by the Taliban, and
maintain their control of Afghanistan’s main urban
centres. Nevertheless, their capacities need to be
enhanced because the situation is still fragile in Kabul
and in many provinces, as was seen in the recent Taliban
attack on a prison in Ghazni province to help prisoners
to escape.
With respect to human rights, it is essential that
Afghan civil society and the authorities continue to
mobilize, especially on behalf of women and children,
who are particularly affected by this exacerbated
security situation. We therefore welcome the adoption
by Afghanistan of a National Action Plan on Women and
Peace and Security to implement resolution 1325 (2000)
from 2015 to 2022, and call on it to pursue its efforts
in this field. It is also important for the international
community to continue to support Afghanistan in
the implementation of its commitments to protecting
children in armed conflict.
The fight against narcotics and the illicit economy is
also among these challenges. As noted by Mr. Fedotov,
much remains to be done on this issue, which is of
great concern to France as it directly threatens the
security and development of Afghanistan, the health
of its population and the stability of the region. We
encourage the authorities to continue their work in the
fight against drugs through a comprehensive approach,
in close cooperation with UNODC, whose ongoing
efforts we welcome. France is resolved to see the United
Nations play a greater role in responding to this central
challenge, particularly in the coordination of the United
Nations agencies involved in the fight against drugs.
In this difficult context, the international community
should not stop working to accompany Afghanistan
towards greater stability, prosperity and democracy.
The commitments made at the London Conference
of December 2014 must be met, for Afghanistan still
needs the support of its partners.
While Afghanistan has fully entered the
transformation decade, the role of the United Nations
is more important than ever. its role in supporting the
Government remains crucial, notably to enable the
population to benefit from Government programmes
and international assistance. But this role must evolve
and adapt. In that regard, we welcome the tripartite
review and reflections being conducted jointly on the
desirable development of the support that the United

S/PV.7526

Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the
Organization can provide to countries.
France, meanwhile, will remain alongside
Afghanistan in the framework of the Franco-Afghan
Friendship and Cooperation Treaty and through its
contribution to the European Union commitment in
Afghanistan, which represents €1.4 billion over the
period 2014-2020.
To conclude, I hail the efforts of all United Nations
personnel in Afghanistan, who are working in difficult
conditions.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and
Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
A secure, democratic and prosperous Afghanistan
depends largely on the success of the reconciliation
process in the framework of a comprehensive strategy
to protect and promote human rights. Chile appreciates
the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan to resolve
outstanding differences with the Taliban through
dialogue. The organization of the first official meeting
between the parties on 7 July in Pakistan was a positive
development. However, we note with concern that
conflict and terrorist activities are on the rise, with
a consequent impact on the civilian population. The
Taliban must demonstrate its commitment to the peace
process, renounce violence and choose the table of
dialogue as the only means to advance its interests.
We are concerned about the recruitment and use
of children, increased attacks on schools and the
military use of children by the parties to the conflict.
We believe that the Lucens Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict can provide guidance in this area. We
hope that the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict will address this matter promptly, in support
of the proposals laid out in the report of the SecretaryGeneral in this regard, and we urge the Government to
implement them.
The launch on 30 June of the National Action Plan
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) was a
significant development. Afghan women should be an
essential component in all efforts to prevent conflict
prevention and build peace, and must participate in

15-2835015/37

S/PV.7526

The situation in Afghanistan

the electoral process and institutions of law and order.
The establishment of police women Councils makes a
substantive contribution to this aspiration.
Political and social cohesion at the national level are
essential at this important stage. While we understand
that some reforms may generate discrepancies,
progress towards the consolidation of democracy and
peace in the country requires the constructive work
of all sectors, which must come together to prevent
some from seeking to take advantage of the political
divisions. It is essential that the Special Electoral
Reform Commission keep the consultation process
inclusive and comprehensive, involving civil society
and religious leaders, with the support requested of the
United Nations and international organizations.
At the regional level, we support the ongoing
constructive dialogue among Afghanistan’s neighbours
to combat terrorism and drug trafficking and its
financing, and to resolve bilateral issues. It is critical
to build relations based on trust and cooperation.
In that sense, we also recognize the importance of
coordination between UNAMA and the Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy in Central Asia and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and we
appreciate the recent visit of the Secretary-General to
the region.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I too wish
to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, for their briefings. We also thank
the representative of Afghanistan for his statement and
wish him every success in his new appointment.
The relative improvement that we have seen in a
number of areas in Afghanistan — including governance
and the fight against corruption — and the efforts being
made by the authorities to ensure security throughout
the country are positive steps in the right direction
for the development of the country. It is important,
however, to maintain the achievements made to date
and to build on them in the coming period through
the implementation of reform programmes previously
announced by the Afghan authorities. That process
must be intensified, as such reforms have a significant
impact on daily life in Afghanistan. We therefore urge
the Afghan political class to support the implementation
of the Government’s reform programmes.

16/37

17/09/2015

The upcoming parliamentary elections will be
the cornerstone of the country’s political future and
stability. We urge the Afghan authorities to continue
their sound preparatory work for the elections and
to hold them as soon as possible on the basis of the
internationally accepted criteria of transparency and
democracy.
With the deteriorating security situation on the
ground and the increase in terrorist activities that have
claimed a large number of Afghan civilian victims, it
is important to strengthen the capacities of the Afghan
National Security Forces (ANSF) and to offer all
international assistance available. These needs must be
met during this important phase in order to enhance the
resilience of the ANSF, broaden their effective control
of the national territory and combat terrorism.
In tandem with the security-building process
under way, one element of critical importance to the
country’s stability is support for the Afghan political
reconciliation process among all stakeholders. We call
upon those stakeholders to make greater progress in
order to overcome the existing obstacles and launch
negotiations as soon as possible.
Despite the clear progress that has been achieved,
the human rights system needs a progressive reform
strategy that addresses many aspects and covers all
areas, in particular those sectors of the population
that have been targeted and weakened. That strategy
must be accompanied by national programmes that
aim to raise citizens’ awareness of their rights and the
laws in force. In that regard, we call upon the Afghan
authorities to work to ensure accountability for all
those who perpetrate crimes against human rights, in
line with international law.
The work that Afghanistan is undertaking to
promote and develop its relations with the countries of
the region, which has recently been evident through a
tangible improvement in those relations, particularly in
the economic sphere, constitutes an important change
that promotes joint work and will help to consolidate
security and stability in the region. We therefore call
upon Afghanistan’s neighbouring States to support
Afghanistan and to continue their cooperation with that
country, in particular in terms of security, and to work
to revitalize joint cooperation, especially with regard to
combating drugs.
In that context, Jordan supports the activities of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and

15-28350

17/09/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

reiterates the importance of adopting a comprehensive
approach to allow the authorities to combat that
problem and to step up awareness campaigns among the
people, as well as to address drug users. It is important
to combat all those who are fuelling that scourge and
who are preventing progress in Afghanistan.
In conclusion, we appreciate the efforts being
made by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, which is serving peace, and the
implementation of its mandate in a competent way and
in the very difficult conditions that Afghanistan is now
experiencing.
Mr. Mahamat Zene (Chad) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), as well as Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, for their briefings. I also
thank Ambassador Tanin, Permanent Representative of
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, for his statement
and wish him every success in his new capacities.
Less than a year after the presidential elections,
the new Afghan authorities have devoted significant
effort to political and administrative reform, national
reconciliation and combating drugs, although the
country continues to face those and many other
challenges concerning security and humanitarian
issues and the fight to reduce poverty. Chad wishes
to commend the efforts of the Afghan authorities and
urges them to continue the reforms already begun,
including those regarding the electoral system, and
calls on the international community to lend them
substantial financial and technical support.
Similarly, Chad welcomes and encourage the
initiatives of UNAMA, which made it possible, at a
provincial level, to organize a number of meetings that
brought together civil society, religious and traditional
leaders and others to implement new mechanisms for
dialogue and crisis resolution. Chad also welcomes the
new stage reached in terms of the peace and national
reconciliation process through direct negotiations
between the Afghan Government and representatives
of the Taliban, which was launched on 7 July in
Murree, Pakistan, under the aegis of the Pakistani
Government, the United States of America, China and
the international community.

S/PV.7526

The fight against terrorism, extremism and drug
trafficking, the challenges related to the porosity of
borders and the problem of water resource management
are all, inter alia, issues that require strong, full
cooperation among all the countries of the region.
Those issues also require multifaceted, broad support
from the international community. In that regard, we
welcome the convening on 8 and 9 June, in Dushanbe,
of a high-level international conference that enabled
the countries of the region to take important decisions
with respect to security, development and, of course,
water management, at a regional level. To that end, the
partnership between the Government of Afghanistan
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
which aims to combat drug trafficking, should be
encouraged and further supported, both at the level
of capacity-building and by stepping up cooperation
with neighbouring States for better coordination in the
transborder fight against drugs and illicit trafficking,
in keeping with the presidential statement of 25 June
2014 (S/PRST/2014/12).
The fragile security situation in Afghanistan, along
with the presence of foreign fighters and elements of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, not only on
its territory but throughout the region, calls for joint
efforts at the regional level as well as heightened
vigilance on the part of the international community.
The growing number of terrorist attacks in Kabul and
throughout the country, which we firmly condemn,
clearly demonstrates the mobility of terrorist groups
and their ability to act as spoilers, underscoring the
need to reinforce the efforts of the Afghan security
forces.
Chad is seriously concerned by the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation and deplores the fact that
civilians are falling victim to anti-personnel land mines
and indiscriminate attacks carried out by the parties to
the conflict and international forces. All parties must
clearly distinguish between civilian targets and military
ones by adhering to the principles of international
humanitarian law as well as international human rights
law.
By way of conclusion, Chad wishes to pay deserved
tribute to all United Nations and humanitarian agency
staff serving in Afghanistan in extremely dangerous
conditions. We urge them to continue their work on
behalf of the Afghan people.

15-2835017/37

S/PV.7526

The situation in Afghanistan

Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Special
Representative Nicholas Haysom for presenting the
Secretary-General‘s report (S/2015/684) on the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
We also thank Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, for
his briefing, and the Ambassador of Afghanistan, for
taking part in this debate. We wish Ambassador Tanin
every success in his new assignment and all the best to
his country.
We commend the work of UNAMA in helping
Afghanistan to turn the page on its turbulent past and
to open a new chapter in the country’s life — one that
we hope will bring reconciliation, peace and progress.
In that regard, we support the review of the role,
structure and activities of all United Nations agencies,
the international donor community and UNAMA and
its improved alignment of work and structure. This
debate provides the Security Council once again with
an opportunity to assess the situation in the country
and take stock of recent developments. We note with
some hope that during the past three months, despite
difficulties, the Government of Afghanistan has pursued
efforts to handle its increasing political, economic
and security challenges. That is a positive sign of the
National Unity Government’s commitment to peace
and national reconciliation. The direct negotiations
between representatives of the Afghan Government
and the Taliban are encouraging steps towards an
inclusive dialogue, in spite of the terrorist attacks that
have occurred in the wake of the appointment of a new
Taliban leader. We strongly encourage the parties to
resume direct negotiations in a constructive way, with
a view to reaching a permanent peace settlement.
Despite the political progress described in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/684), the armed
conflict has grown in intensity and scope, resulting in
a significant number of casualties and the increased
displacement of civilians. The report issued by UNAMA
in August on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict for the period from January to June of this year
cites a figure of almost 5,000 civilian casualties, mainly
victims of improvised explosive devices, suicide attacks
and targeted killings. We reiterate our condemnation of
any violence against civilians and call on all parties to
refrain from such criminal actions.
We are also concerned about the conflict between
the Government forces and rebels linked to international
terrorist networks, which is producing significant

18/37

17/09/2015

displacement of the population. The clashes in eastern
Afghanistan between the Taliban and other groups
loyal to the Islamic State, both because of the resulting
huge displacement of people and for their security
implications, are also matters of great concern. The
expansion of the conflict to the south, south-east and
northern parts of the country, along with the ongoing
hostilities and difficulty of access to the affected
areas, has been a challenge to humanitarian and United
Nations personnel trying to provide assistance to people
in need and help the country attain greater stability and
security.
We welcome President Ghani’s launch, on 30 June,
of Afghanistan’s national action plan on Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security, for 2015 to 2022. The action plan, based
on the Government’s pledges for increasing the role
of women in society, marks the culmination of a yearlong technical process and period of consultation,
supported by the United Nations, aimed at establishing
a framework that can ensure women’s participation
in the ongoing peace and reconciliation processes.
Another positive development, despite some setbacks,
is the continued engagement on critical issues between
the Governments of Pakistan and Afghanistan. We hope
fervently that the two countries will be able to reinforce
mutual trust and redouble their efforts to find common
ground on issues of security coordination and support
for an Afghan-led peace process. Such a relationship
is a critical element in the attainment of stability and
peace in the region.
The information from the Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime — on
the fact that last year Afghanistan accounted for an
estimated 85 per cent of global opium production and
70 per cent of global heroin production, that the export
value of those drugs accounts for some 13 per cent of
its gross domestic product and exceeds the value of the
export of any legal goods and services, and that illicit
drugs are supporting instability, insurgency, corruption
and organized crime, weakening State institutions and
the country’s overall ability to promote peace and good
governance — calls for renewed effort on the part of
the Government and the international community to
address such negative issues in Afghan national life.
Finally, we would like to pay tribute to the efforts of
the Special Electoral Reform Commission in presenting
an initial package of recommendations to President
Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah. We

15-28350

17/09/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

encourage the Commission to continue its work to
ensure a transparent and inclusive commitment on the
part of all parties involved to moving forward with the
aim of restoring the confidence of the Afghan people in
their institutions.
In conclusion, despite the remarkable progress
that the Afghan people have made in recent years, the
challenges they face are immense, and they must work
to reach new levels of cooperation and understanding if
the country is to succeed in overcoming its bloody and
painful past. It is also imperative that the international
community keep to its commitment to Afghanistan by
continuing to assist it in laying the foundations for a
better and more prosperous future.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would like
to thank Special Representative Haysom and Executive
Director Fedotov for their hard work in the past few
months. The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime are great assets to the Security
Council and to the Afghan Government. We look
forward to seeing their important work continue. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his timely letter summarizing the Tripartite Review
Commission discussions (S/2015/713), and Ambassador
Zahir Tanin for his remarks. I would like to take this
opportunity to wish the Ambassador well. It has truly
been an honour to work with him.
I would like to touch on three key areas
today — strides that the National Unity Government
has made over the past year and work that it still
needs to do; the security and stability challenges that
Afghanistan continues to face; and some important
upcoming milestones that could make a genuine
difference to Afghanistan’s future.
Mr. Haysom’s briefing today underscored
the international community’s united support for
Afghanistan, in particular its commitment to the National
Unity Government led by President Ghani and Chief
Executive Abdullah. Next week, the Unity Government
will mark its one-year anniversary. We recognize and
support the progress that the Government has made in
key areas since Mr. Haysom’s previous briefing (see
S/PV.7467), particularly those such as making key
Government appointments, fighting corruption and
establishing the Special Electoral Reform Commission.
The Unity Government’s swift adoption of seven of the
Commission’s recommendations, including increasing

S/PV.7526

the quota of female members on provincial and district
councils to 25 per cent and strengthening voter lists,
are just a few examples of progress. In that regard, I
would like to express our special appreciation for the
important role that UNAMA has played in supporting
the work of the Commission. We should underscore that
political stability in Afghanistan is critical to security.
For the Unity Government to achieve its promises
of reform, however, it is essential that the President and
the Chief Executive consult and coordinate fully with
each other on substantial policy decisions and operate
in a broadly inclusive manner. That includes engaging
regularly on important policy matters with the relevant
Afghan stakeholders in all areas of the country. Without
outreach from the Government to all major segments
of society, those who feel excluded could undermine
the Unity Government and foster greater instability. In
that regard, we welcome initiatives such as UNAMA’s
efforts to promote inclusive Afghan-led dialogue
aimed at local conflict resolution and linking local and
national reconciliation efforts in several provinces,
including Baghlan, Bamyan and Kunduz.
Similarly, we commend and strongly support the
Afghan Government’s efforts to foster a peace and
reconciliation process with the Taliban and other armed
groups. We welcome the efforts by regional partners
such as Pakistan to support that Afghan-led and -owned
initiative. We continue to believe that a reconciliation
process is the best way to end the violence and produce
lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan. The necessary
end conditions of any peace process with insurgent
groups must include ceasing violence, breaking ties
with international terrorist groups, including Al-Qaida,
and accepting the Afghan Constitution, including its
protections for women and minorities.
Afghanistan’s progress in all the areas I just noted
is remarkable, given the heavy toll the ongoing violence
and conflict is inflicting on the Afghan people. The
increase in targeted killings as the Taliban and other
groups use violence to try to advance their influence
constitutes a worrisome trend. The horrific terror
attacks on 7 August in Kabul represent some of the worst
violence we have seen in recent years. We share the
concern of the Secretary-General about the continuing
impact of the conflict on ordinary Afghans and about
the large number of Afghan civilian casualties.
Terrorism attacks are not the only threat to peace,
however. Counter-narcotics is another area where

15-2835019/37

S/PV.7526

The situation in Afghanistan

solid progress could help to advance stability in
Afghanistan. We are pleased that the Government of
Afghanistan will unveil its new national drug action
plan at a ministerial-level event here in New York later
this month. That public high-level demonstration of
Afghan political will illustrates the high priority that
the Government of National Unity correctly places
on counter-narcotics. The Government inherited a
significant narcotics challenge that fuels corruption,
jeopardizes the legal economy, furthers insecurity
and undermines public health and good governance.
We are therefore encouraged by the Afghan National
Unity Government’s renewed commitment to counternarcotics. We also thank the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime for its tireless efforts to support the
Afghan Government’s efforts to counter narcotics.
Looking ahead to the coming months, there are
several critical opportunities that the international
community must seize to deepen its support for
the Government of National Unity and the people
of Afghanistant. On 26 September, we will co-host
with China and Afghanistan a high-level event on
Afghanistan’s peaceful reconstruction and regional
cooperation — an important opportunity for the
international community to recommit to supporting
Afghanistan as it continues its path towards stabilization
and reform. The Security Council’s consideration of
UNAMA’s mandate in March, the 2016 NATO Summit
in Warsaw and the upcoming Afghanistan development
conference will also be occasions on which the
international community will be able to demonstrate
our collective commitment to Afghanistan.
Afghanistan has come a long way but still faces
challenges. We all need to show that we will continue
to be good partners.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank
Mr. Nicholas Haysom and Mr. Yury Fedotov for their
briefings. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Zahir Tanin for his statement, as well as to take this
opportunity to acknowledge, and commend him on, his
work as the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan.
I wish him every success in his new responsibilities.
The holding of elections in Afghanistan a year ago
and the assumption of office by President Ashraf Ghani
launched a new phase in a political process aimed at
overcoming the instability caused by the armed violence
that rocked this brotherly country for decades and

20/37

17/09/2015

claimed the lives of countless innocent civilians. The
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has welcomed those
achievements of the Afghan people in consolidating
peace. Afghanistan needs peace and stability in order
to rebuild the country.
However, we are concerned that the political
momentum has recently been affected by the violence
unleashed by the new Taliban leadership, as well as
by the uncertainty that has been generated by the new
direction taken by that group.
My country appreciates the efforts of the Afghan
Government to pursue national reconciliation as a
central theme of its political agenda, as well as the
support of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for the efforts made by the
country’s authorities. The four initiatives aimed to
promote inter-Afghan dialogue represent an important
starting point for achieving peace and the consolidation
of a political process that is Afghan-owned and includes
diverse representation from all sectors of society.
In that regard, the participation of women remains
a fundamental aspect in the building of an inclusive
society. We are convinced that women’s empowerment
contributes to the promotion of human rights. We
welcome the efforts of the Afghan authorities to
implement the national plan of action on resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security. Through that
initiative, the Afghan Government, with the support
of the UNAMA, committed itself to ensuring that
women could play a more important role in the areas
of participation, protection, prevention, relief and
recovery. We believe that to be the correct path.
My country welcomes the existing collaboration
between President Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive
Abdullah Abdullah in carrying out the necessary
electoral reforms agreed a year ago following the
formation of the Government of National Unity. That
step is essential to boost the confidence of the Afghan
people in their institutions.
The security situation in Afghanistan remains
fragile as the result of the actions of terrorist groups
operating in that country and the region of Central Asia,
which have persisted in their plans for destabilization.
The continued presence of groups affiliated with the
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) demonstrates
once again the growing threat posed to the stability
of the country by the fostering of terrorist activities.
ISIS intends to expand its terrorist methods throughout

15-28350

17/09/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghan territory, as part of its strategy to expand and
bolster its presence in the Middle East and North Africa
by controlling drug-trafficking routes in the region.
ISIS efforts in the country have received a boost
thanks to the incorporation of Taliban elements who
disagree with the fighting methods of the new Taliban
leadership. Reports indicate that about 10 per cent
of Taliban insurgents are active supporters of ISIS,
whose presence is a destabilizing factor for the region.
The presence of ISIS is a worrying development that
requires that the international community, in particular
the Security Council, adopt robust measures to curb the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters, who destabilize the
country and fuel the armed conflicts in Iraq and Syria.
The fight against terrorism requires the strengthening
of the Afghan armed forces as a legitimate institution
in guaranteeing the security of the State.
In addition to the danger of violent extremism,
drug trafficking remains a serious obstacle to the
country’s stability and development. This illicit activity
is the main source of financing for the Taliban and
other criminal groups in carrying out their activities.
The impact of drug trafficking on the region requires
international cooperation, including neighbouring
countries, to prevent, combat and eliminate this scourge.
We recognize the efforts of the Afghan Government
in this regard, which have been assisted by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Proof of this is
the launch of the Afghanistan Drug Reporting System,
which implements stricter controls while establishing
the indicators needed to craft effective policies for the
control and eradication of poppy crops.
The insecurity that persists in some parts of
Afghanistan has a negative impact on the civilian
population, which is the victim of indiscriminate attacks
by terrorist groups. The number of people affected by
armed violence has not decreased, as pointed out in
the report (S/2015/684) of the Secretary-General. The
fighting on the ground and targeted attacks make up
the bulk of the violence with the greatest impact on
civilians.
In that context, we regret the increase in the number
of internally displaced persons this year, which at more
than 100,000 is an increase of 77 per cent as compared
with the previous year. The civilian population,
including children, continue to pay a high price for the
continuing fighting. We call on the parties to respect

S/PV.7526

international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and to protect children.
In another vein, we would like to highlight the
enhancement of Afghanistan’s relations with its
neighbouring countries. That is a positive factor for
the region. Dialogue and the various agreements
established between Afghanistan and India, Pakistan,
China and Russia, among others, reaffirm the need to
strengthen those bilateral relations in order to promote
cooperation in areas of common interest for the benefit
of their peoples.
Finally, we encourage the Government of
Afghanistan to continue its efforts to promote a
comprehensive and inclusive political process leading
to the establishment of a firm and lasting peace.
That requires the participation of all sectors of
Afghan society, with the support of the international
community and the United Nations. In that regard,
and pursuant to resolution 2210 (2015), we support the
recommendations to the effect that UNAMA should
continue its presence in Afghanistan in order to work
in full coordination with the Afghan Government and
its people with a view to bolstering its institutions.
Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I thank the Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
for
Afghanistan, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his briefing. I
also thank the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yury
Fedotov, for his briefing. I commend Ambassador
Tanin for his statement and wish him every success in
his new appointment.
A year ago, the coalition Government assumed
its duties to lead a new transformation decade in
Afghanistan for the period 2015-2024. That period is
crucial to building a strong foundation for the State and
to demonstrating firm national leadership and a sense of
ownership. There is a sense of progress, albeit difficult
and slow. Yet it has been marred by the fiercest fighting
by the Taliban in many years, thereby undermining the
regional integration of Afghanistan and leading to poor
economic growth, corruption and weakness in the rule
of law.
We echo the calls for bolder reforms that would
underpin the importance of the rule of law, human
rights, accountability and justice. We commend the
Government’s endeavours to continue with reforms and
to finalize senior appointments. The public confidence
of Afghans will grow with administrative reforms that

15-2835021/37

S/PV.7526

The situation in Afghanistan

promote capacity-building in anti-corruption, political
participation and the civil service. We regret, however,
that nominations for the first female candidates for
a seat on the Supreme Court and for the Minister of
Defence were rejected by the Wolesi Jirga.
The United Nations has been in Afghanistan
for over 50 years. At this stage, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), United
Nations agencies and the international community
remain important to the long-term stability of
Afghanistan. UNAMA’s field presence in remote
regions of the country has been vital to achieving
peace, self-reliance and growth. The Tripartite
Commission, established under resolution 2210 (2015),
has submitted its recommendations to the Council (see
S/2015/713, annex). We look forward to discussing how
best United Nations agencies can assist the country in
the future. Too many of the challenges in Afghanistan
are of a transnational nature, and we have just heard
briefings in that regard. Therefore, increased emphasis
on UNAMA’s political good-offices role in the region
will be required.
The increased and indiscriminate targeting of
civilians by the Taliban and terrorists and their deep
involvement in the drugs trade are very disconcerting.
Civilian casualties continue to grow, and the conflict
has become deeply entrenched. In just the past few
months, the geographic scope of suicide bombings and
complex attacks has spread beyond Zabul, Hilmand and
Kabul to many other areas. Children have increasingly
been killed, in disregard of international law, which
prohibits attacks against civilians.
While we commend the resolve of the Afghan
national defence and security forces, we underline the
further need for the Government to maintain its focus
on building the capacity of those forces. The NATOled Resolute Support Mission, which is providing
training, advice and assistance, plays a significant role
in that regard. Exploratory negotiations between the
Taliban and the Afghan Government — a step towards
peace — has stirred hopes in Afghanistan. An inclusive
peace deal should remain an ultimate objective, and we
urge regional partners to support President Ghani’s
efforts and to follow up on the direct talks in July in
Murree, Pakistan.
Security
challenges
undermine
economic
development, and poverty is rampant, as every third
Afghan lives below the poverty line. The lack of

22/37

17/09/2015

economic opportunities and alternative livelihoods, the
debts of farmers and the lack of access to credit have
created fertile ground for the cultivation of poppies.
Afghanistan accounts for a staggering 85 per cent of
global opium production. We also note with concern
Mr. Fedotov’s warning about a sharp increase in drug
addiction and the concurrent dangers of HIV/AIDS
in Afghanistan. The launch of the Afghanistan Drug
Reporting System on 23 June, in collaboration with
UNODC and the Ministry of Counter-Narcotics, might
prove to be a positive contribution.
Poverty goes hand in hand with illiteracy.
Only 17 per cent of Afghan women are able to read.
Afghanistan sadly ranks as one of the worst countries
for women in terms of access to education and health
care and pervasive domestic violence against women.
The Afghan Government has taken some steps, and
we welcome the launch of its national action plan on
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, for the period 2015-2022, as well as President
Ghani’s pledge to ensure women’s participation in the
peace process at all its stages. We also note the progress
made towards the establishment of police women
councils.
As was said earlier in this debate, restoring
confidence in the electoral system and the independence
of electoral bodies and the establishment of a voter
registry are key. The agreement between President
Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah to establish the
Special Electoral Reform Commission is a welcome
step. We urge Afghan leaders to set the date for
parliamentary elections without delay.
Regional efforts to establish peace and stability will
remain critical. We support the recently held Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan, the
sixth such high-level ministerial meeting. Encouraging
efforts have been made by Afghanistan and Pakistan,
and we stress the importance of further constructive
steps.
Lithuania has contributed to the multinational
efforts in Afghanistan since 2005, and we will remain
a steadfast partner to Afghanistan. We stand ready to
support the people of Afghanistan. We look forward to
resolute actions and strong leadership in Afghanistan,
because the responsibility for the future of the country
rests with Afghans.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important debate. The Special

15-28350

17/09/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
for
Afghanistan, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, and Mr. Yuri
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, have provided us with
profound insights into the situation in Afghanistan,
and we are greatly in their debt. Ambassador Tanin
has distinguished himself in the service of his country.
We pray that his superlative performance will also be
manifest in his new responsibility.
Afghanistan continues to make steady and striking
progress under the reform agenda of President Ghani.
The appointment of Cabinet members and other
officials, including four women, to ministerial positions
vividly demonstrates a determination and commitment
to implementing crucial reforms, including the
empowerment of women and the advancement of their
rights. We welcome the Government’s commitment to
transparency and accountability. We believe that is vital
to promoting good governance in Afghanistan. The
re-establishment of the Electoral Reform Commission
in July, designed to address fundamental issues of
governance, as stated in the political agreement of
21 September 2014, is a notable development. We
commend the Commission for its engagement with a
broad range of stakeholders, including civil society.
Progress in electoral reform is crucial to the solid
establishment of democracy in Afghanistan. Electoral
reforms that enhance transparency and inclusive
governance are vital to engendering a united and secure
Afghanistan.
On reconciliation, we applaud the initiatives
launched by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to promote dialogue at the
provincial level in Afghanistan. Local reconciliation
efforts constitute a vital building block for reconciliation
at the national level. Therefore we urge the people of
Afghanistan to embrace those initiatives.
Concerning security, we commend the Afghan
National Security Forces for their success against
insurgents operating in various parts of the country.
The fact that they have prevented insurgents from
holding any provincial capital attests to their capability
to defend the territorial integrity of the country. We
note that challenges remain in securing rural areas.
That includes resupplying or reinforcing armed
forces units in those areas. It is important that those
challenges be urgently addressed in order to close the
gaps that insurgents could use to establish a foothold,
and thereby destabilize the country.

S/PV.7526

On counter-narcotics, we welcome the launch
of the Afghanistan Drug Reporting System, aimed
at providing access to data on key counter-narcotics
indicators in Afghanistan. It is our expectation that that
will significantly aid the war on drugs in that country.
We commend the efforts of the Afghan authorities
in the eradication of opium poppy in the country. The
40 per cent increase in eradication between 2014 and
2015 underscores the progress that has been made in
that important counter-narcotic effort. We express
our condolences to the families of security officers
killed in the course of counter-narcotic operations.
Concerted national, regional and international action
will be essential in order to sustain the war on drugs in
Afghanistan.
While significant progress has been made in
Afghanistan — across a broad spectrum of sectors — we
admit that considerable challenges still exist. It is our
expectation that the work of the Tripartite Commission
will enhance the ability of the United Nations to help
Afghanistan to meet those challenges. We pay special
tribute to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Haysom, the UNAMA staff and Afghanistan’s
development partners for their dedication and
commitment to placing the country on a sure path to
peace, reconciliation and development.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov, and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, for
their briefings.
The situation in Afghanistan remains complicated.
Unprecedented terrorist activity persists, and the
number of civilian casualties as a result of the recent
fighting has reached a steady, very high level. We
are alarmed by the escalation in the internal political
conflict in the country following the news of the death
of Taliban leader Mullah Omar. In such circumstances,
the prospects for a political settlement in Afghanistan,
which seemed possible this past spring and summer,
have become even more uncertain.
We are also concerned by the resumption of shelling
from Pakistani territory along Afghan border regions,

15-2835023/37

S/PV.7526

The situation in Afghanistan

which has resulted in the loss of civilian lives. We also
continue to devote special attention to the situation
along the border with Tajikistan, where militants control
the Afghan districts of Imam Sahib and Dasht-e-Archi,
in Kunduz province, and a number of districts in
Badakhshan province. We are furthermore alarmed
by the situation in areas bordering on Turkmenistan,
where an attack in August against the head of counterterrorist operations, First Vice-President Dostum, took
place, along with armed attacks by Taliban fighters
against Turkmen soldiers.
In addition to the presence of Taliban forces in the
provinces of Faryab and Jowzjan — provinces bordering
Turkmenistan — Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) groups remain active. There are reasons to
expect a strengthening of ISIL, whose ranks currently
number approximately 6,000 members and which has
a presence in 25 of the 34 provinces of the country.
Members include the Afghan Taliban and foreign
fighters — which include Arabs, Punjabi Pakistanis,
Waziristanis, Pashtuns, Chechens, Uzbeks and Tajiks.
According to the Afghan intelligence services, over the
past several months ISIL has established more than 10
training camps in order to prepare fighters throughout
the country, and three of those camps are in the north.
Russia supports the policy of the Government of
Afghanistan in implementing the concept of national
reconciliation. We stand ready to assist in advancing
the peace process, which includes a flexible approach
to issues entailing a possible easing of sanctions
established under resolution 1988 (2011) against the
Taliban — if such an approach does not contradict
Afghan national interests and adheres to the three wellknown tenets of national reconciliation.
We hope that, after having almost completed the
process of forming a new Cabinet, the leadership of
Afghanistan will finally be able to tackle the problems
that have accumulated in the country. Russia stands
ready to forge constructive cooperation with the new
leadership of Afghanistan in order to maintain the
stability and independent policy course of the country
as one that is free from terrorism and drug trafficking.
We will continue to assist Kabul in the training of
Afghan security forces through the relevant Russian
authorities. Russia will continue that work bilaterally
and in cooperation with international partners — despite
the changed approaches taken by the United States,
NATO and a number of Western countries regarding

24/37

17/09/2015

the implementation of joint projects with Russia to
assist Afghanistan.
We view the current NATO Resolute Support
Mission as a direct successor to the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF), which failed,
unfortunately, over its 12 years of existence, to resolve
a single one of the issues that it tried to deal with. It is
our view that NATO’s efforts in Afghanistan should be
aimed at strengthening the national security sector and
that NATO’s leadership — pursuant to resolution 2189
(2014) — should continue to report its mission’s activity
to the Security Council at meetings on the situation in
Afghanistan.
At the same time, we are forced to note that the
new NATO mission has, at this stage, also not been able
to achieve its objectives. Afghan security forces have
suffered significant losses in fighting the opposition
and have shown themselves, to date, to be incapable
of independently holding off attacks — as was
demonstrated by the renewed participation of United
States military forces in combat operations in the south
of the country.
We note the world’s growing understanding
regarding the importance of a regional context for
an Afghan settlement, as well as an increase in the
number of regional formats and platforms focused
on Afghanistan. At the same time, we believe that it
is important for countries in the region to play the
primary role in carrying out activities according to
those formats, especially as laid out by the Istanbul
Process.
We are convinced that regional efforts to assist
Afghanistan should be promoted mainly through tried
and tested platforms, first and foremost the Shanghai
Corporation Organization (SCO), into which we have
incorporated virtually every country of the region,
including Afghanistan, as member States, observers
or dialogue partners. Russia welcomes Afghanistan’s
official request for SCO membership, which was
submitted by the President of Afghanistan, Ashraf
Ghani, during his meeting with the President of Russia,
Vladimir Putin, on the margins of the SCO summit in
Ufa.
Following the withdrawal of ISAF contingents,
the problem of drugs — the illicit production and
trafficking of which further destabilizes an already
difficult situation both in the country and in the region
in general — has deteriorated. The merging of criminal

15-28350

17/09/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

activities related to Afghan opiates with international
terrorism continues, thereby strengthening the financial
position of those actors through drug revenues. Russia
looks forward to a comprehensive discussion on the
Afghan drug issue within the broader format of the
upcoming special session of the General Assembly
devoted to narcotics throughout the world in 2016.
According to the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime’s World Drug Report, Afghanistan remains
the world leader in opium cultivation and production,
accounting for 85 per cent of the total global volume.
The total area under opium poppy cultivation in 2014
increased to 224,000 hectares. Opium production
grows by more than 1,000 tons annually. Whereas in
5,500 tonnes were produced in 2013, the production
in 2014 was 6,400 tons. According to forecasts by
international experts, this year it will increase to 7,800
tons. One reason for that situation is the emergence of
new, improved opium poppy strains, potentially making
possible three harvests per year. The level of eradication
of opium poppy cultivation remains low. In that respect,
2014 was an especially poor year. According to the
2015 Afghanistan Opium Survey, the number of drug
users in Afghanistan has nearly doubled since 2012, to
over 3 million individuals. Over 1 million of them are
children under the age of 15.
United Nations experts believe that, following
the withdrawal from Afghanistan of the main groups
of the international coalition forces, the volume of
Afghan drugs being trafficked along the northern route
through Central Asia has increased. The situation
is exacerbated by the fact that ISIL’s leadership is
attempting to seize control of Afghan drug trafficking
in order to gain access to new sources of financing for its
terrorist activities. There is evidence that ISIL fighters
already control part of the illegal supply channels of
drug shipments from Badakhshan province. In that
regard, we believe that the Security Council must
continue to carefully monitor and promptly respond
to developments in the drug situation in Afghanistan.
We would like to take the opportunity provided by the
presence in the Chamber of the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime at
Vienna, Mr. Yuri Fedotov, to express our support for
the consistent efforts of the Office he leads in assisting
Afghanistan to find an appropriate response to the
problems posed by narcotics.
Furthermore, in the context of an Afghan
settlement, we consider it important to take fuller

S/PV.7526

advantage of the potential and practical experience of
the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO),
which since 2003 has been carrying out Operation
Channel, aimed at suppressing drug smuggling routes,
with the additional participation of the CSTO member
States and counter-narcotics officers from agencies
in Afghanistan, China, Iran, Pakistan, the United
States of America and a number of other countries.
Furthermore, a test of the operational readiness of the
CSTO Collective Rapid Reaction Force to carry out
counter-terrorist operations was conducted in May in
Tajikistan and demonstrated the capacity of the armed
forces of CSTO member States to combat attacks by
fighters from terrorist and extremist groups.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2015/684), Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Nicholas Haysom his briefing and Ambassador
Zahir Tanin for his statement.
India is proud to call itself Afghanistan’s first
strategic partner. We stand ready to do whatever is
possible, within our capacities and our means, to work
with the Afghan Government and its people to realize
our common vision. We share the Afghan people’s
vision of a strong, independent, united and prosperous
State.
We are happy to note that Afghanistan’s historic
political transition remains on course. The patience,
forbearance, courage and democratic aspiration of
the people of Afghanistan have strengthened that
process. We are also happy to note that, in accordance
with President Ghani’s instruction to his Cabinet on
23 April, all ministries and executive branch bodies
presented their 100-day strategies during the reporting
period, with the exception of the Ministry of Defence.
Unfortunately, there is much that needs to be done
on the security front. The Secretary-General’s report
substantiates our view that it is terrorism, and not
tribal differences or ethnic rivalries, that is the main
source of insecurity and instability in Afghanistan. The
report mentions that the reporting period witnessed
a significant increase in reports of intra-insurgent
violence between the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and its affiliates with the Taliban. In

15-2835025/37

S/PV.7526

The situation in Afghanistan

addition, the Secretary-General’s report states that
the majority of alleged ISIL-affiliated fighters appear
to be drawn from disaffected former members of the
Afghan Taliban, Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan or groups
previously associated with Al-Qaida, such as the Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan. That is indeed alarming, and
the Council must act against that threat with a sense of
urgency.
The current increase in violence is taking place at a
time when Afghanistan is in the midst of a sensitive and
historic political transition under the leadership of His
Excellency President Ashraf Ghani and His Excellency
Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah. Given the critical
phase that the political transition has entered and the
deteriorating security situation, we feel there is a
strong case for the international community to take a
fresh look at the manner in which the drawdown of the
international military presence in Afghanistan is taking
place. We would also urge the Council to look into ways
to curb terrorist organizations and block the transfer of
finances from the illegal narcotics trade.
President Ghani has taken brave steps aimed
at launching a reconciliation process with a view
to bringing peace to his country. However, those
efforts have been repeatedly rebuffed. The SecretaryGeneral’s report mentions that the deadly attacks in
Kabul, which coincided with the emergence of a new
Taliban leadership in early August, led President
Ghani to call for urgent action by Pakistan against the
Taliban, in particular action to prevent the use of its
territory to prepare Taliban operations. India continues
to support a truly Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
reconciliation process within the framework of the
Afghan Constitution and the internationally accepted
red lines.
In view of the fragile security environment, it is
important for Afghanistan to have a supportive and stable
political environment for growth and development.
Afghanistan is faced with huge developmental
challenges. The eradication of poverty is a key priority
for the Afghan Government. World leaders will adopt
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development a few
days from now, thereby beginning a new chapter in
our collective fight for a sustainable world without
poverty and hunger. It would be useful for the Council
to see how the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) can act to help Afghanistan
achieve the objectives set out in the 2030 Agenda.

26/37

17/09/2015

In our view, UNAMA must continue to play a leading
role in shaping and coordinating the international
community’s efforts to assist Afghanistan’s political
and economic reconstruction process. UNAMA must
also focus on the important role it plays in ensuring
the delivery of valuable humanitarian and development
assistance to Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): It is a pleasure to speak
in the Security Council under your able presidency,
Sir. We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2015/684), and we greatly appreciate the briefings
provided to the Council by Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and by Mr. Yuri
Fedotov, the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime at Vienna. Likewise, it is
always instructive to hear the remarks of our brother
Ambassador Zahir Tanin of Afghanistan.
This debate is taking place at another crucial
moment for Afghanistan and the region, as the country
faces imposing economic, security and political
challenges. In recent weeks, the security situation in
Afghanistan has deteriorated significantly, with violent
attacks in Kabul and across the country. Pakistan
condemns all terrorist violence in Afghanistan. There
can be no justification for such attacks, which kill
innocent children, women and men.
In Afghanistan, as elsewhere, there are two
possible paths to ending war and violence: a military
victory over the insurgents or a negotiated peace.
There is general consensus within the international
community that peace can be best restored through a
negotiated solution with the Afghan insurgency, led by
Tehrik-e-Taliban. UNAMA’s call earlier this morning
for renewing direct engagement between the parties to
the conflict is further confirmation of that approach.
Several avenues for reconciliation have been
explored over the years, in Doha and elsewhere.
Obviously, reconciliation and dialogue has to be
between the Afghans themselves: it has to be owned and
conducted by Afghans. External parties can facilitate
reconciliation, but they cannot impose a solution.
My country’s priority remains to defeat the terrorists
whom we are confronting. They are responsible for

15-28350

17/09/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

hundreds of attacks against civilian and security
targets in Pakistan. They have killed over 64,000 of
our citizens and security personnel, including innocent
children at a school in Peshawar.
Our military campaign, Zarb-e-Azb, and
Pakistan’s multidimensional national action plan have
degraded those terrorist groups and have flushed out
and eliminated those trying to use our territory for
their violent agendas. Their infrastructure in North
Waziristan and adjacent areas has been destroyed.
Their few remaining hideouts in the Shawal Valley and
other isolated redoubts are under consistent and strong
attack.
It was at the request of His Excellency President
Ashraf Ghani that my country undertook to facilitate
a dialogue between Kabul and the Afghan Taliban.
Our sole aim was to establish direct contact between
them and the National Unity Government. The first
round of intra-Afghan talks was hosted in Murree on
7 July. Representatives of China and the United States
observed those talks. The objective was to ensure
transparency and impartiality. The outcome of that
round was encouraging. Both the Afghan Government
and the representatives of the Taliban agreed to
continue the dialogue. A specific date, 31 July, was set
for the second round of talks. But a few days before
that date, there occurred certain developments, which
are well known to all Council members and whose
consequences were predictable. Those developments
led to the rupture of what could have been a promising
peace process. The Afghan Taliban was unable to return
to the table. Equally inevitably, the level of violence in
Afghanistan escalated, including a series of attacks that
which claimed hundreds of innocent lives. Pakistan
unequivocally condemned all those attacks. But we
were shocked and saddened when some in Afghanistan
chose to lay the blame for the escalating violence on my
country. Our efforts to encourage the Taliban leaders
to revive the dialogue should not be misconstrued as
any form of endorsement for their revived violence
following the scuttling of the intra-Afghan talks. There
are vast uncontrolled areas in Afghanistan from where
such violence emanates against both Afghan targets
and against Pakistan.
Pakistan has refrained from responding to the
allegations made by certain Afghan quarters. On the
contrary, my Prime Minister dispatched our national
security adviser to Kabul on 4 September to reaffirm
Pakistan’s desire to assist Afghanistan’s reconciliation

S/PV.7526

process as well as to take part in the sixth Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference for Afghanistan.
We have declared that Afghanistan’s enemies are
also enemies of Pakistan. We should both be clear
on who these enemies are. Those who are working
overtime to sabotage and poison Pakistan-Afghanistan
relations are really no friends of Afghanistan. Pakistan
is very clear in its conviction that continued conflict
in Afghanistan is not in our national interest. Peace in
Afghanistan and cooperation with Kabul will enable
us to fully defeat our common threat from violent
groups. It will pave the way for the voluntary return
of the millions of Afghan refugees we still host, which
represents the most protracted presence of refugees in
any single country in recent history. It will open the
way for the ambitious plans for regional development
and integration we have jointly worked for and on.
In conclusion, let me say that we seek peace,
friendship and cooperation between Pakistan and
Afghanistan. Mutual respect for each other’s national
interests and sensitivities must be the bedrock of our
future relationship.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I, too, wish to thank
Special Representative Haysom and Executive Director
Fedotov for their briefings.
It is my duty to express the Italian Government’s
appreciation of the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in this
third trimester and to renew our support for its mission,
which is being carried out in difficult circumstances,
often placing the staff and its safety in harm’s way.
The security situation in Afghanistan continues
to be alarming. UNAMA’s mid-year report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict indicates the
largest increase in the number of civilian victims since
2009, if not 2001. In recent weeks there has been a
surge in terrorist violence by rebel groups, with brutal
attacks in Kabul and other areas of the country. These
criminal acts affect innocent victims, and we condemn
them today, as we have in the past, in the most absolute
terms.
I take this opportunity to reiterate Italy’s
full support for the efforts of the National Unity
Government to secure peace, stability and development
in Afghanistan. Our support takes the concrete form

15-2835027/37

S/PV.7526

The situation in Afghanistan

of active participation in the non-combat Resolute
Support Mission, led by NATO, as a framework nation
for Afghanistan’s western region.
In the few short months since our previous meeting
here (see S/PV.7467) on UNAMA and the completion
of the formation of the Government, we have seen
encouraging results. The first recommendations of
the Special Commission on Electoral Reform on
adequate tax measures, for example, have led to an
increase in internal revenue and a monetary policy in
the framework of the Staff-Monitored Programme of
the International Monetary Fund, as agreed with the
Afghan Government.
The recent senior officials meeting on the
refreshed Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework of
5 September in Kabul was very constructive, resulting
in the establishment of clear indicators and deadlines
in all of the sectors needing reform. These useful tools
help build our confidence in the country’s progress
towards economic and social sustainability and further
democratic consolidation.
The concrete implementation of Afghanistan’s
complex reform agenda under the self-reliance mutual
accountability framework is now more than ever a
fundamental goal for the sake of the Afghan people and
in compliance with international agreements. I thus
welcome the European Union’s decision to accept the
Afghan Government’s invitation to host and co-chair
the next ministerial conference on Afghanistan in
Brussels, which we hope will be a landmark moment in
the country’s path towards self-reliance.
The promotion of the rights of women and children
and protecting them from any form of violence must
remain a priority. A milestone was clearly reached
on 30 June with the adoption of the national plan on
women, peace and security, pursuant to resolution
1325 (2000) of the Security Council. We also greatly
appreciated the decision of President Ghani to present
the candidacy of the first woman judge to the Supreme
Court, although she was ultimately not appointed.
Efforts must continue in this direction. The data
collected by UNAMA is dismaying in that it highlights
an alarming increase, during the first half of the
year, of 23 per cent in the number of women victims
of conflict and of 13 per cent in the number of child
victims. Action to strengthen women’s empowerment
in every sector of society, where Afghanistan has made
undeniable progress, must continue, since there is still

28/37

17/09/2015

much work to be done. We thus strongly support the
Afghan Government in its commitment to upholding
women’s and children’s rights. We acknowledge this
commitment and trust that the results obtained to date
will be further consolidated and broadened.
A few months ago there were encouraging signs
of a possible reconciliation process and a cessation
of the violence in Afghanistan, such as the Murree
meeting of 7 July, the first direct encounter between
representatives of the Afghan Government and of the
Taliban movement. Recent developments have renewed
uncertainties about the future of this process.
It is our hope that genuine cooperation within
the region, which is a prerequisite for ensuring peace
and stability in Afghanistan, can be immediately
established to help overcome the current difficulties.
Italy will support, with strength and determination, any
and all initiatives to this end.
Finally, I also take this opportunity to say goodbye
to Ambassador Tanin, before I welcome him to one
of the upcoming meetings on Kosovo issues. I have
already had the opportunity to say to him today that
as he is moving closer to my country, the quality of his
food will improve in the coming weeks.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this important
debate on Afghanistan. I also thank Mr. Haysom and
Mr. Fedotov for their briefings. I take this opportunity
also to pay tribute to my long-time friend, Ambassador
Zahir Tanin of Afghanistan, who is leaving us very
soon, for his great service to his country as well as to
the United Nations. I wish him, as many have done,
good luck in his new post in Kosovo.
As a former special representative for Afghanistan
and Pakistan of the Japanese Government, it is my great
pleasure to speak on the situation in Afghanistan. Japan
is proud to be one of Afghanistan’s strongest supporters.
We have been accompanying Afghanistan on its path
towards reform and self-reliance. Japan’s assistance, in
the amount of $5.8 billion since 2001, has extended to a
wide range of areas. We have worked with Afghanistan
and its people in strengthening law enforcement and
justice, infrastructure, rural development, human
resources and agriculture.

15-28350

17/09/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

Among the numerous forms of assistance we
provide, I would like to focus today on one success story
in the field of agriculture that illustrates Afghanistan’s
great potential for realizing self-reliance. Indeed, the
key word in my statement today is “self-reliance”.
According to the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, 37 per cent of Afghanistan’s land
is considered barren and thus infertile. Against this
backdrop, in 2003, Dr. Nakamura, a Japanese medical
doctor and director of the Japanese non-governmental
organization Peace Japan Medical Services, launched a
project in the Gamberi desert, in Nangarhar province,
with the aim of transforming it into fertile soil.
I would like to draw the Council’s attention to two
photographs attached to my written statement, which
has been circulated to members. What was a forbidding
desert of 16,500 hectares in Nangarhar province in 2005,
as seen in the first photograph, by 2012 had been, as can
be seen in the second one, dramatically transformed
into fertile croplands abundant in greenery. By utilizing
eighteenth-century Japanese irrigation technology
combined with Afghanistan’s own traditional methods,
the Green Ground Project succeeded in establishing a
highly effective irrigation system. Relying on age-old
skills, the new irrigation system was able to withstand
the seasonal spring floods, which had impeded previous
attempts.
The transformation did not stop there. Wheat
production increased from almost zero to a capacity
that is now able to feed more than 600,000 people. For
those Afghans who had long fled from one destination
to another, the transformation offered a place for them
to finally settle and make a stable living. People began
to enjoy greater job opportunities. Prior to that project,
only 30,000 people had worked in agriculture in the
area. However, in the span of 12 years, the number
increased five-fold to 150,000. With vastly improved
job opportunities, we began to see greater social
stability and a significant reduction in crime. This past
summer, when the Minister of Rural Rehabilitation and
Development and the Minister of Agriculture, Irrigation
and Livestock observed what had taken place, they
were at a loss for words. The transformation had far
exceeded their expectations.
That extraordinary success story traces its
beginnings down to the grass-roots level. It was initially
funded solely by the aforementioned non-governmental
organization, Peace Japan Medical Services. In 2010,

S/PV.7526

the Japan International Cooperation Agency joined
in providing technical and financial assistance. We
are now looking at the possibility of cooperating with
the Afghan Government and other organizations to
disseminate the Peace Japan Medical Services model
irrigation system to other areas of Afghanistan.
The story of the Gamberi desert is just one vivid
example of Afghanistan’s potential for realizing
self-reliance. Japan firmly believes that, when the
international community and Afghanistan work
hand-in-hand, similar achievements are possible in
other fields as well. Afghanistan has made great strides
in its path towards self-reliance.
Nonetheless, political uncertainties and instability
have been undermining its economic potential. Under
such difficult situations, we look to the National Unity
Government of Afghanistan to intensify its reform
efforts. We look to the Afghan Government to tackle
crucial challenges to sustainable growth, such as the
need to improve security, strengthen political stability,
eliminate corruption, achieve fiscal sustainability and
promote electoral reform.
For its part, the international community seeks
to reaffirm its commitment to providing necessary
assistance under the principle of mutual accountability
agreed in Tokyo. In that regard, we also extend
our appreciation to the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, which has been very ably led
by Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for its meritorious efforts
in successfully compiling the Tripartite Review
Commission’s report (S/2015/713, annex).
In conclusion, Afghanistan’s path to self-reliance
presents vast opportunities and important challenges.
Nonetheless, the transformation of the Gamberi desert
illustrates that Afghanistan is indeed progressing, stepby-step, towards a brighter future. Japan, along with the
international community, stands ready to accompany
Afghanistan on its path toward peace, prosperity and
self-reliance.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): In view of time
constraints, I will read out a shortened version of my
statement. The full version will be available on Twitter.
I align myself with the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.

15-2835029/37

S/PV.7526

The situation in Afghanistan

17/09/2015

First of all, I would like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haysom and
Executive Director Fedotov for their briefings, and
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.

short time. However, a lot still needs to be done in order
to ensure that future elections are fair, transparent and
inclusive. The Netherlands will remain Afghanistan’s
partner in supporting that effort.

I will make three points: the first, on security
challenges; the second, on development and governance;
and the third, on the functioning of the United Nations
in Afghanistan.

Thirdly, with regard to to the functioning of the
United Nations in Afghanistan, we are happy to have
received the report of the Tripartite Review Commission
(S/2015/713, annex), which examines the role,
structure and activities of all United Nations entities
in Afghanistan. It is an important accomplishment that
the report was compiled through good coordination
among the entities in Afghanistan, the donor countries
and, most important, the Afghan Government. The
Netherlands supports the recommendations formulated
in the report. We welcome the emphasis on having the
United Nations continue its work to strengthen its good
offices and the request to increase joint programming
among United Nations entities. That is a responsibility
that extends beyond UNAMA alone.

In terms of security challenges and regional
cooperation, the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) (S/2015/684) describes a worrisome
increase in civilian casualties and a worsening overall
security situation. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
offers its condolences to the Afghan Government and
its people for the lives lost in the many recent attacks by
insurgent groups. We welcome the positive step of the
direct talks between the Afghan Government and the
Taliban held in Pakistan this past summer. In the long
run, lasting stability and peace is possible only through
reconciliation. We hope that the Afghan-led peace talks
can resume quickly and continue to have the required
support of the region.
The recent Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan in Kabul was an example
of fruitful regional cooperation, as is the Heart of Asia
Process. We express our appreciation for the initiative
of the Governments of Afghanistan, the United States
of America and China to organize a high-level side
event on Afghanistan’s peaceful reconstruction and
regional cooperation during the upcoming week of
high-level meetings.
Secondly, with respect to development assistance
and good governance, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
is satisfied with the outcome of the recent senior
officials meeting in Kabul, in particular with the more
concrete deliverables in the self-reliance through mutual
accountability framework, such as the establishment
of prosecution units for dealing with violence against
women in all provinces, as well as the implementation
of the Afghan national action plan pursuant to resolution
1325 (2000).
Furthermore, as the report of the Secretary-General
on UNAMA highlights, the National Unity Government
has made some significant progress in furthering good
governance by improving accountability and reducing
corruption. Also, the Special Electoral Reform
Commission managed to achieve impressive results in a

30/37

I would like to underline the Kingdom of the
Netherlands’ continued support for the coordinating
role played by UNAMA to that effect. In particular, I
would like to compliment UNAMA on the high quality
of its work in Afghanistan in the field of human rights,
which is recognized globally as an example of best
practices for its robust methodology and constructive
engagement with all parties to the conflict, as is also
mentioned in the review. We also strongly support the
recommendation to further emphasize the normative
mandate of the United Nations in improving human
rights and the rule of law in Afghanistan.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
has been a long-time partner of Afghanistan. We have
contributed significantly in the fields of security,
justice and development, and we will stand by the
Afghan people in the years to come. We are currently
examining our appropriate involvement after 2017.
We will take into account the progress made by the
Government of Afghanistan, and we underline, just as
our Japanese colleague did earlier, the importance of
self-reliance. We indeed hope that self-reliance will be
achieved in this new era of increased Afghan ownership
and leadership. It is in that spirit of partnership focusing
on supporting peace, justice and development that we
will continue to support Afghanistan and its people.
If I may, I would like to end on a personal note and
pay tribute to the work of Ambassador Tanin, both for
his efforts in his national capacity and in his efforts

15-28350

17/09/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

aimed at reforming the Security Council. I wish him all
the best and have to say that I will miss him as a friend.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to express my appreciations to you, Mr. President,
and to the Russian presidency for holding today’s
debate on the situation in Afghanistan. I would also
like to thank Ambassador Tanin of Afghanistan for his
statement and to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to him for his services to his country and wish him
success in his new assignment. I would also like to
thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom and Mr. Yury Fedotov for
their valuable briefings.
Iran continues its full support for the promotion of
security, stability and comprehensive and sustainable
development in Afghanistan, inasmuch as we
consider security in Afghanistan to be vital for the
security of our own borders and the region. Because
the assumption of full leadership is indeed a major
step towards establishing peace and prosperity in the
country, Iran continues to fully support the National
Unity Government of Afghanistan and remains
confident that it is well positioned and possesses the
necessary capacities to address the political, economic
and security challenges it faces.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General on
Afghanistan (S/2015/684) indicates that, although the
overall number of attacks shows a very slight decrease
as compared to 2014, the sustained conflict has grown
in both intensity and geographic scope. There was a
visible spike in terrorist attacks in Kabul following
the confirmation of the death of Taliban leader Mullah
Omar. The deterioration of the security situation,
especially in the north and west of Afghanistan, is
a matter of concern. We condemn all violent attacks
committed by the Taliban and all other terrorist groups,
as well as any cooperation with them, since we believe
cooperation would encourage them in their odious
behaviour, and would therefore be counterproductive to
the establishment of peace in Afghanistan.
Afghanistan should become the object of
regional and international cooperation, rather than of
competition, so that peace, security and development
can be established and strengthened in the region. With
the increasing prominence of Daesh and its affiliate in
Afghanistan, along with the vast spectrum of terrorist

S/PV.7526

and extremist groups, as the Secretary-General’s
report suggests, international and regional Powers
have a greater responsibility to the National Unity
Government and can reap enormous benefits from
assisting it, especially in its fight against terrorism. Iran
welcomes the statement by President Ghani concerning
the signing of the joint comprehensive plan of action
between Iran and its negotiating parties. We appreciate
his characterization of the plan as an opportunity to
strengthen peace, stability and economic cooperation
in the region.
With respect to bilateral cooperation, we see the
expansion of our political and economic ties with
neighbouring Afghanistan as a priority. Iran stands
ready to increase its bilateral cooperation, particularly
on security matters, counter-narcotics efforts,
development projects and economic cooperation in the
fields of infrastructure and agriculture, as well as in
efforts to find durable solutions for Afghan refugees.
There is great potential to be explored in the fields
of trade and transit. We expect the tripartite agreement
between India, Afghanistan and Iran on the Chahbahar
port facilities to be finalized by the end of September.
Access to that port would be very beneficial for
Afghanistan as a land-locked country. The completion
of the two ongoing railroad projects from Iran to the
Afghan cities of Harat and Farah is also an important
step in the enhancement of the economic activities
between the two countries and within the region.
With regard to counter-narcotics efforts, we are
particularly concerned about reports indicating that
opium poppy cultivation in Afghanistan has shown an
increase in recent years. That increase is primarily due
to the prevailing insecurity and poverty. It represents
a real threat to the region and beyond and should be
addressed by the international community in a very
serious and comprehensive manner. In that context,
we welcome the initiatives taken by the countries of
the region, including China, Pakistan, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Iran.
Strong support and commitment from international
donors, the Afghan authorities and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime are essential to deter the
menace of drug cultivation and drug trafficking.
Narcotics are not only a social health challenge but
also, and more important, a major source of income
for extremist and terrorist groups. Therefore, the
international community should especially appreciate

15-2835031/37

S/PV.7526

The situation in Afghanistan

and support the triangular initiative of Afghanistan, Iran
and Pakistan on cooperation in countering narcotics. It
is a useful initiative that will benefit Afghanistan as
well as transit and destination countries, and must be
supported by the international community.
Hundreds of thousands of Afghan refugees continue
to live in Iran. We continue to participate in the work of
the Tripartite Review Commission in order to plan for
the voluntary, safe, dignified and gradual repatriation
of Afghan refugees and the continued management
of the refugee population in Iran. The decrease in
voluntary repatriation underlines the importance of
meeting the reasonable needs of repatriated refugees
in Afghanistan so that that trend can be reversed, and
underscores the need to mobilize more international
support for that purpose. We also continue to support
hundreds of thousands of Afghan students, from
primary to university education, pending their eventual
repatriation.
We support UNAMA, as well as United Nations
agencies, in their efforts to provide development and
reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan through
robust regional engagement on issues such as border
security, immigration, the return of refugees and drug
control measures. The role of UNAMA should be
further streamlined, taking into account the work of the
Tripartite Review Commission, which is made up of the
Government, as the main partner, and the international
donor community, UNAMA and the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): While Sweden fully aligns
itself with the statement to be made on behalf of the
European Union, we would like to make just a few
additional remarks in our national capacity.
First, I would like to thank Mr. Haysom,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for his comprehensive briefing on the
worrying situation in Afghanistan and, more important,
for the work he has been doing with his team on the
ground. We take particular note of the continued fragile
security situation and the intensity of the conflict.
I would also like to take this opportunity to express
my personal thanks and the gratitude of the Swedish
delegation to Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his work
here. He is a true example of how an individual can
bring about positive change for his country. We have

32/37

17/09/2015

observed his work with great admiration and wish him
good luck in the future.
I would like to focus on three points.
First, we welcome the results of the review of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) carried out by the Tripartite Review
Commission, which will feed into the debate here in the
Security Council. We would like to thank the National
Unity Government of Afghanistan for its constructive
contributions, and the UNAMA team for facilitating
that process.
Sweden remains a dedicated supporter of
UNAMA and agrees to the proposals put forward
by the Commission concerning the future of its
engagement. We are particularly pleased that the
recommendations acknowledge the normative role of
the United Nations in several important areas, based
on the cardinal principles of transparency, participation
and accountability. Afghanistan will need international
support for the foreseeable future. UNAMA will
therefore continue to have a role in donor coordination,
the facilitation of humanitarian access and support
for capacity-building for humanitarian response.
UNAMA’s physical presence in the country is critical
to the effectiveness of the United Nations mandate and
to the ability of United Nations donors to deliver and
monitor assistance throughout the country, not least
in the humanitarian field. Furthermore, it is essential
that UNAMA’s role in providing its good offices for
peace and reconciliation be maintained, in order to help
facilitate what must be an Afghan-led peace process that
is inclusive and representative of the population. The
participation of women in that process is particularly
important. Unfortunately, the prospects for a peace
dialogue, despite regional and international efforts,
which we welcome, have been threatened by repeated
attacks on the civilian population.
Secondly, recent events have brought with them a
worrying number of civilian casualties and conflictrelated displacement. Violence, in the form of suicide
attacks, targeted killings and abductions, is part of
the daily lives of millions of Afghans, and as is so
often the case, women and children are in particularly
vulnerable situations. That development is disturbing
and must be countered. We are very concerned about
the continuing violations of international human rights
law and humanitarian law, which cause great suffering
and despair. The universality of human rights must

15-28350

17/09/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

not be compromised. It is important to ensure that the
violations are ended and mechanisms for achieving
accountability strengthened.
Thirdly, Sweden welcomes the recent senior officials
meeting at which a framework for self-reliance through
mutual accountability was endorsed. We welcome its
strategic focus and the efforts made to increase Afghan
ownership and ensure that development aid is spent
as effectively as possible. We would like to commend
the Government of Afghanistan for prioritizing work
on human rights and gender equality. The refreshed
framework reaffirms our mutual commitments and
long-term partnership, but it also provides an important
foundation for putting Afghanistan firmly on a path to
self-reliance.
In conclusion, Sweden’s support to Afghanistan is
substantial and long-term. It began several decades ago
and will continue, with a commitment of $1.2 billion
throughout the transformation decade. The Afghan
Government and people can count on our continued
support regardless of the spiralling conflict. We
condemn every attack on the civilian population and
every effort to obstruct a meaningful dialogue on peace
and reconciliation. It is time for an end to the violence
that has plagued Afghanistan for too long. It is also time
for reforms to be implemented. Our shared vision of a
prosperous and self-governed Afghanistan, in which
the Afghan people can fully enjoy their rights and
freedoms as enshrined in the country’s Constitution,
depends greatly on it.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany): In the interests of time, I
will try to be brief. Our thanks go to today’s briefers.
We believe that the Secretary-General’s summary of the
Tripartite Review Commission discussions (S/2015/713,
annex) has come at the right moment. It helps to define
the role of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) during the transformation
decade, and the constructive role of the Afghan
Government in drafting it is very commendable.
It is important to safeguard the achievements of
the past decade while continuing on a path towards a
more sustainable future for the Afghan people. The
Government in Kabul has made remarkable progress in
that area. At the same time, we deeply deplore the evergrowing number of civilian lives lost due to cowardly
terrorist acts and incessant fighting, as well as the

S/PV.7526

many casualties among the Afghan security forces in
their fight against anti-Government factions.
We encourage the Government of Afghanistan to
continue its efforts to implement the reform agenda
presented at the London Conference in December of last
year. The reform agenda should now be implemented
more rapidly. Germany stands ready to support
Afghanistan in that endeavour, and we second the call
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/684) for all
Afghan political leaders to confront those challenges in
a spirit of national unity.
Development and security go hand in hand. Longlasting peace in Afghanistan can be achieved only
through an inclusive political process. In that regard,
we welcome the recent peace talks and encourage
participants and supporters to continue that dialogue
as soon as possible. While we welcome Afghanistan’s
active participation in the work of the Human Rights
Council, it is clear that the implementation of human
rights, particularly women’s rights, in all aspects of
Government activity remains a challenge as well as an
obligation for the Afghan Government. That includes
supporting refugees as well as finding solutions that
can enable them to return to their countries of origin.
A stable Afghanistan requires regional stability,
and vice versa. We commend the Government of
Afghanistan for actively strengthening ties with its
regional neighbours, in, for example, the framework
of the Heart of Asia Process, which Germany will
continue to support. Germany would like to commend
UNAMA for its work in Afghanistan. It played an
especially crucial role during the last elections. For
a democratic society to develop, it is essential that
the Afghan people be able to cast their ballots in a
secure, free and fair election process. In that context,
we welcome the appointment of the Special Electoral
Reforms Commission. Germany will remain committed
to supporting Afghanistan in this crucial decade. We
will very soon be introducing a new draft resolution in
the General Assembly in support of Afghanistan and
seeking approval for it from all Member States.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): I would like to join others
in thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Haysom and Executive Director Fedotov for
their briefings, and also in welcoming the contribution of
Afghanistan’s Permanent Representative, Ambassador

15-2835033/37

S/PV.7526

The situation in Afghanistan

Zahir Tanin. I echo others in wishing him well in his
next assignment.
As we approach the first anniversary of the National
Unity Government’s formation, it is an opportune
moment to acknowledge the leadership and resolve
that President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah
have displayed and the progress that Afghanistan has
made. In embarking on its transformation decade,
Afghanistan has made genuine gains spanning the
political, economic, security and social spheres.
Over the past year, however, the insurgency has
continued to prey on civilians, with attacks that have
killed and injured hundreds of non-combatants. The
Afghan national defence and security forces have
demonstrated bravery, spirit and dedication in defence
of their nation. We reaffirm our commitment to
supporting the Afghan Government in defending its
citizens against the insurgency. Australia is providing
financial assistance totalling $300 million over three
years, through 2017. More than 25,000 Australian
personnel have served in Afghanistan, and 400 continue
to serve now.
Australia welcomes the positive steps the National
Unity Government has taken to advance the cause of
peace and reconciliation, including direct talks with
the Taliban in Murree, Pakistan. Against a background
of ongoing challenges, peace can be achieved only if
reconciliation efforts are approached with a sense of
purpose and pragmatism.
Australia was pleased to join with international
partners this month in Kabul in endorsing the selfreliance mutual accountability framework. The
commitments made by the Government of Afghanistan
on human rights and empowering women and girls
will build on the progress that has been made over the
past decade. The full implementation of the law on
eliminating violence against women and the national
action plan on women and peace and security is an
essential element of the reform agenda. We will continue
to assist the Afghan Government by providing shelter
and support for more than 2,300 women and girls and
training for more than 2,800 police and justice-sector
officials in upholding women’s rights. Australia thanks
and congratulates the National Unity Government on
a successful first year in office and looks forward to
continuing to work towards peace and prosperity in
Afghanistan.

34/37

17/09/2015

The United Nations has played an important
and constructive role in Afghanistan since 1961. We
welcome the work of the Tripartite Review Commission
on future priorities for United Nations engagement
in Afghanistan and encourage Council members to
consider its recommendations in the lead-up to renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan in March 2016.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (spoke in Russian): AS this is
the first time that I address the Security Council this
month, I want to congratulate you, Mr. President, and
your country on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month.
(spoke in English)
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union and its member States. The candidate countries
Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine,
Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.
I thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2015/684) on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security. I
also thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan, Mr. Haysom, for his briefing
and assure him of our continued full support for his
mission. I would also like to thank Ambassador Tanin
for his statement and for the very good cooperation we
have had over the years. We look forward to working
with him closely in his new capacity.
I would like to reiterate the European Union’s full
support for the continued important role played by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), and all the United Nations agencies working
to support the Afghan people and to coordinate the
assistance provided by the international community.
The role of the United Nations in facilitating
consensus and support for the National Unity
Government’s reform agenda has been particularly
helpful when preparing the senior officials meeting held
in Kabul on 5 September. The new self-reliance-oriented

15-28350

17/09/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

mutual accountability framework provides important
benchmarks and timelines for deliverables in key
priority areas. It is particularly encouraging to see that
the new framework includes indicators with regard to
human rights, and in particular the rights of women
and children, as well as indicators with regard to the
continued development of accountable institutions
and electoral reforms. With regard to the latter, the
European Union welcomes the progress made by the
Special Electoral Reform Commission, which has
presented its initial recommendations. The capacity
of Afghan institutions to deliver results that reach its
citizens will make the difference.
The past months have seen a new spike in the exodus
of refugees and migrants from Afghanistan, many of
them well educated. Continuous insecurity threatens
the progress made in stabilizing the country. It is all
the more urgent that the Government of Afghanistan,
with the support of the international community and
all regional stakeholders, provide a secure and stable
environment. We remain committed to Afghanistan.
It is crucial that the Afghan people be able to regain
confidence in the future, especially through the urgent
implementation of reforms aimed at creating economic
opportunities.
I am honoured to announce that the European Union
accepts the invitation by the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan to co-host the next ministerial
conference in Brussels. It takes Afghan leadership,
along with continued international solidarity and
support, to make this effort a success and to advance
the long-term objective of Afghan self-reliance. On that
path, the Brussels conference can send a strong signal
of hope, confidence and change.
The Secretary-General’s report highlights the
sustained conflict, which has grown both in intensity
and geographic scope. It recalls the continued and utter
disregard on the part of the Taliban and other insurgent
groups for Afghan lives. We need to be clear: the
insurgency continues to plan and target attacks against
Afghan civilians. The European Union condemns
the insurgent groups that continue to directly attack
civilians, democratic institutions and civil society,
causing record numbers of casualties. It is also vital that
humanitarian aid agencies and aid workers be allowed
unhindered access to the most vulnerable affected
population, in line with basic humanitarian principles.

S/PV.7526

The European Union is confident that the National
Unity Government will prevail in the struggle, backed
by all the support that we can collectively muster. The
initiation of an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process remains the key objective. Earlier this year, we
encouraged direct meetings between the Government
of Afghanistan and representatives of the Taliban.
We now face a deadlock owing to the continuous
insurgency attacks. We call on all countries, especially
on Afghanistan’s neighbours, to support an inclusive
settlement that eschews oppressive violence inflicted
on so many Afghans, disavows any link with terrorism
or terrorist groups and respects human rights, in
particular the rights of women.
We welcome the launching of Afghanistan’s national
action plan on resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, for the period 2015-2022. We
fully support the National Unity Government in that
endeavour, and we have put in place a special support
programme for the implementation of those efforts.
We must protect the gains made by Afghan women
since the fall of the Taliban regime, as their active
involvement in rebuilding the State remains crucial.
It is also our wish, with a view towards strengthening
women’s empowerment in all sectors of society, to see
women actively involved in negotiations on the future
of their country.
We believe that increased regional economic
cooperation, in particular the development of
intra-regional trade and infrastructure, will provide
benefits to all of the countries in the region. We
therefore support all efforts to maintain and improve
such regional relations. So far, credit must go to
President Ghani and other leaders in the region for their
endeavours to reach out to each other.
Regional connectivity and improved economic
cooperation can provide an important basis for
stability and prosperity. The full implementation of the
Afghanistan and Pakistan trade and transit agreement
and other agreements can play a valuable role in
stimulating economic activity. We continue to support
the Heart of Asia Process and other processes that are
owned by the countries in the region. We look forward
to the concerted efforts of the main stakeholders to
show leadership and invest both political and financial
resources to that end.
In conclusion, let me say that the European Union
will work with, and render support to, the National

15-2835035/37

S/PV.7526

The situation in Afghanistan

Unity Government during this difficult transformation
period, and will stand at its side while further
promoting an inclusive dialogue on reconciliation and
political participation. Lasting peace can come only
with the constructive engagement of all neighbouring
countries. The European Union will work with the
leading members of the international community to
support that outcome. UNAMA’s role in promoting
peace and security for all Afghans will be a vital one,
and we reiterate its importance.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): Let me start by congratulating
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council and by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2015/684) on the situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security. I also thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov,
for their briefings, as well as Ambassador Zahir Tanin
for his statement. I also take this opportunity to pay
tribute to Ambassador Tanin for his work on behalf of
Afghanistan and to wish him every success in his new
endeavours.
We welcome the successful continuation of the
political transition in Afghanistan. In that context, we
believe that the latest appointments at various levels of
the State’s bodies will further advance the productive
and result-oriented functioning of the National Unity
Government. We also welcome the Afghan National
Unity Government’s efforts to implement various
reforms in the field of good governance, with special
emphasis on the rule of law and fighting corruption.
Those reforms will undoubtedly strengthen social
cohesion in the whole country and help to strengthen
trust in State structures.
Electoral reform is another area where the Afghan
Government has initiated an important process. We
expect the parliamentary elections to be held following
the completion of the relevant reforms, which will
further strengthen the functioning of democratic
institutions.
In order to safeguard the achievements in Afghanistan
over the past 14 years and to be able to build upon them,
the international community’s continuing support for
Afghanistan during the 2015-2024 transformation

36/37

17/09/2015

decade is of the utmost importance. We commend the
role played by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in coordinating the efforts
of the international stakeholders in Afghanistan. We
hope that the international community will continue to
support the valuable efforts of UNAMA.
We fully support the Afghan Government’s
initiatives vis-à-vis the peace and reconciliation
process. For the sake of lasting peace and stability
in Afghanistan, we hope that those efforts will yield
positive results.
With the understanding that the problems faced by
the countries of the region, which include terrorism and
organized crime, are of a transboundary nature, close
cooperation among the regional countries is crucial in
tackling those challenges. We therefore believe that the
existing multilateral platforms should be used more
effectively. In that regard, the Istanbul Process is as an
effective cooperation model that is capable of providing
practical solutions to the current challenges in the Heart
of Asia region. When a climate of cooperation and
solidarity prevails, it will be possible for the regional
countries to benefit from the important economic
potential of the region.
Turkey will continue its support to the Afghan
Government in its endeavours to bring about peace,
stability and prosperity to Afghanistan. Turkey’s
commitment to Afghanistan is long-term. With
this understanding, Turkey makes comprehensive
contributions to Afghanistan on both a bilateral level and
through the United Nations and NATO. In the security
area, Turkey will continue with its capacity-building
programmes, both within the NATO framework and
on a bilateral basis with the Afghan National Army
and the Afghan National Police. Turkey’s development
assistance programme for the Afghan people, which is
the most comprehensive development aid programme
directed towards another country in its history, will
continue in the years ahead with a commitment of
$150 million for the period of 2015-2017.
To conclude, I would like to underscore that lasting
peace and stability in Afghanistan can be possible only
within a regional framework that taps into the positive
energy and increased cooperation of its neighbourhood.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.

15-28350

17/09/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): Slovakia would first like
to align itself with the statement delivered earlier by the
observer of the European Union.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2015/684) and to welcome
Special Representative Haysom and thank him for his
briefing. Also, we carefully listened to the remarks of
Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime at Vienna. I would
also like to take this opportunity to thank Ambassador
Tanin for his statement and, personally, for his excellent
work and friendship during his tenure in New York.
A year ago in this very Chamber, I began my
statement (see S/PV.7267) by calling upon the Afghan
leaders to uphold their declared commitments, form
a Government of national unity and take steps to
stabilize the country. Today, I praise the National Unity
Government and the leadership of Afghan politicians
who have been able to work together in a constructive
manner in their efforts to address the increasing
political, economic and security challenges. The
inspirational role of leaders in Kabul is irreplaceable
and closely followed by the Afghan people. Only when
the elite set an example can we expect the same attitude
at other levels of the decision-making process. In that
regard, I would like to express my appreciation for
the four initiatives of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to promote an
inclusive Afghan-owned and -led dialogue in a number
of provinces.
Also a year ago in the Chamber, many speakers
included electoral issues among the mentioned
challenges I just mentioned. Today, I commend the
commencement of work by the Special Electoral
Reform Commission, which is a sign that the National
Unity Government is stepping forward to meet the
agreed goals. We took note with admiration of the
broad consultation process of the Commission, both in
the capital and in the provinces, whereby it met with
political, religious, civic and international leaders.
And also a year ago, I applauded the bravery of
the Afghan people, who had gone to the polls to vote

S/PV.7526

in April and June 2014. Today, we should make every
effort to ensure that the elections scheduled for 2016 for
the lower house of Parliament and for district councils
take place. But for that to happen we need an improved
security environment.
While Afghanistan’s transition is on a good
and promising path, security challenges continue
to seriously threaten the transformation process.
Despite the considerable progress made in ensuring
security in the country, Government forces still face
attacks by non-State armed actors. We are particularly
deeply concerned by reports on the presence of groups
associated with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
in the eastern part of the country, as well as by the
activities of scattered formations of foreign fighters.
Both make the position of Government forces more
complicated in addressing local incidents.
In terms of Afghan security, Slovakia continues
to assist the country through the Resolute Support
non-combat training mission. Its role in Afghanistan
is vital, as it provides further training, advice and
assistance for the Afghan security forces and institutions.
In January, Slovakia commenced its three-year plan to
financially contribute to sustaining the Afghan forces
with $1.5 million. We will also provide further official
development assistance.
Slovakia welcomes the initiative of President Ghani
to unveil Afghanistan’s new national drug action plan.
We are awaiting the details of the plan as to how the
international community may participate in addressing
this acute problem.
The leaders of Afghanistan have shown their
commitment to shaping a democratic and peaceful
future for their country. The international community
must not abandon them in these crucial years when
terrorism is on the rise globally and when the wider
region of Central Asia is dangerously threatened.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

15-2835037/37
